
McCook, NE Code of Ordinances


CITY OF McCOOK, NEBRASKA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2017 S-3 Supplement Contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2017-2950, passed 9-5-2017



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ORDINANCE NO. 2011-2855



AN ORDINANCE TO REVISE ALL CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF MCCOOK,
NEBRASKA, TO REPEAL PRIOR ORDINANCES, TO REQUIRE FILING, AND TO PROVIDE AN
EFFECTIVE DATE.



   BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MCCOOK,
NEBRASKA:



   SECTION 1.  The general ordinances of the City of McCook, Nebraska,
are hereby revised, codified, and printed in book form as the "Code of
Ordinances of the City of McCook, Nebraska" consisting of the following
Titles:



      Chapter



   TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



         10.   Rules of Construction; General Penalty



   TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



         30.   Government Officials



         31.   City Policies



         32.   Ordinances



         33.   Finances



         34.   Purchasing Regulations



         35.   City Organizations



         36.   Taxation



         37.   Civil Service



         38.   Fee Schedule



   TITLE V: DEPARTMENTS



         50.   Municipal Utilities



         51.   Sewer Regulations



         52.   Water



         53.   Police and Fire Departments



         54.   City Parks and Property



         55.   Solid Waste



   TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



         70.   General Provisions



         71.   Traffic Rules



         72.   Parking and Stopping



         73.   Traffic Schedules



         74.   Parking Schedules



   TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



         90.   Animals



         91.   Fire Prevention; Fireworks; Poisonous or Flammable
Gas; Explosives



         92.   Fair Housing



         93.   Unlicensed Vehicles



         94.   Streets and Sidewalks



         95.   Nuisance; Health and Sanitation



         96.   Trees and Shrubs



   TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



         110.   Licensing of Construction Contractors



         111.   Alcoholic Beverages



         112.   Itinerant Merchants, Peddlers and Solicitors



         113.   Trailer Camps and Camping Areas



         114.   Telephone Companies



         115.   Garbage Collection



         116.   Oil and Natural Gas



         117.   Lottery Regulations



         118.   Alarm Systems



   TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



         130.   General Offenses



         131.   Curfew



   TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



         150.   Building Codes and Regulations



         151.   Zoning



         152.   Subdivisions



   TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



      Table



         I.   Franchise Agreements



   PARALLEL REFERENCES



References to Nebraska Revised Statutes



References to Prior Code



References to Resolutions



References to Ordinances



   INDEX



   SECTION 2.  The Code of Ordinances contains all of the provisions of a
general nature pertaining to the subjects enumerated and embraced in the
code. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by the code are
repealed, except that nothing shall affect any rights acquired under, actions
involving, or fines, penalties, forfeitures, or liabilities incurred pursuant
to such ordinances prior to repeal.



   SECTION 3.  All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all
other ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in the Code of
Ordinances, including ordinances specified in this section, shall remain in
full force and effect unless repealed expressly or by necessary implication.



         1.   Vacating or setting the boundaries of streets,
alleys, or other public places.



         2.   Annexing or detaching territory.



         3.   Granting or accepting easements, plats, or
dedication of land to public use.



         4.   Providing for the acquisition or conveyance of real
or personal property.



         5.   Authorizing or directing public improvements to be
made.



         6.   Levying taxes or special assessments.



         7.   Appropriating money.



         8.   Granting franchises or special licenses.



         9.   Providing for the issuance of bonds or other
instruments of indebtedness.



   SECTION 4.  At least one copy of the Code of Ordinances shall be on
file in the office of the City Clerk and available for inspection by members
of the public during the hours the office is kept open for the ordinary
transaction of business. The Clerk shall file a copy of the ordinances with
the County Court.



   SECTION 5.  This ordinance shall be in full force and shall take
effect from and after its passage, approval, and publication according to law.



   Passed and approved this 16th day of May, 2011.



   -s- Dennis Berry, Mayor



ATTEST:



-s- Lea Ann Doak, City Clerk-Treasurer



TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



      Chapter




         10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY




CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of interpretation



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to other sections



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.16   Section histories; statutory references



   10.17   Supplementation of code of ordinances



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances shall be designated as the "McCook Code
of Ordinances" and may be so cited.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary, and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to
their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY.  McCook, Nebraska.



      CITY COUNCIL or GOVERNING BODY.  The McCook City Council.



      CODE,THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This city code, as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.



      COUNTY.  Red Willow County, Nebraska.



      MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH.  A calendar month.



      OATH.  Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR
and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT.  An
officer, office, employee, commission, or department of the city unless the
context clearly requires otherwise.



      PERSON.  Includes bodies politic and corporate, societies,
communities, the public generally, individuals, partnerships, limited
liability companies, joint-stock companies, and associations.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



      SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person
cannot write.



      STATE.  The State of Nebraska.



      SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by
a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of
the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter
of the heading. Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.



      WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters, or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 49-801(16)



§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of the city shall be by the
following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the Mayor and City Council or of the context of the same ordinance.



   (A)   ANDorOR.  Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written "and/or", if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute or ordinance requires an
act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, the requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act
by an authorized agent or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term.  A general term following specific enumeration
of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever a section refers to another section hereof, that reference
shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended,
revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is materially
altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the
misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to
express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words
to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when
another word or words was clearly intended to express the intent, the
spelling shall be corrected and the word or words supplied, omitted or
substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions
shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the
text as originally published.



   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question
exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   (1)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last.



      (2)   If the last day is a Saturday or Sunday, it shall be
excluded.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code contains all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining
to the subjects enumerated and embraced in this code. All prior ordinances
pertaining to the subjects treated by this code are repealed, except that
nothing shall affect any rights acquired under, actions involving, or fines,
penalties, forfeitures, or liabilities incurred pursuant to those ordinances
prior to repeal.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code, including
ordinances specified in this section, shall remain in full force and effect
unless repealed expressly or by necessary implication:



   (A)   Vacating or setting the boundaries of streets, alleys, or
other public places;



   (B)   Annexing or detaching territory;



   (C)   Granting or accepting easements, plats, or dedication of land
to public use;



   (D)   Providing for the acquisition or conveyance of real or
personal property;



   (E)   Authorizing or directing public improvements to be made;



   (F)   Levying taxes or special assessments;



   (G)   Appropriating money;



   (H)   Granting franchises or special licenses; or



   (I)   Providing for the issuance of bonds or other instruments of
indebtedness.



§ 10.15  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance is repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance
thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the publication of
the ordinance repealing or modifying it to give effect thereto.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, liability, fine, forfeiture, or
penalty instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance
previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged,
but may be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance
had continued in force, unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision is itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.



Statutory reference:



   Requirements for amendments and revisions, see Neb. RS 16-247



§ 10.16  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates that the
text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example:
(Neb. RS 18-132)



   (B)   A statutory cite set forth as a "statutory reference"
following the text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to
that statute for further information. Example:



      § 39.01  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



         This municipality shall make available to any person for
inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state
law.



      Statutory reference:



         Inspection of public records, see Neb. RS 84-712 et seq.



§ 10.17  SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   Discretion. When preparing a supplement to this city code, the
codifier (that is, the person, agency, or organization authorized to prepare
the supplement) may make formal non-substantive changes in ordinances and
parts of ordinances included in the supplement as necessary to embody them
into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:



      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate
sections and divisions;



      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings, and titles for
sections and other subdivisions of the ordinance printed in the supplement
and make changes in the catchlines, headings, and titles;



      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other
divisions to be inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate new
material, change existing section or other division numbers;



      (4)   Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same
meaning to "this chapter", "this subchapter", "this section" and the like, as
may be appropriate, or to "§§     through     " (inserting section
numbers to indicate the sections of the code which embody the substantive
sections of the ordinance incorporated into the code);



      (5)   Insert appropriate section numbers in references to code
sections such as "§     " or "§§     through     " which are not
filled in prior to adoption of an ordinance;



      (6)   Correct the spelling of words, correct obvious
typographical errors, correct erroneous division and hyphenation of words,
capitalize or decapitalize words, and make other similar changes in
accordance with accepted usage or for consistency with other provisions of
the code;



      (7)   Change terminology for consistency with terminology used
in other provisions of the code; and



      (8)   Make other non-substantive changes necessary to
incorporate ordinance material into the code while preserving the original
meaning of the ordinance sections.



   (B)   Prohibition. In no case shall the codifier make any change in
the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or
already embodied in the code and not repealed by any ordinance.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this city
code, unless otherwise specifically provided herein, shall be deemed guilty
of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in any sum not
exceeding $500. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every
24 hours of failure to comply with the provisions of this code.



   (B)   (1)   Whenever a nuisance exists, as defined in Title IX of
this code, the city may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the
same, in the manner provided by law.



      (2)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a
nuisance exists, the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed,
enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.



Statutory reference:



   Authority to abate nuisances, see Neb. RS 18-1720 and 18-1722



   Authority to impose fines, see Neb. RS 16-246



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



      Chapter




         30.   GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS





         31.   CITY POLICIES





         32.   ORDINANCES





         33.   FINANCES





         34.   PURCHASING REGULATIONS





         35.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS





         36.   TAXATION





         37.   CIVIL SERVICE





         38.   FEE SCHEDULE




CHAPTER 30:  GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS



Section



Elected Officials



   30.001   Qualifications



   30.002   Bonds required



   30.003   Filling of vacancies



   30.004   City Council officers



   30.005   City Council presidential powers



Appointed Officials; General Provisions



   30.020   Council conduct



   30.021   Council control



   30.022   Merger of offices



Specific Appointed Officials



   30.035   City Manager



   30.036   City Attorney



   30.037   City Treasurer



   30.038   Treasurer books; warrants



   30.039   Treasurer annual report



   30.040   City Clerk



   30.041   Official seal



   30.042   City Engineer; Special Engineer



   30.043   Chief of Police



   30.044   Fire Chief



   30.045   Public Works Director



   30.046   Zoning Administrator



   30.047   Building Inspector



   30.048   Director of Finance



   30.049   Utilities Director



   30.050   Library Director



   30.051   Senior Services Director



Oath of Office



   30.060   Oath required; form



Compensation



   30.075   Officers and employees



   30.076   Salary adjustments



   30.077   Conflict of interest



 



   30.999   Penalty



ELECTED OFFICIALS



§ 30.001  QUALIFICATIONS.



   Members of the City Council shall be residents and registered voters of
the city and shall hold no other employment with the city. They shall be
permitted to hold other elective office as provided by state law. Any Council
member who ceases to possess any of the qualifications required by this
section shall forthwith forfeit the office.



(Prior Code, § 1-201)  (Ord. 2005-2720, passed 2-7-2005)



§ 30.002  BONDS REQUIRED.



   (A)   In place of the individual bonds required to be furnished by
municipal officers, a schedule, position, blanket bond or undertaking, or
evidence of equivalent insurance may be given by municipal officers, or a
single corporate surety fidelity, schedule, position, or blanket bond or
undertaking, or evidence of insurance coverage covering all the officers,
including officers required by law to furnish an individual bond or
undertaking, may be furnished. The city may pay the premium for the bond or
insurance coverage. The bond or insurance coverage shall be, at a minimum, an
aggregate of the amounts fixed by law or by the person, Council, or board
authorized by law to fix the amounts and with such terms and conditions as
may be required.



(Neb. RS 11-104)



   (B)   Each Council member, before entering upon the duties of his or
her office, shall be required to give a bond to the city with two or more
good and sufficient sureties or some responsible surety company. If the bond
is given by two sureties, they shall each justify that he or she is worth at
least $2,000 over and above all debts and exemptions. The bond amounts shall
be in the sum of $1,000, and shall be conditioned for the faithful discharge
of the duties of the Council member giving the same, and shall be further
conditioned that if the Council member shall vote for any expenditure or
appropriation of money or creation of any liability in excess of the amount
allowed by law, the Council member and the sureties signing the bond shall be
liable thereon. The bond shall be filed with the City Clerk and approved by
the Mayor. Upon approval, the city may pay the premium for the bond. Any
liability sought to be incurred, or debt created, in excess of the amount
limited or authorized by law, shall be taken and held by any court of the
state as the joint and several liability and obligation of the Council member
voting for and the Mayor approving the same, and not the debt, liability, and
obligation of the city. Voting for or approving of the liability, obligation,
or debt shall be conclusive evidence of malfeasance in office, for which
Council member or Mayor may be removed from office.



(Prior Code, § 1-401)



   (C)   Official bonds of the city shall be in form, joint and
several, and shall be made payable to the city in that penalty as the
governing body may set by resolution which sums shall be on file at the
office of the City Clerk, provided the penalty amount on any bond shall not
fall below the legal minimum, when one has been set by the state, for each
particular official. All official bonds of the city officials shall be
executed by the principal named in the bonds and by at least two sufficient
sureties who shall be freeholders of the county, or by the official as
principal and by a guaranty, surety, fidelity, or bonding company, provided
no city official, while still in his or her  official term of office, shall
be accepted as surety on any other official's bond, contractor's bond,
license bond, or appeal bond under any circumstances. Only companies that are
legally authorized to transact business in the state shall be eligible for
suretyship on the bond of an official of the city. All  bonds shall obligate
the principal and sureties for the faithful discharge of all duties required
by law of the principal, and shall inure to the benefit of the city and any
persons who may be injured by a breach of the conditions of the bonds. No
bond shall be deemed to be given or complete until the approval of the
governing board, and all sureties are endorsed in writing on the  instrument
by the Mayor and City Clerk pursuant to the approval of the governing body.
The premium on any official bond required to be given may be paid out of the
General Fund, or other proper city fund, upon a resolution to that effect by
the governing body at the beginning of any city year. All official bonds,
meeting the conditions herein, shall be filed with the City Clerk for his or
her official records and it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to furnish a
certified copy of any bond so filed upon the payment of a fee which shall be
set by resolution of the governing body. In the event that the sureties on
the official bond of any officer of the city, in the opinion of the governing
body, become insufficient, the governing body may, by resolution, fix a
reasonable time within which the officer may give a new bond or additional
sureties as directed. In the event that the officer should fail, refuse, or
neglect to give a new bond, or additional sureties, to the satisfaction and
approval of the governing body, then the office shall, by such failure,
refusal, or neglect, become vacant, and it shall be the duty of the governing
body to appoint a competent and qualified person to fill the office. Any
official who is re-elected to office shall be required to file a new bond
after each election.



(Prior Code, § 1-402)  (Ord. 1797, passed 4-21-1986)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 11-103 through 11-118,
16-219,  16-304



§ 30.003  FILLING OF VACANCIES.



   Vacancies in the City Council shall be filled in accordance with
current state law.



(Prior Code, § 1-202)  (Ord. 2005-2720, passed 2-7-2005)



§ 30.004  CITY COUNCIL OFFICERS.



   At the first regular meeting in December following the general election
in every even-numbered year, the Council shall elect one of its members as
President, who shall be ex-officio Mayor, and another as Vice President, who
shall serve in the absence of the President. In the absence of the President
and the Vice President, the Council may elect a temporary chairperson.



(Prior Code, § 1-203)  (Ord. 2005-2720, passed 2-7-2005)



§ 30.005  CITY COUNCIL PRESIDENTIAL POWERS.



   The President of the Council shall preside over the Council, and have a
voice and vote in its proceedings but no veto. He or she shall be recognized
as the official head of the city for all ceremonial purposes, by the courts
for the purpose of serving civil process, and by the Governor for military
purposes. In addition, he or she shall exercise any other powers and perform
any duties not inconsistent with the provisions of Neb. RS Chapter 19,
Article 6, as are conferred upon the Mayor of the city.



(Prior Code, § 1-204)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 19-617



APPOINTED OFFICIALS; GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 30.020  COUNCIL CONDUCT.



   The Council shall choose a City Manager and a City Clerk, but no member
of the Council shall be chosen as Manager. Neither the Council nor any of its
committees or members shall dictate the appointment of any person to office
or employment by the City Manager, or in any manner seek to prevent him or
her from exercising his or her own judgment in the appointment of officers
and employees in the administrative service. Except for the purpose of
inquiry, the Council and its members shall deal with the administrative
service solely through the City Manager, and neither the Council nor any
member thereof shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the City
Manager, either publicly or privately. The Council, or a committee thereof,
may investigate the affairs of any department or the official acts and
conduct of any city officer. It shall have power to administer oaths, compel
the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and papers, and may
punish for contempt any person failing to obey its subpoena or refusing to
testify. No person shall be excused from testifying, but his or her testimony
shall not be used against him or her in any criminal proceeding other than
for perjury.



(Prior Code, § 1-301)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 19-618



§ 30.021  COUNCIL CONTROL.



   The Council shall have authority to create and discontinue departments,
offices, and employments, and by ordinance or resolution to prescribe, limit,
or change the compensation of the officers and employees.



(Prior Code, § 1-302)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 19-620



§ 30.022  MERGER OF OFFICES.



   The governing body may, at its discretion, by ordinance combine and
merge any elective and appointive office or employment, except Mayor and
Council member, with any other elective or appointive office or employment,
so that one or more of the offices or employments be held by the same officer
or employee at the same time. The offices or employments merged and combined
shall always be construed to be separate, and the effect of the combination
or merger shall be limited to a consolidation of official duties only. The
salary or compensation of the officer or employee holding the merged and
combined offices or employments, or offices and employments, shall not be in
excess of the maximum amount provided by law for the salary or compensation
of the office, offices, employment or employments so merged and combined.



(Prior Code, § 1-323)  (Ord. 1750, passed 10-1-1984)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-305, 16-318.01



SPECIFIC APPOINTED OFFICIALS



§ 30.035  CITY MANAGER.



   (A)   The chief executive officer of the city shall be the City
Manager, who shall be responsible for the proper administration of all
affairs of the city. He or she shall be chosen by the Council for an
indefinite period, solely on the basis of administrative qualifications, and
need not be a resident of the city or state when appointed. He or she shall
hold office at the pleasure of the Council, and receive a salary as it shall
fix by ordinance. During the absence or disability of the City Manager, the
Council shall designate some properly qualified person to perform the duties
of the office.



   (B)   The powers and duties of the City Manager shall be:



      (1)   To see that the laws and ordinances are enforced;



      (2)   To appoint and remove all heads of departments and all
subordinate officers and employees in the departments in both the classified
and unclassified service, which appointments shall be upon merit and fitness
alone, and in the classified service all appointments and removals shall be
subject to the civil service provisions;



      (3)   To exercise control over all departments and divisions
thereof that may be created by the Council;



      (4)   To attend all meetings of the Council with the right to
take part in the discussion but not to vote;



      (5)   To recommend to the Council for adoption such measures
as he or she may deem necessary or expedient;



      (6)   To prepare the annual budget and keep the Council fully
advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city; and



      (7)   To perform such other duties as may be required of him
or her by statute, or by ordinance or resolution of the Council.



   (C)   The City Manager may investigate at any time the affairs of
any department or the conduct of any officer or employee. He or she, or any
person or persons appointed by him or her for the purpose, shall have the
same power to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books
and papers and other evidence, and to punish for contempt, which has herein
been conferred upon the Council.



   (D)   Before taking office, the City Manager shall file with the
City Clerk a surety company bond, conditioned upon the honest and faithful
performance of his or her duties, in such sum as shall be fixed by the
Council. The premium of this bond shall be paid by the city.



(Prior Code, § 1-303)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 19-645 through 19-648



§ 30.036  CITY ATTORNEY.



   The City Attorney, as appointed by the City Manager, shall be the legal
advisor of the Council and city officers. The City Attorney shall commence
and defend all suits and actions necessary to be commenced or defended on
behalf of the city, or that may be ordered by the Council. He or she shall
attend meetings of the Council and give it his or her opinion upon any matter
submitted to him or her,  either orally or in writing as may be required.
She or he shall draw all ordinances, contracts and other documents requested
by the City Manager and Council. The City Council shall have the right to pay
the City Attorney additional compensation for legal services performed by him
or her for the city or to employ a City Prosecutor and additional legal
assistance and to pay for the legal assistance out of the funds of the city.



(Prior Code, § 1-304)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. 16-319



§ 30.037  CITY TREASURER.



   (A)   The Treasurer of the city shall be custodian of and receive
all money belonging to the city. He or she shall keep a separate account of
each fund or appropriation, and the debits and credits belonging thereto. He
or she shall, at the end of every month, and as often as may be requested,
render an account to the City Council, under oath, showing the state of the
treasury at the date of the account, the amount of money remaining in each
fund and the amount paid therefrom, and the balance of money in the treasury.
He or she shall accompany the account with a statement of all receipts and
disbursements, together with all warrants retained and paid by him or her,
which warrants, with all vouchers held by him or her, shall be filed with his
or her account in the Clerk's office. He or she shall produce and show all
funds shown by the report to be on hand, or satisfy the Council or its
committee that he or she has the funds in his or her custody or under his or
her control. If the Treasurer neglects or fails, for the space of ten days
from the end of every month, to render his or her account, his or her office
may, by resolution of the Council, be declared vacant, and the Council shall
appoint some person to fill the vacancy. The Treasurer shall keep his or her
books and accounts in such a manner as the Council shall prescribe and shall
keep a daily cashbook. All of the books and accounts of the Treasurer shall
always be subject to inspection by the City Manager, members of the Council
and other persons as they may designate. The Treasurer shall perform other
duties as are required of him or her by the laws of the city and the state
statutes. The Treasurer shall keep all money in his or her hands belonging to
the city separate and distinct from his or her own money, and he or she is
hereby expressly prohibited from using, either directly or indirectly, the
corporation money or warrants in his or her custody and keeping same for his
or her own use and benefit or that of any other person whomsoever. Any
violation of this section shall subject the Treasurer to immediate removal
from office by the City Council, and it may declare the office vacant. The
City Council shall appoint a successor to hold office for the remainder of
the term.



(Prior Code, § 1-306)



   (B)   The Treasurer shall give every person paying money into the
treasury and his or her office a receipt therefor, which shall show the
source from which the funds are derived, and shall, by distinct lines and
columns, show the amount received to the credit of each separate fund, and
whether same was paid in cash, in warrants, or otherwise, one of which copies
the Treasurer shall deliver to the person making the payment and the other he
or she shall retain in his or her office and file the copy with his or her
monthly reports.



(Prior Code, § 1-307)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 19-618



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-318, 16-717, 16-719,
77-2209



§ 30.038  TREASURER BOOKS; WARRANTS.



   (A)   The Treasurer shall daily, as moneys are received, foot the
several columns of his or her cashbook and of his or her register, and carry
the amounts forward, and at the close of each year, in case the amount of
money received by the Treasurer is insufficient to pay the warrants
registered, he or she shall close the account for that year in the register
and shall carry forward the excess. Any Treasurer who shall fail regularly to
enter upon his or her cashbook the amounts so received and receipted for, or
who shall fail to keep his or her cashbook footed from day to day, for the
space of three days, shall forfeit for each offense the sum of $100, to be
recovered in a civil action on his or her official bond by any person holding
a warrant drawn on the Treasurer, one-half to the person bringing the action,
and one-half to the school fund of the county. The cashbook, register, and
retained receipts of the Treasurer shall at all times be open to the
inspection of any person in whose name any warrants are registered and unpaid.



(Prior Code, § 1-308)



   (B)   The Treasurer shall keep a warrant register which shall show
in columns arranged for that purpose, the number, date, and amount of each
warrant presented and registered, the particular fund upon which the same is
drawn, the date of presentation, the name and address of the person in whose
name the same is registered, the date of payment, the amount of interest, and
the total amount paid thereon, with the date when notice to the person in
whose name the warrant is registered as herein provided. On presentation of a
warrant for payment to the Treasurer when there are not sufficient moneys on
hand to the credit of the proper fund to pay the same, it shall be the duty
of the Treasurer to enter the warrant in his or her warrant register for
payment in the order of its presentation and he or she shall endorse on the
warrant the words "registered for payment" with the date of registration and
shall sign the endorsement, whereupon the warrant shall draw interest at the
rate fixed by the City Council, which rate shall be endorsed on the warrant,
until notice of payment shall be given the registered owner. The Treasurer
shall neither directly or indirectly contract for nor purchase any city
warrant at any discount whatever upon the sum due on the warrant or order,
and if he or she shall so contract for or purchase any order or warrant, he
or she shall not be allowed in settlement the amount of the order or warrant,
or any part thereof, and shall also forfeit the whole amount due on the order
or warrant.



(Prior Code, § 1-310)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 45-106, 77-2202, 77-2210
through 77-2212, 77-2203



§ 30.039  TREASURER ANNUAL REPORT.



   It shall be the duty of the Treasurer to prepare and publish annually,
within 60 days following the close of the city fiscal year, a statement of
the receipts and expenditures by funds of the city for the preceding fiscal
year. Not more than the legal rate shall be charged and paid for the
publication. The publication shall be made in one legal newspaper of general
circulation in the city. Any Treasurer failing or neglecting to prepare and
publish the statement of receipts and expenditures shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor and shall be removed from office for the failure or neglect.



(Prior Code, § 1-309)  Penalty, see § 30.999



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 19-1101, 19-1103, 19-1104



§ 30.040  CITY CLERK.



   (A)   The City Council shall appoint the City Clerk. Except when
some other person is specifically appointed, the Clerk shall be, and assume
the duties of, the City Treasurer. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to
attend every meeting of the Council and keep a record of the proceedings
thereof. Whenever required by the Mayor, or requested by two members of the
Council, or the City Manager, he or she shall deliver a notice to the members
of the Council of any special meeting thereof, and shall notify any and all
committees of the Council of the business entrusted to them. The Clerk shall
keep and carefully preserve all papers and books which may come into his or
her possession as Clerk, filing and arranging them in a manner convenient for
reference. The Clerk shall keep the seal of the city and duly attest thereby
the Mayor's signature to all ordinances and all deeds and papers required to
be attested, when ordered by the governing body. The Clerk shall keep a
register of all licenses granted and the purpose for which they were issued,
and report to the Council at every meeting. At the beginning of each month,
he or she shall, if required by the governing body, furnish the Police
Department with a true copy of the register of all licenses then in force. He
or she shall issue licenses and collect license fees connected therewith as
provided by the laws of the state or the city.



   (B)   Within 30 days after any meeting of the Council, the Clerk
shall prepare and publish the proceedings of the Council in a legal
newspaper, or more than one legal newspaper if directed by the Council. The
charge for the publication shall not exceed the rates provided by law. The
publication charge shall be paid and allowed as other claims against the
General Fund. Wherever the Clerk is required to issue licenses, occupation
tax receipts, or permits, the City Collector shall collect the amount
required to be paid by the applicant therefor. The Clerk shall have
additional duties and receive a salary as the governing body may prescribe.



(Prior Code, § 1-311)



   (C)   The City Clerk shall publish within 30 days after the close of
each month the amount of each claim allowed, the purpose of the claim, and
the name of the claimant, except that the aggregate amount of all payroll
claims may be included as one item. Between July 15 and August 15 of each
year, the employee job titles and the current annual, monthly, or hourly
salaries corresponding to such job titles shall be published.  Each job
title published shall be descriptive and indicative of the duties and
functions of the position.



(Prior Code, § 1-312)



(Ord. 1680, passed 4-4-1983)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 19-618



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. 16-317, 19-615, 19-1102 through
19-1104



§ 30.041  OFFICIAL SEAL.



   The official Corporate Seal of the city shall be kept in the office of
the City Clerk, and shall bear the following inscription, "City of McCook,
Nebraska. Incorporated as City of First Class December 21, 1933." The City
Clerk shall affix an impression or representation of the  official seal to
all licenses, permits, ordinances, and all other official papers issued by
order of the governing body and countersigned by the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 1-501)  (Ord. 1680, passed 4-4-1983)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-115



§ 30.042  CITY ENGINEER; SPECIAL ENGINEER.



   (A)   The City Engineer, as appointed by and under the direction of
the City Manager, shall make a record of the minutes of his or her surveys
and of all work done for the city, including sewers, extension of water
system and heating system, electric light and sewerage system and power
plant, and accurately make such plats, sections, profiles, and maps as may be
necessary in the prosecution of any public work, which shall be public
records and belong to the city and be turned over to his or her successor.
The City Engineer, when requested by the City Manager, shall make estimates
of the cost of labor and material which may be done or furnished by contract
with the city and make all surveys, estimates and calculations necessary to
be made for the establishment of grades, the building of culverts, sewers,
electric light system, waterworks, power plant, public heating system,
bridges, curbing and gutters, the improvement of streets, and the erection
and repair of buildings, and shall perform other duties as may be required.



(Prior Code, § 1-313)



   (B)   The City Manager may, whenever it is deemed expedient, employ
a special engineer to make or assist in making any particular estimate or
survey, and any estimate or survey made by the special engineer shall have
the same validity and serve in all respects as though the same had been made
by the City Engineer.



(Prior Code, § 1-314)



(Ord. 1820, passed 3-2-1987)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 19-618



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-320, 16-321



§ 30.043  CHIEF OF POLICE.



   The Chief of Police, as appointed by and under the direction of the
City Manager, shall have the immediate superintendence of the police. He or
she and the policemen or policewomen shall have the power, and it shall be
their duty, to arrest all offenders against the laws of the state or of the
city, by day or by night, in the same manner as a Sheriff or Constable, and
keep them in the city prison or other place to prevent their escape, until a
trial or examination may be had before the proper officer, and they shall
have the same power as a Sheriff and Constable in relation to all criminal
matters arising out of a violation of a city law and all process issued by
the County Court in connection with a violation of a city law. They shall
arrest and detain any person found violating any law of the state or any law
of the city, until a legal warrant can be obtained. Each member of the city
Police Department shall have the duties of becoming well informed as to the
laws of the state and laws of the city, of enforcing the laws, of wearing at
all times the badge, uniform, and insignia furnished by the city for the
Police and of properly caring for same, and all further duties as shall be
assigned to them by the City Manager and Council and as are otherwise
provided by law. The Chief of Police shall have custody of all city property
used by the city police, shall execute the orders of the Mayor and City
Manager, shall be a member of the Board of Health and the Secretary and
Quarantine Officer thereof, shall have charge of traffic control on the city
streets, shall make and file or cause to be made and filed complaints for
violations of the ordinances of the city, shall have charge of the city jail
and the prisoners therein, and shall perform any other duties as are assigned
to or required of him or her by the City Manager and Council or otherwise
provided by law.



(Prior Code, § 1-315)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-225



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-238, 16-323, 29-401



§ 30.044  FIRE CHIEF.



   (A)   The Fire Chief, as appointed by and under the direction of the
City Manager, shall be responsible for the day-to-day supervision,
administration and operation of the Fire Department.



   (B)   The Fire Chief shall have control over the property,
implements and apparatus used by the Fire Department subject to the general
and specific directives of the City Manager.



(Prior Code, § 1-317)  (Ord. 96-2349, passed 6-17-1996; Ord. 2001-2583,
passed 11-19-2001)



§ 30.045  PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The Public Works Director, as appointed by and under the
direction of the City Manager, shall have general charge and control over all
work and direct activities of the Public Works Department.



   (B)   The Public Works Department includes the Street Division,
Collection Division, Recycling Division, Transfer Station Division, Cemetery
Division, Parks Division, Ball Parks Division, Airport Division, and Swimming
Pool Division. The Public Works Director shall consult with the Division
Supervisors concerning problems, programs, and policies in force; provide
technical advice to the City Manager and other city departments concerning
public works programs and operating problems; organize, coordinate, direct,
and supervise staff; participate in long-range planning; and investigate
additional service areas.



(Prior Code, § 1-318)  (Ord. 1680, passed 4-4-1983; Ord. 2002-2611, passed
2-4-2002; Ord. 2004-2707, passed 9-20-2004)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 19-618



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-308



§ 30.046  ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   The City Manager or his or her agent is hereby designated by
the City Council as the Zoning Administrator. He or she shall administer and
enforce the zoning ordinance. He or she may be provided with the assistance
of other persons as the City Council may direct.



   (B)   If the Zoning Administrator shall find that any of the
provisions of the zoning ordinance are being violated, he or she shall notify
in writing the person responsible for the violations, indicating the nature
of the violation and ordering the actions necessary to correct it. He or she
shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures;
removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions,
alterations, or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being
done; or shall take any other action authorized by the zoning ordinance to
ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.



(Prior Code, § 1-319)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-308



§ 30.047  BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   The Building Inspector, as appointed by and under the direction of the
City Manager, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions
of the municipal code pertaining to building construction and repair under
the direction of the City Manager. For such purpose, he/she shall have the
powers of the Municipal Police. Under the direction of the City Manager and
upon presentation of proper credentials, the Building Inspector, or his or
her duly authorized representative, may enter at all reasonable times any
building, structure, or premise to perform any duty imposed upon the City
Manager by any Building Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical
Code, or Housing Code duly adopted by reference in the municipal code, or any
provision of the municipal code. Whenever any building or construction work
is being done contrary to the provisions of the codes, it shall be the duty
of the Building Inspector under the direction of the City Manager to order
the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in doing
or causing the work to be done. Any such person shall immediately stop, or
cause to be stopped, said work until authorization is received from the
Building Inspector to continue the work. When any structure is in a dangerous
condition or the building is being used contrary to the provisions of the
laws of the city, the Building Inspector under the direction of the City
Manager, may order such use discontinued or the structure, or portion thereof
in violation vacated. The Building Inspector, acting in good faith and
without malice in the discharge of his or her duties, shall not thereby
render himself or herself personally liable and is hereby relieved from all
personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as
the result of any act or omission in the discharge of his or her duties. Any
suit brought against the Building Inspector, because of an alleged act or
omission performed by him or her in the enforcement of any provision of the
municipal codes relating to buildings or building construction shall be
defended by the legal department of the city until final termination of the
proceedings. The Building Inspector may request, and shall receive so far as
may be necessary in the discharge of his or her duties, the assistance and
cooperation of other officials of the city. The Building Inspector shall have
such additional duties, carry out tasks, and make such reports as the City
Manager may prescribe from time to time.



§ 30.048  DIRECTOR OF FINANCE.



   The Director of Finance shall be the Treasurer of the city. Under the
direction of the City Manager, he or she shall have general charge,
direction, and control over all work and activities of the Finance Department
including the duties of Treasurer as described in this code. The Director of
Finance shall also assist department heads in determining annual expenditure
requirements, assist the City Manager in the preparation of the budget,
long-range planning, all personnel changes, promotions, and disciplinary
actions.



(Prior Code, § 1-320)  (Ord. 1680, passed 4-4-1983)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 19-618



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-308



§ 30.049  UTILITIES DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The Utilities Director, as appointed by and under the
direction of the City Manager, shall have general charge and control over all
work and direct activities of the Water Department and Sewer Department and
shall have the immediate control of the water plant, pump house and machinery
and appliances used in connection with producing and distributing water to
inhabitants of the city and the systems of sewerage of the city.



   (B)   The Utilities Director shall consult with the Division
Supervisors concerning problems, programs, and policies in force; provide
technical advice to the City Manager and other city departments concerning
programs of the Water Department and Sewer Department and operating problems;
organize, coordinate, direct, and supervise staff; and participate in
long-range planning.



   (C)   The Utilities Director shall supervise and inspect repairs and
maintenance work on the city water and sewer systems; enforce the laws of the
city relating to the Water Department and Sewer Department as well as carry
out any order or directive of the City Manager. The Utilities Director, or
his or her duly authorized agent, shall have free access at proper hours of
the day to all parts of each premise and building to or in which water or
sewer service is furnished to examine pipes and fixtures and ascertain
whether there is any disrepair or violation of city law.



(Prior Code, § 1-321)  (Ord. 2004-2707, passed 9-20-2004)



§ 30.050  LIBRARY DIRECTOR.



   The Library Director, as appointed by and under the direction of the
City Manager, shall manage the city library. He or she shall also collect all
money received by the library and turn the same over to the City Treasurer
along with a report of the source of the revenue.



(Prior Code, § 1-322)  (Ord. 2004-2717, passed 1-3-2005)



§ 30.051  SENIOR SERVICES DIRECTOR.



   The Senior Services Director, as appointed by and under the director of
the City Manager, shall be responsible for the day-to-day supervision,
administration, and operation of the senior center and the public transit
system.



OATH OF OFFICE



§ 30.060  OATH REQUIRED; FORM.



   All officials of the city, whether elected or appointed, except when a
different oath is specifically provided herein, shall, before entering upon
their respective duties, take and subscribe the following oath which shall be
endorsed upon their respective bonds:



   "I ___________ do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution
of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Nebraska against
all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I bear true faith and allegiance to
the same; that I take this obligation freely, and without mental reservation,
or for the purpose of evasion; and that I will faithfully and impartially
perform the duties of the office of ___________ according to law, and to the
best of my ability. And I do further swear that I do not advocate, nor am I a
member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of
the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence;
and that during such time as I am in this position I will not advocate, nor
become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the
overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or
violence. So help me God."



(Neb. RS 11-101)  (Prior Code, § 1-403)



COMPENSATION



§ 30.075  OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



   Salaries of officers and employees of the city shall be in such amount
as the governing body shall fix by ordinance, provided that after the
governing body has adopted a wage and salary schedule with appropriate
employee classifications and wage ranges for each classification, by
ordinance, the ordinance shall be sufficient for all changes in salary for
city employees included thereunder without further ordinance being passed,
approved, and published. All salaries shall be on file at the office of the
City Clerk and available for public inspection at any reasonable time.



(Prior Code, § 1-1001)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-310, 19-616, 19-620



§ 30.076  SALARY ADJUSTMENTS.



   The annual compensation of the Mayor and Council members shall be
payable quarterly in equal installments, and shall be fixed by the Council.
The emoluments of any appointive or elective officer shall not be increased
or diminished during the term for which the officer was elected or appointed,
except that when there are officers elected or appointed to the Council, or a
board or commission having more than one member and the terms of one or more
members commence and end at different times, the compensation of all members
of the Council, board, or commission may be increased or diminished at the
beginning of the full term of any member thereof. No person who shall have
resigned or vacated any office shall be eligible to the same during the time
for which the person was elected or appointed when, during the same time, the
emoluments have been increased. For each absence from regular meetings of the
Council, unless authorized by a two-thirds vote of all members thereof, there
shall be deducted a sum equal to 2% of the annual salary. Absence from five
consecutive regular meetings shall operate to vacate the seat of a member,
unless the absence is excused by the Council by resolution setting forth the
excuse and entered upon the journal.



(Prior Code, § 1-1002)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 19-616



§ 30.077  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, OFFICER shall mean:



      (1)   Any members of any board or commission of the city;



      (2)   Any appointed official if the city official:



         (a)   Serves on a board or commission which spends and
administers its own funds; and



         (b)   Is dealing with a contract made by the board or
commission.



      (3)   Any elected city official. Unless specified otherwise,
volunteer firefighters and ambulance drivers shall not be considered officers
for purposes of this section, with respect to their duties as firefighters
and ambulance drivers.



   (B)   No officer of the city shall be permitted to benefit from any
contract to which the city is a party. The existence of an interest in any
contract renders the contract voidable by decree of a court of competent
jurisdiction as to any person who entered into the contract or took
assignment thereof with actual knowledge of the prohibited conflict. An
action to have a contract declared void under this section may be brought by
the city or by any resident thereof and must be brought within one year after
the contract is signed or assigned. Any decree may provide for the
reimbursement of any person for the reasonable value of all money, goods,
material, labor, or services furnished under the contract, to the extent that
the city has benefitted thereby.



   (C)   The prohibition in this section shall apply only when the
officer, or his or her parent, spouse, or child:



      (1)   Has a business with which the individual is associated,
or business association, which shall mean a business:



         (a)   In which the individual is a partner, director, or
officer; or



         (b)   In which the individual or a member of the
individual's immediate family is a stockholder of closed corporation stock
worth $1,000 or more at fair market value or which represents more than 5%
equity interest, or is a stockholder of publicly-traded stock worth $10,000
or more at fair market value or which represents more than 10% equity
interest.



       (2)   Will receive a direct pecuniary fee or commission as a
result of the contract; provided however, the officer shall not be deemed to
have an interest within the meaning of this section if the officer:



         (a)   Is an employee of the business involved in the
contract; and



         (b)   Has no ownership interest or will not receive a
pecuniary fee.



   (D)   The provisions of this section shall not apply if the
interested officer:



      (1)   Makes a declaration on the record to the governmental
body responsible for approving the contract regarding the nature and extent
of his or her interest, prior to official consideration of the contract;



      (2)   Does not vote on the matter of granting the contract,
except that if the number of members of the board declaring an interest in
the contract would prevent the board, with all members present, from securing
a quorum on the issue, then all members may vote on the matter; and



      (3)   Does not act for the city as to inspection or
performance under the contract in which he or she has an interest.



   (E)   The receiving of deposits, cashing of checks, and buying and
selling of warrants and bonds of indebtedness of any city by a financial
institution shall not be considered a contract under the provisions of this
section. The ownership of less than 5% of the outstanding shares of a
corporation shall not constitute an interest within the meaning of this
section. Notwithstanding the provisions of division (D), above, if an
officer's parent, spouse or child is an employee of the city, the officer may
vote on all issues of the contract which are generally applicable to all
employees or all employees within a classification and do not single out his
or her parent, spouse, or child for special action. If an officer has the
power to employ personnel and he or she hires his or her parent, spouse, or
child, the officer shall disclose the hiring pursuant to divisions (F)(1)(a)
through (e) below, except that if the parent, spouse, or child is already
employed in the position at the time the officer takes office and the
position does not change, no disclosure need be made. Notwithstanding any
other provision of this section, any contract entered into with an interested
officer shall be subject to applicable competitive bidding requirements and
shall be fair and reasonable to the city.



   (F)   (1)   The City Clerk shall maintain, separately from other
records, a ledger containing the information listed in divisions (F)(1)(a)
through (e) below about every contract entered into by the city in which an
officer has an interest as specified above for which disclosure is made as
provided in division (D) above. Such information shall be kept in the ledger
for five years from the date of the officer's last day in office and shall
include the:



         (a)   Names of the contracting parties;



         (b)   Nature of the interest of the officer in question;



         (c)   Date that the contract was approved by the city
involved;



         (d)   Amount of the contract; and



         (e)   Basic terms of the contract.



      (2)   The information supplied relative to the contract shall
be provided to the Clerk not later than ten days after the contract has been
signed by both parties. The ledger kept by the Clerk shall be available for
public inspection during the normal working hours of the office in which it
is kept.



   (G)   An open account established for the benefit of any city or
entity thereof, with a business in which an officer has an interest, shall be
deemed a contract subject to the provisions of this section. The statement
required to be filed pursuant to this section shall be filed within ten days
after such account is open. Thereafter, the Clerk shall maintain a running
account of all amounts purchased on the open account. Purchases made from
petty cash or a petty cash fund shall not be subject to the provisions of
this section.



   (H)   Any officer who knowingly violates the provisions of this
section or Neb. RS  49-14,103.01 through 49-14,103.03, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty for the violation as set out
in § 30.999 of this chapter.



   (I)   The city may enact ordinances exempting from the provisions of
this section, contracts involving $100 or less in which an officer of the
city may have an interest. No officer, including volunteer firefighters and
ambulance drivers, shall receive any pay or perquisites from the city other
than his or her salary. The governing body shall not pay or appropriate any
money or other valuable thing to pay a person who is not an officer for the
performance of any act, service, or duty which shall come within the proper
scope of the duties of any officer of the city.



(Prior Code, § 1-1003)  (Ord. 1709, passed 10-3-1983; Ord. 1754, passed
10-1-1984; Ord. 1817, passed 2-2-1987)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 18-305 through 18-312,
49-14,103.03, 70-624.04



§ 30.999  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions of any
section of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Unless
otherwise specified in the particular chapter or section for which the person
stands convicted of violating, the penalty for the violation shall be in any
amount not to exceed $1,000 and/or imprisonment for any length of time not to
exceed three months, in the discretion of the court, provided whenever any
section of this chapter shall declare a nuisance, a violation of that section
shall be penalized by a fine of not more than $1,000, in which case a new
violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of the
failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 1-1201)



CHAPTER 31:  CITY POLICIES



Section



General Provisions



   31.01   Corporate existence



   31.02   Service of process



   31.03   Powers of city



   31.04   Codification of ordinances



   31.05   Travel expenses



Meetings



   31.15   Definitions



   31.16   Public meetings



   31.17   Closed sessions; chance meetings



   31.18   Emergency meetings



   31.19   Minutes



   31.20   Voting



   31.21   Notice to media



   31.22   Participation by public



   31.23   Meeting day and time; quorum; call to order



   31.24   Rules of conduct



   31.25   Expedited consent agenda



   31.26   Power to compel witnesses and testimony



Elections



   31.40   General provisions



   31.41   Representation at large; term



   31.42   Initiative and referendum



City Property



   31.55   Responsibility for maintenance and control



   31.56   Sale or conveyance of property



   31.57   Removal of obstructions; permitted obstructions



   31.58   Overhanging branches



   31.59   Procedure for appraisal and acquisition of real property



   31.60   Public works construction; architect or professional
engineer required; exceptions



 



   31.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 31.01  CORPORATE EXISTENCE.



   The city is hereby found and declared to be a city of more than 5,000
persons. The city shall be governed by the laws of the state regulating
cities of the first class.



(Prior Code, § 1-101)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-101



§ 31.02  SERVICE OF PROCESS.



   All process affecting the city may be served by personal, residence, or
certified mail upon the Chief Executive Official or the Clerk.



(Neb. RS 25-510.02(2))  (Prior Code, § 1-102)  (Ord. 1748, passed
10-1-1984)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. 16-115



§ 31.03  POWERS OF CITY.



   The city is a body corporate and politic. It shall have the power to
sue and be sued; to purchase, lease, and lease with option to buy; to acquire
property by gift or devise; to hold real and personal property within or
without the limits of the city, and real estate sold to satisfy unpaid tax
obligations for the use of the city in such manner and upon such terms and
conditions as may be deemed in the best interests of the city; to sell,
exchange, or lease any personal or real property owned by the city, including
park land, in such manner and upon such terms and conditions as may be deemed
in the best interests of the city, provided that real estate owned by the
city may be conveyed without consideration to the state or to the state
Armory Board for state armory sites, or if acquired for state armory sites,
shall be conveyed in the manner strictly as provided in Neb. RS 18-1001
through 18-1006; to make all contracts and do all other acts in relation to
the concerns of the city as may be necessary in the exercise of its corporate
powers; and to exercise such other and further powers as may be conferred by
law.



(Neb. RS 16-201)  (Prior Code, § 1-103)



§ 31.04  CODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.



   The city shall have the power to revise the ordinances of the city from
time to time and publish the same in book form. The revision shall be
evidenced by a general codification ordinance which shall repeal all other
ordinances in conflict and embrace as the governing law of the city all
provisions therein. All ordinances in force at the time of the codification
shall continue in force for the purpose of all rights acquired, fines,
penalties, forfeitures, and liabilities incurred.



(Prior Code, § 1-104)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-247



§ 31.05  TRAVEL EXPENSES.



   (A)   The expenditure of public funds is hereby subject, pursuant to
the State of Nebraska Local Government Miscellaneous Expenditure Act, to the
following:



      (1)   Authorized expenses may include:



         (a)   Registration costs, tuition costs, fees or charges;



         (b)   Mileage at the then current rate allowed by Neb.
RS 81-1176, or actual travel expense if travel is by commercial or charter
means. In-state mileage shall be calculated by using the Official State
Highway Map Mileage Chart, plus five miles per each day, or part thereof,
that the person is engaged in city business. Out of state travel will be at
actual odometer readings. When travel mode is optional, the lower of the
reimbursable cost is authorized;



         (c)   1.   Meals for travel requiring an overnight
trip, $30 per day (no receipts necessary), or pro-rata, based on the
following:



               A.   Breakfast - $5;



               B.   Lunch - $10;



               C.   Dinner - $15.



            2.   Actual receipts may be substituted for per
diem when the total meal expenses for the trip exceeds the per diem.
Banquets, lunches and other meals included in the registration fee or prepaid
with the conference will be deducted from the per diem rate;



         (d)   When required to travel away from home overnight,
and traveling includes a partial day on the departure day or a partial day on
the return day, departures must occur prior to 6:00 a.m. for breakfast per
diem and return must be after 8:00 p.m. for supper per diem;



         (e)   Actual cost of meals (receipts required), not to
exceed the applicable federal per diem rate for Meals and Incidentals (M&I),
when not required to travel when away from home overnight; and



         (f)   Other transportation, lodging and miscellaneous
expenses at actual cost upon the submission of proper vouchers/receipts.



      (2)   Authorized expenditures shall not include expenditures
for meals of City Council members provided while attending a public meeting
of the City Council unless such meeting is a joint meeting with one or more
other governing bodies.



      (3)   Authorized expenditures shall not include expenditures
for any expenses incurred by a spouse of an elected or appointed official,
employee, or volunteer unless the spouse is also an elected or appointed
official, employee, or volunteer of the city.



   (B)   The expenditure of public funds is hereby authorized, pursuant
to the State of Nebraska Local Government Miscellaneous Expenditure Act, for
the following purposes:



      (1)   Nonalcoholic beverages provided to individuals attending
public meetings of the City Council.



      (2)   Nonalcoholic beverages and meals:



         (a)   Provided for any individuals while performing or
immediately after performing relief, assistance, or support activities in
emergency situations, including, but not limited to, tornado, severe storm,
fire or accident;



         (b)   Provided for any volunteers during or immediately
following their participation in any activity approved by the City Council,
including but not limited to, mowing parks, picking up litter, removing
graffiti or snow removal;



         (c)   Provided at one recognition dinner each year held
for elected and appointed officials, employees, or volunteers. The maximum
cost per person for such dinner shall not exceed $25. The annual recognition
dinner may be held separately for employees of each department or separately
for volunteers, or any of them in combination.



      (3)   Plaques, certificates of achievement, or items of value
awarded to elected or appointed officials, employees, or volunteers,
including persons serving on local government boards or commissions, are
subject to a $300 limit on value. This amount shall not be amended or altered
more than once in any 12-month period. This amount may be amended by
resolution, only after a public hearing has been held.



   (C)   The following procedures shall be used for business travel:



      (1)   Transportation method:  when travel is by air, advance
ticketing will be utilized whenever possible to obtain the lowest available
coach fare.



      (2)   Lodging:



         (a)   Reimbursement for non-commercial lodging is not
permitted.



         (b)   When city personnel are accompanied by non-city
personnel, only the costs attributed to the city personnel are reimbursable.



      (3)   Expenses:



         (a)   The following expenses are reimbursable upon
submission of paid receipts: parking fees; taxi fares; shuttle fares; bus
fares; highway tolls; registration fees; lodging; tuition fees; supplies or
equipment required for travel or training; rental cars; fees for official
functions related to travel and traveler's checks fees.



         (b)   The following expenses are not reimbursable:
entertainment, including television rentals; personal expenses, such as,
hygiene items, laundry, magazines; travel insurance and alcoholic beverages.



      (4)   Travel advances:  employees shall receive approval by
the City Manager for any trip, and any travel advance, before departing and
before incurring any expenses (including prepaid transportation, lodging
expenses, and registration fees). Travel advances will only be authorized
when employees are required to travel away from home overnight. All travel
expenses require the approval of the department head and City Manager.



      (5)   Expense claims:



         (a)   Personnel on authorized travel must submit expense
claims to the Finance Administrative Assistant Department immediately upon
return, but not later than ten working days after return to duty.



         (b)   All receipts, unexpended city funds, and funds due
the city, shall be returned at that time.



         (c)   All expenses (including prepaid expenses) shall be
summarized and accounted for on a "Report of Expense" form.



(Ord. 2008-2814, passed 11-3-2008)



MEETINGS



§ 31.15  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      MEETINGS.  All regular, special, or called meetings, formal or
informal, of a public body for the purposes of briefing, discussion of public
business, formation of tentative policy, or the taking of any action.



(Prior Code, § 1-601)



      PUBLIC BODY.



         (a)   The governing body of the city;



         (b)   All independent boards, commissions, bureaus,
committees, councils, subunits, or any other bodies now or hereafter created
pursuant to law;



         (c)   Advisory committees of the bodies listed above; and



         (d)   Instrumentalities exercising essentially public
functions.



   (B)   This subchapter shall not apply to subcommittees of the bodies
unless a quorum of the public body attends a subcommittee meeting or unless
the subcommittees are holding hearings, making policy, or taking formal
action on behalf of their parent body.



(Prior Code, § 1-602)



(Ord. 1707, passed 10-3-1983)  (Ord. 2005-2723, passed 2-7-2005)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. 84-1409(2)



§ 31.16  PUBLIC MEETINGS.



   (A)   All public meetings as defined by law shall be held in a
building which shall be open to attendance by the public and in which the
public body usually holds meetings unless the publicized notice hereinafter
required shall designate some other public building or other specified place.
The advance publicized notice of all public convened meetings shall be
transmitted to all members of the public body and to the public by a method
designated by the public body. The notice shall contain the time and specific
place for each meeting and either an enumeration of the agenda subjects known
at the time of the publicized notice, or a statement that an agenda kept
continually current shall be readily available for public inspection at the
office of the City Clerk during normal business hours.



   (B)   Agenda items shall be sufficiently descriptive to give the
public reasonable notice of the matters to be considered at the meeting.
Except for items of an emergency nature, the agenda shall not be altered
later than:



      (1)   Twenty-four hours before the scheduled commencement of
the meeting; or



      (2)   Forty-eight hours before the scheduled commencement of a
meeting of the governing body scheduled outside the corporate limits of the
city. The public body shall have the right to modify the agenda to include
items of an emergency nature only at the public meeting. The minutes of the
public body shall include the record of the manner and advance time by which
the advance publicized notice was given, a statement of how the availability
of an agenda of the then known subject was communicated, the time and
specific place of the meeting, and the name of each member of the public body
present or absent at each convened meeting. The minutes of the public body
shall be a public record open to inspection by the public upon request at any
reasonable time at the office of the City Clerk. Any official action on any
question or motion duly moved and seconded shall be taken only by roll call
vote of the public body in open session. The record of the public body shall
show how each member voted, or that the member was absent and did not vote.



(Prior Code, § 1-603)  (Ord. 2005-2723, passed 2-7-2005; Ord. 2006-2773,
passed 7-3-2006)



§ 31.17  CLOSED SESSIONS; CHANCE MEETINGS.



   (A)   Any public body may hold a closed session by the affirmative
vote of a majority of its voting members if a closed session is clearly
necessary for the protection of the public interest or for the prevention of
needless injury to the reputation of an individual and if the individual has
not requested a public meeting. The subject matter and the reason
necessitating the closed session shall be identified in the motion to close.
Closed sessions may be held for, but shall not be limited to, such reasons as:



      (1)   Strategy sessions with respect to collective bargaining,
real estate purchases, pending litigation or litigation which is imminent as
evidenced by communication of a claim or threat of litigation to or by the
public body;



      (2)   Discussion regarding deployment of security personnel or
devices;



      (3)   Investigative proceedings regarding allegations of
criminal misconduct; or



      (4)   Evaluation of the job performance of a person when
necessary to prevent needless injury to the reputation of a person and if the
person has not requested a public meeting.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall permit a closed meeting for
discussion of the appointment or election of a new member to any public body.



   (C)   The vote to hold a closed session shall be taken in open
session. The entire motion, the vote of each member on the question of
holding a closed session, and the time when the closed session commenced and
concluded shall be recorded in the minutes. If the motion to close passes,
then the presiding officer immediately prior to the closed session shall
restate on the record the limitation of the subject matter of the closed
session. The public body holding such a closed session shall restrict its
consideration to matters during the closed portions to only those purposes
set forth in the motion to close as the reason for the closed session. The
meeting shall be reconvened in open session before any formal action may be
taken. For purposes of this section, FORMAL ACTION shall mean a collective
decision or a collective commitment or promise to make a decision on any
question, motion, proposal, resolution, order, or ordinance or formation of a
position or policy, but shall not include negotiating guidance given by
members of the public body to legal counsel or other negotiators in closed
sessions authorized under division (A)(1) of this section.



   (D)   (1)   Any member of the public body shall have the right to
challenge the continuation of a closed session if the member determines that
the session has exceeded the reason stated in the original motion to hold a
closed session or if the member contends that the closed session is neither
clearly necessary for:



         (a)   The protection of the public interest; or



         (b)   The prevention of needless injury to the
reputation of an individual.



      (2)   The challenge shall be overruled only by a majority vote
of the members of the public body. The challenge and its disposition shall be
recorded in the minutes.



   (E)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that any
meeting be closed to the public. No person or public body shall fail to
invite a portion of its members to a meeting and no public body shall
designate itself a subcommittee of the whole body for the purpose of
circumventing the provisions of this chapter. No closed session, informal
meeting, chance meeting, social gathering, e-mail, fax, or electronic
communication shall be used for the purpose of circumventing the provisions
of this chapter.



   (F)   This chapter shall not apply to chance meetings, or to
attendance at or travel to conventions or workshops of members of a public
body at which there is no meeting of the body then intentionally convened, if
there is no vote or other action taken regarding any matter over which the
public body has supervision, control, jurisdiction, or advisory power.



(Prior Code, § 1-604)  (Ord. 2005-2723, passed 2-7-2005; Ord. 2006-2773,
passed 7-3-2006)



§ 31.18  EMERGENCY MEETINGS.



   When it is necessary to hold an emergency meeting without reasonable
advance public notice, the nature of the emergency shall be stated in the
minutes and any formal action taken in the meeting shall pertain only to the
emergency. The emergency meetings may be held by means of electronic or
telecommunication equipment. The provisions of § 31.21 of this chapter shall
be complied with in conducting emergency meetings. Complete minutes of the
emergency meetings specifying the nature of the emergency and any formal
action taken at the meeting shall be made available to the public by no later
than the end of the next regular business day.



(Prior Code, § 1-605)  (Ord. 1707, passed 10-3-1983; Ord. 2005-2723, passed
2-7-2005)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 84-1411



§ 31.19  MINUTES.



   Each public body shall keep minutes of all meetings showing the time,
place, members present and absent, and the substance of all matters
discussed. The minutes of all meetings and evidence and documentation
received or disclosed in open session shall be public records and open to
public inspection during normal business hours. Minutes shall be written and
available for inspection within ten working days, or prior to the next
convened meeting, whichever occurs earlier.



(Prior Code, § 1-606)  (Ord. 2005-2723, passed 2-7-2005)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 84-1412, 84-1413



§ 31.20  VOTING.



   Any action taken on any question or motion duly moved and seconded
shall be by roll call vote of the public body in open session, and the record
shall state how each member voted, or if the member was absent or not voting.
The requirements for a roll call or viva voce vote shall be satisfied by the
public body utilizing an electronic voting device which allows the yeas and
nays of each member of the public body to be readily seen by the public. The
vote to elect leadership within the public body may be taken by secret
ballot, but the total number of votes for each candidate shall be recorded in
the minutes. An affirmative vote of a majority of the elected members of the
governing body shall be required for the transaction of any business.



(Prior Code, § 1-607)  (Ord. 2005-2723, passed 2-7-2005)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. 16-503, 84-1413



§ 31.21  NOTICE TO MEDIA.



   The City Clerk, Secretary, or other designee of each public body shall
maintain a list of the news media requesting notification of meetings and
shall make reasonable efforts to provide advance notification to them of the
time and place of each meeting, and the subjects to be discussed at that
meeting.



(Prior Code, § 1-608)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 84-1411



§ 31.22  PARTICIPATION BY PUBLIC.



   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this subchapter, the public shall
have the right to attend and the right to speak at meetings of public bodies,
and all or any part of a meeting of a public body, except for closed sessions
called pursuant to § 31.17, may be videotaped, televised, photographed,
broadcast, or recorded by any person in attendance by means of a tape
recorder, camera, video equipment, or any other means of pictorial or sonic
reproduction or in writing.



   (B)   It shall not be a violation of this section for any public
body to make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations regarding the
conduct of persons attending, speaking at, videotaping, televising,
photographing, broadcasting, or recording its meetings. A public body may not
be required to allow citizens to speak at each meeting, nor may it forbid
public participation at all meetings.



   (C)   No public body shall require members of the public to identify
themselves as a condition for admission to the meeting. The public body may,
however, require any member of the public desiring to address the body to
identify himself or herself.



   (D)   No public body shall, for the purpose of circumventing the
provisions of this subchapter, hold a meeting in a place known by the body to
be too small to accommodate the anticipated audience.



   (E)   No public body shall be deemed in violation of this section if
it holds its meeting in its traditional meeting place which is located in
this state. No public body shall be deemed in violation of this section if it
holds a meeting outside of this state if, but only if:



      (1)   A member entity of the public body is located outside of
this state and the meeting is in that member's jurisdiction;



      (2)   All out-of-state locations identified in the notice are
located within public buildings used by members of the entity or at a place
which will accommodate the anticipated audience;



      (3)   Reasonable arrangements are made to accommodate the
public's right to attend, hear, and speak at the meeting, including making a
telephone conference call available at an instate location to members, the
public, or the press, if requested 24 hours in advance;



      (4)   No more than 25% of the public body's meetings in a
calendar year are held out-of-state;



      (5)   Out-of-state meetings are not used to circumvent any of
the public government purposes established in the state Open Meetings Act;



      (6)   Reasonable arrangements are made to provide viewing at
other instate locations for a videoconference meeting if requested 14 days in
advance and if economically and reasonably available in the area; and



      (7)   The public body publishes notice of the out-of-state
meeting at least 21 days before the date of the meeting in a legal newspaper
of statewide circulation.



   (F)   The public body shall, upon request, make a reasonable effort
to accommodate the public's right to hear the discussion and testimony
presented at the meeting.



   (G)   Public bodies shall make available at the meeting, for
examination and copying by members of the public, at least one copy of all
reproducible written material to be discussed at an open meeting.



   (H)   Public bodies shall make available at least one current copy
of the Open Meetings Act posted in the meeting room at a location accessible
to members of the public. At the beginning of the meeting, the public shall
be informed about the location of the posted information.



(Prior Code, § 1-609)  (Ord. 1707, passed 10-3-1983; Ord. 1789, passed
4-21-1986; Ord. 2005-2723, passed 2-7-2005; Ord. 2006-2773, passed 7-3-2006)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 84-1412



§ 31.23  MEETING DAY AND TIME; QUORUM; CALL TO ORDER.



   (A)   The regular meetings of the governing body shall be held in
the City Council Chambers. Regular meetings shall be held on the first and
third Mondays of each month at the hour of 6:30 p.m., except if the regular
meeting day falls on a holiday, then the meeting shall be the following day.



   (B)   Special meetings may be called by the Mayor, City Manager, or
two members of the City Council, the object of which shall be submitted to
the Council in writing. The call and object, as well as the disposition
thereof, shall be entered upon the journal by the City Clerk. On filing the
call for a special meeting, the City Clerk shall notify the Council members
of the special meeting, stating the time and its purpose. Notice of a special
meeting need not be given to a Council member known to be out of the state,
or physically unable to be present.



   (C)   The Council shall hold its regular meeting on the first Monday
in December following the general elections in every even numbered year.



   (D)   A majority of all members elected to the Council shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a less number may
adjourn, from time to time, and compel the attendance of the absent members.
At the hour appointed for the meeting, the City Clerk shall proceed to call
the roll of members and announce whether a quorum is present. If a quorum is
present, the Council shall be called to order by the Mayor, if present, or if
absent, by the Vice President of the Council. In the absence of both the
Mayor and the Vice President of the Council, the City Council members shall
elect a President pro tempore.



(Prior Code, § 1-610)  (Ord. 1680, passed 4-4-1983; Ord. 1794, passed
4-21-1986; Ord. 2005-2723, passed 2-7-2005; Ord. 2015-2916, passed 5-18-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-401, 16-402, 19-615, 19-617



§ 31.24  RULES OF CONDUCT.



   The business and proceedings of the meeting of the Council shall be
conducted in accordance with the following rules.



   (A)   The presiding officer may refer back to any order of business
after passing it, if there is no objection from any Council member.



   (B)   The presiding officer shall preserve order at all meetings and
when any Council member is called to order, he or she shall be seated until
the point is decided. All questions of order shall be decided by the
presiding officer, subject to appeal to the Council. In such appeal, a
Council member shall state briefly what in his or her opinion the ruling
should have been and upon this appeal being seconded, the question of the
appeal shall be put by the presiding officer.



   (C)   When a question is being put by the presiding officer, no
Council member shall leave the Council Chambers.



   (D)   If not covered in this section, questions of procedure and
conduct at Council meetings shall be decided by the President of the Council
in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order.



   (E)   Upon request of any Council member, any motion or resolution
shall be reduced to writing before being acted upon.



   (F)   No motion shall be put or discussed until it has been seconded.



   (G)   The minutes of the meeting shall show the Council member who
offered or introduced a motion, resolution, or ordinance and the Council
member seconding the same.



   (H)   The "yeas" and "nays" upon any question shall be taken and
entered on the minutes on request of any Council member.



   (I)   The Council may reprimand or censure any of its members for
improper behavior as Council member.



   (J)   Any resolution, ordinance, or motion may be withdrawn by its
introducer or mover with consent of the Council member seconding same, before
same is voted upon.



   (K)   Motions to reconsider may only be made by a Council member who
voted with the majority.



   (L)   The presiding officer may reasonably limit the time during
which any person not a member of the Council may address a Council meeting.



   (M)   The presiding officer may express his or her opinion on any
subject being discussed or debated by the Council.



   (N)   The rules may be suspended on the affirmative vote of
three-fourths of the members of the Council.



(Prior Code, § 1-611)  (Ord. 2005-2723, passed 2-7-2005)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-403



§ 31.25  EXPEDITED CONSENT AGENDA.



   (A)   There is hereby established a consent agenda procedure for the
transaction of certain routine business at Council meetings. The intent of
this procedure is to expedite the conducting of routine business at Council
meetings to allow more time to be devoted to substantive issues by condensing
the time necessary to process routine items, but yet allowing an opportunity
for full discussion in consideration of the items if appropriate.



   (B)   The procedure to be followed is as follows.



      (1)   Items considered by the City Manager to be of routine
and non-controversial nature may be placed by him or her on the agenda for
regular Council meetings and special Council meetings under the heading of
"consent agenda." The items shall be clearly worded to indicate action to be
taken by the Council.



      (2)   At the Council meeting, the Mayor will review those
items placed on the consent agenda and ask if any member of the Council or
public in attendance wish to have an item removed from the consent agenda and
placed on the regular agenda. Requests are not debatable, and will be
complied with without discussion.



      (3)   After all items have been removed from the consent
agenda, as requested by a member of the Council or public in attendance, the
Council will then consider adoption of the actions recommended and specified
in the consent agenda by a single motion and vote of the Council.



      (4)   All items listed on the consent agenda shall be recorded
in the minutes individually and in their proper form, and the vote recorded
adopting the recommended and specified action on the consent agenda shall be
shown as the vote on each item in the minutes.



(Prior Code, § 1-612)



§ 31.26  POWER TO COMPEL WITNESSES AND TESTIMONY.



   The Council or any committee of the members thereof shall have power to
compel the attendance of witnesses for the investigation of matters that may
come before them. The presiding officer of the Council, or chairperson of the
committee for the time being, may administer the requisite oaths. The Council
or committee shall have the same authority to compel the giving of testimony
as is conferred on courts of justice.



(Prior Code, § 1-613)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-406



ELECTIONS



§ 31.40  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   The city shall hold its city elections in accordance with the
provisions of Neb. RS Chapter 32.



(Prior Code, § 1-801)  (Ord. 2005-2722, passed 2-7-2005)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. 19-612(2), 32-505



§ 31.41  REPRESENTATION AT LARGE; TERM.



   The City Council shall be made up of five Council members. Council
members shall be elected from the city at large unless the City Council by
ordinance provides for the election of all or some of its Council members by
wards. Council members shall serve for a term of four years and until their
successors are elected and have qualified, except that the first election
under an ordinance changing the manner of election shall be for all Council
members irrespective of their manner of election.



(Prior Code, § 1-806)



§ 31.42  INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM.



   The city accepts and makes a part of this code Neb. RS Chapter 18,
Article 25 relating to initiative and referendum.



(Prior Code, § 1-1101)  (Ord. 2005-2721, passed 2-7-2005)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 18-2501 through 18-2511



CITY PROPERTY



§ 31.55  RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE AND CONTROL.



   The governing body shall have the care, supervision, and control of all
public highways, bridges, streets, alleys, public squares, and commons within
the city, and shall cause the same to be kept open and in repair, and free
from nuisances.



(Prior Code, § 8-101)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-609



§ 31.56  SALE OR CONVEYANCE OF PROPERTY.



   (A)   The city may sell and convey any real or personal property
owned by the city, including park land, in the manner and upon the terms and
conditions as may be deemed in the best interests of the city, except that
real estate owned by the city may be conveyed without consideration to the
state for state armory sites or, if acquired for state armory sites, shall be
conveyed in the manner strictly as provided in Neb. RS 18-1001 to 18-1006.



   (B)   The power to sell and convey any real estate owned by the
city, including park land, except real estate used in the operation of public
utilities and except real estate for state armory sites for the use of the
state as expressly provided in division (A) of this section, shall be
exercised by ordinance directing the conveyance of the real estate and the
manner and terms thereof. Notice of the sale and the terms thereof shall be
published for three consecutive weeks in a legal newspaper published in or of
general circulation in the city immediately after the passage and publication
of the ordinance.



   (C)   If within 30 days after the passage and publication of the
ordinance, a remonstrance against the sale is signed by registered voters of
the city equal in number to 30% of the registered voters of the city voting
at the last regular city election held therein and is filed with the
governing body, the property shall not then, or within one year thereafter,
be sold. If the date for filing the remonstrance falls upon a Saturday,
Sunday, or legal holiday, the signatures shall be collected within the 30-day
period, but the filing shall be considered timely if filed or postmarked on
or before the next business day.



   (D)   Upon the receipt of the remonstrance, the governing body, with
the aid and assistance of the Election Commissioner or County Clerk, shall
determine the validity and sufficiency of signatures on the remonstrance. The
governing body shall deliver the remonstrance to the Election Commissioner or
County Clerk by hand carrier, by use of law enforcement officials, or by
certified mail, return receipt requested. Upon receipt of the remonstrance,
the Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall issue to the governing body a
written receipt that the remonstrance is in the custody of the Election
Commissioner or County Clerk. The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall
compare the signature of each person signing the remonstrance with the voter
registration records to determine if each signer was a registered voter on or
before the date on which the remonstrance was filed with the governing body.
The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall also compare the signer's
printed name, street and number or voting precinct, and city or post office
address with the voter registration records to determine whether the signer
was a registered voter. The signature and address shall be presumed to be
valid only if the Election Commissioner or County Clerk determines that the
printed name, street and number or voting precinct, and city or post office
address matches the registration records and that the registration was
received on or before the date on which the remonstrance was filed with the
governing body. The determinations of the Election Commissioner or County
Clerk may be rebutted by any credible evidence which the governing body finds
sufficient. The express purpose of the comparison of names and addresses with
the voter registration records, in addition to helping to determine the
validity of the remonstrance, the sufficiency of the remonstrance, and the
qualifications of the signer, shall be to prevent fraud, deception, and
misrepresentation in the remonstrance process.



   (E)   Upon completion of the comparison of names and addresses with
the voter registration records, the Election Commissioner or County Clerk
shall prepare in writing a certification under seal setting forth the name
and address of each signer found not to be a registered voter and the
signature page number and line number where the name is found, and if the
reason for the invalidity of the signature or address is other than the
non-registration of the signer, the Election Commissioner or County Clerk
shall set forth the reason for the invalidity of the signature. If the
Election Commissioner or County Clerk determines that a signer has affixed
his or her signature more than once to the remonstrance and that only one
person is registered by that name, the Election Commissioner or County Clerk
shall prepare in writing a certification under seal setting forth the name of
the duplicate signature and shall count only the earliest dated signature.
The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall certify to the governing body
the number of valid signatures necessary to constitute a valid remonstrance.
The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall deliver the remonstrance and
the certifications to the governing body within 40 days after the receipt of
the remonstrance from the governing body. The delivery shall be by hand
carrier, by use of law enforcement officials, or by certified mail, return
receipt requested. Not more than 20 signatures on one signature page shall be
counted.



   (F)   The governing body shall, within 30 days after the receipt of
the remonstrance and certifications from the Election Commissioner or County
Clerk, hold a public hearing to review the remonstrance and certifications
and receive testimony regarding them. The governing body shall, following the
hearing, vote on whether or not the remonstrance is valid and shall uphold
the remonstrance if sufficient valid signatures have been received.



(Neb. RS 16-201)  (Prior Code, § 8-102)  (Ord. 96-2375, passed 11-4-1996;
Ord. 99-2505, passed 3-1-1999)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-202



§ 31.57  REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTIONS; PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS.



   (A)   Trees and shrubs, growing upon or near the lot line, or upon
public ground and interfering with the use or construction of any public
improvements, shall be deemed an obstruction under this subchapter. Trees,
shrubs and their roots may be removed by the city at the expense of the owner
of the property upon which the tree or shrub is located should the owner
fail, or neglect, after notice, to do so. It shall be unlawful for any
person, persons, firm, or corporation to obstruct, or encumber, by fences,
gates, buildings, structures, or otherwise, any of the streets, alleys, or
sidewalks.



(Prior Code, § 8-103)



   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place any
building material, sand, gravel, dirt, trash, or debris of any kind or
character in any of the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the city.



      (2)   It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant, or lessee of
property upon which any building or improvement is in course of construction,
and the duty of his or her contractors and builders, to use no more of the
public street and sidewalk than may be necessary for the construction of the
improvement. It shall be the duty of the Public Works Director or Chief of
Police to prevent the accumulation of building materials in the public
streets and highways. They may designate how much of the public streets and
highways may be occupied with building materials, and may order the prompt
removal of the material beyond the limits.



(Prior Code, § 8-104)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-207, 16-210, 16-609



§ 31.58  OVERHANGING BRANCHES.



   The owner or occupant of any lot, piece, or parcel of ground abutting
or adjacent to any street or sidewalk over which there extends the branches
of trees shall at all times keep the branches or limbs thereof trimmed to the
height of at least eight feet above the surface of the street or walk.
Whenever the limbs or branches of any tree or trees extend over streets or
sidewalks contrary to the provisions herein so as to interfere with the
lighting of the street from street lights, or with the convenience of the
public using the street or sidewalk, the governing body at any regular or
special meeting may pass a resolution ordering the owner or occupant to cut
or remove the obstructions within five days after having received a copy
thereof from the Public Works Director stating that the city will remove the
branches and charge the costs thereof to the owner or occupant as a special
assessment for improvements as herein provided, if the resolution is not
complied with. In the event the property owner is a non-resident of the
county in which the property lies, the city shall, before levying any special
assessment against that property, send a copy of any notice required by law
to be published by means of certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
last known address of the non-resident property owner. The last known address
shall be that address listed on the current tax rolls at the time the
required notice was first published.



(Prior Code, § 8-105)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-207, 16-210



§ 31.59  PROCEDURE FOR APPRAISAL AND ACQUISITION OF REAL PROPERTY.



   (A)   When acquiring an interest in real property by purchase or
eminent domain, the city shall do so only after the governing body has
authorized the acquisition by action taken in a public meeting after notice
and public hearing.



(Neb. RS 18-1755)



   (B)   The city shall not purchase, lease-purchase, or acquire for
consideration real property having an estimated value of $100,000 or more
unless an appraisal of the property has been performed by a certified real
estate appraiser.



(Neb. RS 13-403)



(Prior Code, § 8-106)



(Ord. 99-2503, passed 3-11-1999)



§ 31.60  PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION; ARCHITECT OR PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER
REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, the city
shall not engage in the construction of any public works involving
architecture or engineering unless the plans, specifications, and estimates
have been prepared, and the construction has been observed, by an architect,
professional engineer, or those under the direct supervision of an architect
or professional engineer.



   (B)   Division (A) of this section shall not apply to the following
activities:



      (1)   Any public works project with contemplated expenditures
for the completed project that do not exceed $100,000;



      (2)   Any alteration, renovation, or remodeling of a building
if the alteration, renovation, or remodeling does not affect architectural or
engineering safety features of the building;



      (3)   Performance of professional services for itself if the
city appoints a city engineer or employs a full-time person licensed under
the Engineers and Architects Regulation Act who is in responsible charge of
architectural or engineering work;



      (4)   The practice of any other certified trade or legally
recognized profession;



      (5)   Earthmoving and related work associated with soil and
water conservation practices performed on any land owned by the city that is
not subject to a permit from the Department of Natural Resources;



      (6)   The work of employees and agents of the city performing,
in accordance with other requirements of law, their customary duties in the
administration and enforcement of codes, permit programs, and land use
regulations and their customary duties in utility and public works
construction, operation, and maintenance;



      (7)   Those services ordinarily performed by subordinates
under direct supervision of a professional engineer or those commonly
designated as locomotive, stationary, marine operating engineers, power plant
operating engineers, or manufacturers who supervise the operation of or
operate machinery or equipment or who supervise construction within their own
plant;



      (8)   The construction of city water wells as defined in Neb.
RS 46-1212, the installation of pumps and pumping equipment into city water
wells, and the decommissioning of city water wells, unless the construction,
installation, or decommissioning is required by the city to be designed or
supervised by an engineer, or unless legal requirements are imposed upon the
city as a part of a public water supply; and



      (9)   Any other activities described in Neb. RS 81-3449 to
81-3453.



(Prior Code, § 8-107)  (Ord. 99-2504, passed 3-1-1999; Ord. 2012-2875,
passed 6-28-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 81-3423, 81-3445, 81-3449
through 81-3453



§ 31.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions
of any section of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Unless otherwise specified in the particular section for which the person
stands convicted of violating, the penalty for the violation shall be in any
amount not to exceed $1,000 and/or imprisonment for any length of time not to
exceed three months, in the discretion of the court.



   (B)   Whenever any section of this chapter shall declare a nuisance,
a violation of that section shall be penalized by a fine of not more than
$1,000, in which case a new violation shall be deemed to have been committed
every 24 hours of the failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 1-1201)



CHAPTER 32:  ORDINANCES



Section



   32.01   Authority



   32.02   Passage pursuant to rules; proof



   32.03   Vote on appropriation of money



   32.04   Requirement of reading



   32.05   Requirement of publication or posting



   32.06   Style and title



   32.07   Emergency ordinances



   32.08   (Reserved)



   32.09   Amendments and revisions



 



   32.99   Penalty



§ 32.01  AUTHORITY.



   The governing body shall have the responsibility of making all
ordinances, by-laws, rules, regulations, and resolutions, not inconsistent
with the laws of the state, as may be necessary and proper for maintaining
the peace, good government, and welfare of the city and its trade, commerce,
and security.



(Prior Code, § 1-701)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-403, 16-404, 19-611



§ 32.02  PASSAGE PURSUANT TO RULES; PROOF.



   All ordinances shall be passed pursuant to rules and regulations as the
Council may provide. All ordinances may be proven by the certificate of the
City Clerk under the seal of the city. The passage, approval, and publication
or posting of any ordinance shall be sufficiently proven by a certificate
under the seal of the city from the Clerk showing that the ordinance was
passed and approved, and when and in what paper the same was published. The
city code shall be received as evidence of the passage and legal publication
of its contents in all courts without further proof.



(Prior Code, § 1-702)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-403



§ 32.03  VOTE ON APPROPRIATION OF MONEY.



   All ordinances, resolutions, or orders for the appropriation or payment
of money shall require for their passage or adoption the concurrence of a
majority of all members elected to the Council.



(Prior Code, § 1-703)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-404



§ 32.04  REQUIREMENT OF READING.



   Ordinances, resolutions, or orders for the appropriation of money shall
require for their passage the concurrence of the majority of the members
elected to the governing body. Ordinances of a general or permanent nature
shall be read by the title on three different days. This requirement may be
suspended by three-fourths vote of the Council,  in which case the ordinance
may be read by title or number and then moved for final passage.
Three-fourths of the Council may require any ordinance to be read in full
before final passage under either process.



(Prior Code, § 1-704)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-404



§ 32.05  REQUIREMENT OF PUBLICATION OR POSTING.



   Within 15 days after they are passed, all ordinances of a general
nature shall be published one time in:



   (A)   Some newspaper published in the city, or if no paper is
published in the city, then by posting a written or printed copy thereof in
each of three public places in the city; or



   (B)   In book or pamphlet form.



(Prior Code, § 1-705)  (Ord. 1816, passed 1-5-1987)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-613



§ 32.06  STYLE AND TITLE.



   (A)   The style of all City ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by
the Governing Body of the City of McCook, Nebraska."



(Prior Code, § 1-706)



   (B)   No ordinance shall contain a subject not clearly expressed in
its title.



(Prior Code, § 1-707)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-404, 16-405



§ 32.07  EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.



   In the case of riot, infectious or contagious diseases, or other
impending danger or any other emergency requiring its immediate operation, an
ordinance shall take effect upon the proclamation of the Mayor, and the
posting thereof in at least three of the most public places in the city. The
emergency notice shall recite the emergency and be passed by a three-fourths
vote of the governing body, and entered upon the City Clerk's minutes.



(Neb. RS 16-405)  (Prior Code, § 1-708)



§ 32.08  (RESERVED).



§ 32.09  AMENDMENTS AND REVISIONS.



   No ordinance or section thereof shall be revised or amended unless the
new ordinance contains the entire ordinance or section as revised or amended,
and that ordinance or section so amended shall be repealed.



(Neb. RS 16-404)  (Prior Code, § 1-709)



§ 32.99  PENALTY



   (A)   Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions
of any section of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Unless otherwise specified in the particular section for which the person
stands convicted of violating, the penalty for the violation shall be in any
amount not to exceed $1,000 and/or imprisonment for any length of time not to
exceed three months, in the discretion of the court.



   (B)   Whenever any section of this chapter shall declare a nuisance,
a violation of that section shall be penalized by a fine of not more than
$1,000, in which case a new violation shall be deemed to have been committed
every 24 hours of the failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 1-1201)



CHAPTER 33:  FINANCES



Section



Budget Regulations



   33.01   Financial statement required



   33.02   Proposed budget requirements



   33.03   Proposed budget statement; hearing; adoption; certification
of tax amount



   33.04   Adopted budget statement; filing; certification of amount of
tax



   33.05   Annual audit; financial statements



Taxation and Appropriation



   33.20   Property tax levy for general revenue purposes



   33.21   Sinking funds; gift of money or property



   33.22   Motor vehicle tax



   33.23   Annual appropriation bill



   33.24   Expenditures; limitations; diversion of funds; violation;
penalty; payment of judgments



   33.25   Claims and accounts payable; filing; requirements;
disallowance; notice; costs



Deposit and Investment of Funds



   33.35   Depository of funds



   33.36   Certificates of deposit; time deposits



   33.37   Depository bond or security



   33.38   Maximum deposit per bank



   33.39   Investments and use of surplus funds



Contracts and Payments



   33.50   Contract appropriations



   33.51   Contract vote



   33.52   Fair labor standards



   33.53   Warrant payment



   33.54   Uncollected debts



 



   33.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Taxation, see Chapter 36



BUDGET REGULATIONS



§ 33.01  FINANCIAL STATEMENT REQUIRED.



   The governing body shall cause to be published semiannually a statement
of the receipts of the city and the sources thereof and an itemized account
of the expenditures and the financial condition of the city.



(Prior Code, § 1-901)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-722



§ 33.02  PROPOSED BUDGET REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The governing body shall annually prepare a proposed budget
statement on forms prescribed and furnished by the Auditor. The proposed
budget statement shall be made available to the public prior to publication
of the notice of the hearing on the proposed budget statement pursuant to
Neb. RS 13-506. The proposed budget statement shall contain the following
information, except as provided by state law:



      (1)   For the immediately preceding fiscal year, the revenue
from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other than revenue received
from personal and real property taxation, allocated to the funds and
separately stated as to each such source: the unencumbered cash balance at
the beginning and end of the year; the amount received by taxation of
personal and real property; and the amount of actual expenditures;



      (2)   For the current fiscal year, actual and estimated
revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, allocated to the
funds and separately stated as to each such source: the actual unencumbered
cash balance available at the beginning of the year; the amount received from
personal and real property taxation; and the amount of actual and estimated
expenditures, whichever is applicable. The statement shall contain the cash
reserve for each fiscal year and shall note whether or not such reserve is
encumbered. The cash reserve projections shall be based upon the actual
experience of prior years. The cash reserve shall not exceed 50% of the total
budget adopted exclusive of capital outlay items;



      (3)   For the immediately ensuing fiscal year, an estimate of
revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other than revenue
to be received from taxation of personal and real property, separately stated
as to each such source: the actual or estimated unencumbered cash balances,
whichever is applicable, to be available at the beginning of the year; the
amounts proposed to be expended during the year; and the amount of cash
reserve, based on actual experience of prior years, which cash reserve shall
not exceed 50% of the total budget adopted exclusive of capital outlay items;



      (4)   A statement setting out separately the amount sought to
be raised from the levy of a tax on the taxable value of real property:



         (a)   For the purpose of paying the principal or
interest on bonds issued by the governing body; and



         (b)   For all other purposes;



      (5)   A uniform summary of the proposed budget statement,
including each proprietary function fund included in a separate proprietary
budget statement prepared pursuant to the Municipal Proprietary Function Act,
and a grand total of all funds maintained by the governing body; and



      (6)   A list of the proprietary functions which are not
included in the budget statement. The proprietary functions shall have a
separate budget statement which is approved by the City Council as provided
in the Municipal Proprietary Function Act.



   (B)   The actual or estimated unencumbered cash balance required to
be included in the budget statement by this section shall include deposits
and investments of the city as well as any funds held by the County Treasurer
for the city and shall be accurately stated on the proposed budget statement.



   (C)   The city shall correct any material errors in the budget
statement detected by the Auditor or by other sources.



   (D)   The estimated expenditures plus the required cash reserve for
the ensuing fiscal year less all estimated and actual unencumbered balances
at the beginning of the year and less the estimated income from all sources,
including motor vehicle taxes, other than taxation of personal and real
property, shall equal the amount to be received from taxes, and the amount
shall be shown on the proposed budget statement filed pursuant to this
section. The amount to be raised from taxation of personal and real property,
as determined above, plus the estimated revenue from other sources, including
motor vehicle taxes, and the unencumbered balances shall equal the estimated
expenditures, plus the necessary required cash reserve, for the ensuing year.



(Prior Code, §  1-902)  (Ord. 1752, passed 10-1-1984; Ord. 99-2519, passed
4-19-1999)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 13-504, 13-505



§ 33.03  PROPOSED BUDGET STATEMENT; HEARING; ADOPTION; CERTIFICATION OF TAX
AMOUNT.



   (A)   The City Council shall each year conduct a public hearing on
its proposed budget statement. Notice of the place and time of the hearing,
together with a summary of the proposed budget statement, shall be published
at least five days prior to the date set for hearing in a newspaper of
general circulation within the city's jurisdiction.



   (B)   After the hearing, the proposed budget statement shall be
adopted, or amended and adopted as amended, and a written record shall be
kept of the hearing. The amount to be received from personal and real
property taxation shall be certified to the levying board after the proposed
budget statement is adopted or is amended and adopted as amended. The
certification of the amount to be received from personal and real property
taxation shall specify separately the amount to be applied to the payment of
principal or interest on bonds issued by the City Council and the amount to
be received for all other purposes.



   (C)   If the adopted budget statement reflects a change from that
shown in the published proposed budget statement, a summary of the changes
shall be published within 20 days after its adoption in the manner provided
in this section, but without provision for hearing, setting forth the items
changed and the reasons for the changes.



   (D)   Upon approval by City Council, the budget shall be filed with
the Auditor of Public Accounts. The Auditor may review the budget for errors
in mathematics, improper accounting, and noncompliance with the provisions of
the Nebraska Budget Act or Neb. RS 13-518 through 13-522. If the Auditor
detects such errors, he or she shall immediately notify the Council of such
errors. The Council shall correct any such errors. Warrants for the payment
of expenditures provided in the budget adopted under this section shall be
valid notwithstanding any errors or noncompliance for which the Auditor has
notified the Council.



(Neb. RS 13-506)



   (E)   When a levy increase has been authorized by vote of the
electors, the adopted budget statement shall indicate the amount of the levy
increase.



(Neb. RS 13-507)



§ 33.04  ADOPTED BUDGET STATEMENT; FILING; CERTIFICATION OF AMOUNT OF TAX.



   (A)   (1)   After publication and hearing on the proposed budget
statement and within the time prescribed by law, the City Council shall file
with and certify to the levying board or boards on or before September 20 of
each year and file with the Auditor of Public Accounts a copy of the adopted
budget statement which complies with Neb. RS 13-518 through 13-522, together
with the amount of the tax required to fund the adopted budget, setting out
separately:



         (a)   The amount to be levied for the payment of
principal or interest on bonds issued by the City Council; and



         (b)   The amount to be levied for all other purposes.



      (2)    Proof of publication shall be attached to the
statements.



   (B)   The City Council, in certifying the amount required, may make
allowance for delinquent taxes not exceeding 5% of the amount required plus
the actual percentage of delinquent taxes for the preceding tax year and for
the amount of estimated tax loss from any pending or anticipated litigation
which involves taxation and in which tax collections have been or can be
withheld or escrowed by court order. For purposes of this section,
anticipated litigation shall be limited to the anticipation of an action
being filed by a taxpayer who or which filed a similar action for the
preceding year which is still pending. Except for such allowances, the City
Council shall not certify an amount of tax more than 1% greater or lesser
than the amount determined under § 33.02.



   (C)   The City Council shall use the final adjusted values as
provided by the County Assessor pursuant to Neb. RS 13-509 for the current
year in setting or certifying the levy. The City Council may designate one of
its members to perform any duty or responsibility required of the Council by
this section.



(Neb. RS 13-508)



§ 33.05 ANNUAL AUDIT; FINANCIAL STATEMENTS.



   (A)   The City Council shall cause an audit of the city's accounts
to be made by a recognized independent and qualified accountant as
expeditiously as possible following the close of the fiscal year and to cover
all financial transactions and affairs of the city for that preceding fiscal
year. The audit shall be made on a cash or accrual method at the discretion
of the City Council. The audit shall be completed and the annual audit report
made by the accountant shall be submitted within six months after the close
of the fiscal year in any event, unless an extension of time is granted by a
written resolution adopted by the City Council. All public utilities utility
or other enterprises which substantially generates its own revenue, that
phase of the affairs of the city shall be audited separately from other
functions of the city and the result shall appear separately in the annual
audit report made by the accountant to the city and such audit shall be on an
accrual basis and shall contain statements and materials which conform to
generally accepted accounting principles.



(Neb. RS 19-2903)



   (B)   The annual audit report shall set forth, insofar as possible,
the financial position and results of financial operations for each fund or
group of accounts of the city. When the accrual method is selected for the
annual audit report, the report shall be in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles. The annual audit report shall also include
the professional opinion of the accountant with respect to the financial
statements, or, if an opinion cannot be expressed, a declaration that the
accountant is unable to express such an opinion with an explanation of the
reasons why he or she cannot do so.



(Neb. RS 19-2904)



   (C)   At least three copies of such annual audit report shall be
properly signed and attested by the accountant; two copies shall be filed
with the City Clerk, and one copy shall be filed with the Auditor of Public
Accounts. The annual audit report filed, together with any accompanying
comment or explanation, shall become a part of the public records of the City
Clerk and shall at all times thereafter be open and subject to public
inspection.



(Neb. RS 19-2905)



Statutory reference:



   Other provisions on audits, see Neb. RS 19-2906 through 19-2909



TAXATION AND APPROPRIATION



§ 33.20  PROPERTY TAX LEVY FOR GENERAL REVENUE PURPOSES.



   The governing body shall have the power to levy and collect taxes for
all city purposes on all real estate and personal property within the
corporate limits which is taxable according to the laws of the state. All
city taxes, both real and personal, except special assessments otherwise
provided for, shall become due on the first day of December of each year. The
Council shall cause to be certified to the County Clerk the amount of tax to
be levied for the purposes of the adopted budget statement, including all
special assessments and other taxes. The County Clerk shall then place the
same on the property tax list to be collected in the manner provided by law.



(Prior Code, § 1-906)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-702



§ 33.21  SINKING FUNDS; GIFTS OF MONEY OR PROPERTY.



   (A)   The city is hereby empowered to receive money or property by
donation, bequest, gift, devise, or otherwise for the benefit of any one or
more of the public purposes for which sinking funds are established by the
provisions of this section, as stipulated by the donor. The title to the
money or property so donated shall vest in the City Council, or in its
successors in office, who shall become the owners thereof in trust to the
uses of the sinking fund or funds; provided, if the donation is real estate,
the City Council may manage the same as in the case of real estate donated to
the city for city library purposes under the provisions of Neb. RS 51-215 and
51-216.



(Neb. RS 19-1301)



   (B)   The City Council, subject to all the limitations set forth in
this section, shall have the power to levy a tax of not to exceed $0.105 on
each $100 in any one year upon the taxable value of all the taxable property
within the city for a term of not to exceed ten years, in addition to the
amount of tax which may be annually levied for the purposes of the adopted
budget statement of the city, for the purpose of establishing a sinking fund
for the construction, purchase, improvement, extension, original equipment,
or repair, not including maintenance, of any one or more of the following
public improvements, including acquisition of any land incident to the making
thereof: city library; city auditorium or community house for social or
recreational purposes; city hall; city public library, auditorium, or
community house in a single building; city swimming pool and appurtenances
thereto; city jail; city building to house equipment or personnel of a fire
department, together with firefighting equipment or apparatus; city park;
city cemetery; city medical clinic building, together with furnishings and
equipment: or city hospital. The city shall not be authorized to levy the tax
or to establish the sinking fund as provided in this division if, having
bonded indebtedness, such city has been in default in the payment of interest
thereon or principal thereof for a period of ten years prior to the date of
the passage of the resolution providing for the submission of the proposition
for establishment of the sinking fund as required in division (C).



(Neb. RS 19-1302)



   (C)   Before any sinking fund or funds are established or before any
annual tax is levied for any such planned city improvement mentioned in
division (B) by the city, the City Council shall declare its purpose by
resolution to submit to the qualified electors of the city at the next
general city election the proposition to provide the city with the specific
city improvement planned for consummation under this section. The resolution
of submission shall, among other things, set forth a clear description of the
improvement planned, the estimated cost according to the prevailing costs,
the amount of annual levy over a definite period of years, not exceeding ten
years, required to provide such cost, and the specific name or designation
for the sinking fund sought to be established to carry out the planned
improvement, together with a statement of the proposition for placement upon
the ballot at the election. Notice of the submission of the proposition,
together with a copy of the official ballot containing the same, shall be
published in its entirety three successive weeks before the day of the
election in a legal newspaper published in the city or, if no legal newspaper
is published therein, in some legal newspaper published in the county in
which the city is located and of general circulation. If no legal newspaper
is published in the county, such notice shall be published in some legal
newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the city is located.
No such sinking fund shall be established unless the same has been authorized
by a majority or more of the legal votes of the city cast for or against the
proposition. If less than a majority of the legal votes favor the
establishment of the sinking fund, the planned improvement shall not be made,
no annual tax shall be levied therefor, and no sinking fund or sinking funds
shall be established in connection therewith, but such resolution of
submission shall immediately be repealed. If the proposition shall carry at
such election in the manner prescribed in this division, the City Council and
its successors in office shall proceed to do all things authorized under such
resolution of submission but never inconsistent with this section. Provisions
of the statutes of this state relating to election of officers, voting
places, election apparatus and blanks, preparation and form of ballots,
information to voters, delivery of ballots, conduct of elections, manner of
voting, counting of votes, records and certificates of elections, and
recounts of votes, so far as applicable, shall apply to voting on the
proposition under this section.



(Neb. RS 19-1303)



   (D)   All funds received by the City Treasurer, by donation or by
tax levy, as hereinbefore provided, shall, as they accumulate, be immediately
invested by the Treasurer, with the written approval of the City Council, in
the manner provided in § 33.39. Whenever investments of such sinking fund or
funds are made, as aforesaid, the nature and character of the same shall be
reported to the City Council, and the investment report shall be made a
matter of record by the City Clerk in the proceedings of the City Council.
The sinking fund, or sinking funds, accumulated under the provisions of this
section, shall constitute a special fund, or funds, for the purpose or
purposes for which the same was authorized and shall not be used for any
other purpose unless authorized by 60% of the qualified electors of the city
voting at a general election favoring such change in the use of the sinking
fund or sinking funds; provided that the question of the change in the use of
the sinking fund or sinking funds, when it fails to carry, shall not be
resubmitted in substance for a period of one year from and after the date of
such election.



(Neb. RS 19-1304)



(Prior Code, § 1-910)



Statutory reference:



   Additional levy limitations, see Neb. RS 17-702



   Investment in warrants, see Neb. RS 77-2337, 7702339



§ 33.22  MOTOR VEHICLE TAX.



   The governing body of the city may levy a tax on all motor vehicles
owned or used in the city, which tax shall be paid to the County Treasurer in
which the city is located when the registration fees as provided in Neb. RS
60-329 through 60-339 are paid. The taxes shall be credited by the County
Treasurer to the Road Fund of the city. The funds shall be used by the city
for constructing, resurfacing, maintaining or improving streets, roads,
alleys, public ways or parts thereof, for the amortization of bonded
indebtedness when created for such purposes.



(Prior Code, § 1-928)  (Ord. 1895, passed 4-16-1990)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1214



§ 33.23  ANNUAL APPROPRIATION BILL.



   The City Council shall adopt a budget statement pursuant to the
Nebraska Budget Act, to be termed, "The Annual Appropriation Bill," in which
the Council may appropriate those sums of money as may be deemed necessary to
defray all necessary expenses and liabilities of the city.



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-704



§ 33.24  EXPENDITURES; LIMITATIONS; DIVERSION OF FUNDS; VIOLATION; PENALTY;
PAYMENT OF JUDGMENTS.



   The Mayor and Council shall not have power to appropriate, issue, or
draw any order or warrant on the treasurer for money, unless the same has
been appropriated or ordered by ordinance or the claim for the payment of
which such order or warrant is issued has been allowed according to Neb. RS
16-726 through 16-729, and a fund has been provided in the adopted budget
statement out of which such claim is payable. Any transfer or diversion of
the money or credits from any of the funds to another fund or to a purpose
other and different from that for which proposed, except as provided in Neb.
RS 16-721, shall render any City Council member voting therefor or any
officer of the corporation participating therein guilty of a misdemeanor, and
any person shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined $25 for each offense,
together with costs of prosecution. Should any judgment be obtained against
the city, the Mayor and Finance Committee, with the sanction of the City
Council, may borrow a sufficient amount to pay the same, for a period of time
not to extend beyond the close of the next fiscal year, which sum and
interest thereon shall, in like manner, be added to the amount authorized to
be raised in the general tax levy of the next year and embraced therein.



(Prior Code, §§ 1-908, 1-909)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-706, 16-726 through 16-729



§ 33.25  CLAIMS AND ACCOUNTS PAYABLE; FILING; REQUIREMENTS; DISALLOWANCE;
NOTICE; COSTS.



   (A)   All liquidated and unliquidated claims and accounts payable
against a city of the first class shall be presented in writing; state the
name and address of the claimant and the amount of the claim; and fully and
accurately identify the items or services for which payment is claimed or the
time, place, nature, and circumstances giving rise to the claim.



   (B)   As a condition precedent to maintaining an action for a claim,
other than a tort claim as defined in Neb. RS 13-903, the claimant shall file
such claim within ninety days of the accrual of the claim in the office of
the City Clerk.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall notify the claimant or his or her agent
or attorney by letter mailed to the claimant's address within five days if
the claim is disallowed by the City Council.



   (D)   No costs shall be recovered against such city in any action
brought against it for any claim or for any claim allowed in part which has
not been presented to the City Council to be audited, unless the recovery is
for a greater sum than the amount allowed with the interest due.



(Neb. RS 16-726)



DEPOSIT AND INVESTMENT OF FUNDS



§ 33.35  DEPOSITORY OF FUNDS.



   The City Treasurer shall deposit, and at all times keep on deposit, for
safekeeping, in state or national banks of approved and responsible standing,
all money collected, received or held by him or her as City Treasurer. The
deposits shall be subject to all regulations imposed by law or adopted by the
City Council for the receiving and holding thereof. The fact that a
stockholder, director, or other officer of the banking institution shall also
be serving as Mayor, member of the City Council, or as any other officer of
the city, shall not disqualify the bank from acting as a depository for the
city funds.



(Prior Code, § 1-911)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-712



§ 33.36  CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT; TIME DEPOSITS.



   The City Treasurer may and is hereby authorized to purchase
certificates of deposit from and make time deposits in banks, capital stock
financial institutions, or qualifying mutual financial institutions selected
as depositories of city funds under provisions herein. The certificates of
deposit purchased and time deposits shall bear interest, and shall be secured
as set forth herein; provided, that the penal sum of the bond or the sum of
the pledge of assets shall be reduced in the amount of the time deposit or
certificate of deposit insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.



(Prior Code, § 1-912)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-713



§ 33.37  DEPOSITORY BOND OR SECURITY.



   (A)   For the security of the fund so deposited, the City Treasurer
shall require each depository bank to give bond for the safekeeping and
payment of the deposits and the accretions thereof, which bond shall run to
the city and be approved by the Mayor. The bond shall be conditioned that a
depository shall, at the end of every quarter, render to the Treasurer a
statement in duplicate, showing the several daily balances, the amount of
money of the city held by it during the quarter, the amount of the accretion
thereto, and how credited. The bond shall also be conditioned that the
depository shall generally do and perform whatever may be required by the
provisions herein and faithfully discharge the trust reposed in the
depository. The bond shall be as nearly as practicable in the form provided
by the laws of the state; provided, no person in any way connected with any
depository bank, as officer or stockholder, shall be accepted as a surety on
any bond given by the bank of which he or she is an officer or stockholder.
The bond shall be deposited with the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 1-913)



   (B)   In lieu of the bond required herein, any bank, capital stock
financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial institution making
application to become a depository may give as security as provided in the
Public Funds Deposit Security Act to the City Clerk, provided, that the penal
sum of the bond or the sum of the pledge of assets shall be of the value
equal to or greater than the amount of the deposit in excess of that portion
of the deposit insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.



(Prior Code, § 1-914)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-714, 16-715



§ 33.38  MAXIMUM DEPOSIT PER BANK.



   (A)   The Treasurer shall not have on deposit in any bank, capital
stock financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial institution at
any time more than:



      (1)   The amount insured or guaranteed by the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation plus the maximum amount of the bond given by the bank,
capital stock financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial
institution if the bank, capital stock financial institution, or qualifying
mutual financial institution gives a surety bond, nor in any bank, capital
stock financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial institution
giving a personal bond; or



      (2)   More than the amount insured or guaranteed by the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation plus one-half of the amount of the bond
of such bank, capital stock financial institution, or qualifying mutual
financial institution, and the amount so on deposit any time with any such
bank, capital stock financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial
institution shall not in either case exceed the amount insured or guaranteed
by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation plus the paid-up capital stock
and surplus of such bank, capital stock financial institution, or qualifying
mutual financial institution.



   (B)   The City Treasurer shall not be liable for any loss sustained
by reason of the failure of any bonded depository whose bond shall have been
duly approved by the Mayor as herein provided, or which has, in lieu of a
surety bond, deposited approved securities as herein provided.



(Prior Code, § 1-915)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-716



§ 33.39  INVESTMENTS AND USE OF SURPLUS FUNDS.



   (A)   When the City Treasurer holds funds of the city in excess of
the amount required for maintenance or set aside for betterments and
improvements, the City Treasurer may and is hereby authorized, to invest the
surplus funds in the outstanding bonds or registered warrants of the city,
bonds and debentures issued either singly or collectively by any of the 12
federal land banks, the 12 intermediate credit banks, or the 13 banks for
cooperatives under the supervision of the Farm Credit Administration, or in
interest-bearing bonds or the obligations of the United States. The interest
on such bonds or warrants shall be credited to the fund out of which the
bonds or warrants were purchased.



   (B)   All income received by the city from public utilities and from
the payment and collection of water taxes, rents, rates or assessments shall
be applied to the payment of running expenses, interest on bonds or money
borrowed and the erection and construction of public utilities; should there
be any surplus, it shall be annually created into a sinking fund for the
payment of public utility bonds or for the improvements of the works, or into
the general fund as the Council may direct. The surplus remaining, if any,
may and the City Treasurer is hereby authorized, be invested in
interest-bearing bonds or obligations of the United States.



   (C)   (1)   Whenever the City has accumulated a surplus of any
fund in excess of its current needs or has accumulated a sinking fund for the
payment of its bonds and the money in such sinking fund exceeds the amount
necessary to pay the principal and interest of any such bonds which become
due during the current year, the City Treasurer may and is hereby is
authorized, invest any such surplus in excess of current needs or such excess
in its sinking fund in certificates of deposit, in time deposits, and in any
securities in which the State Investment Officer is authorized to invest
pursuant to the Nebraska Capital Expansion Act and the Nebraska State Funds
Investment Act and as provided in the authorized investment guidelines of the
Nebraska Investment Council in effect on the date the investment is made. The
State Investment Officer shall upon request furnish a copy of current
authorized investment guidelines of the Nebraska Investment Council.



      (2)   Nothing in division (C)(1) shall be construed to
authorize investments in venture capital.



Statutory reference:



   City funds; deposits, transfers, see Neb. RS 16-712 through 16-721



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 77-2341



CONTRACTS AND PAYMENTS



§ 33.50  CONTRACT APPROPRIATIONS.



   No contract shall be made by the City Council or any committee or
member thereof and no expense shall be incurred by any of the officers or
departments of the city, whether the object of the expenditure is ordered by
the City Council or not, unless an appropriation shall have been previously
made concerning the expense, except as otherwise provided by law.



(Prior Code, § 1-918)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-501



§ 33.51  CONTRACT VOTE.



   On the passage or adoption of every resolution or order to enter into a
contract, or accepting of work done under contract, by the Mayor or Council,
the "yeas" and "nays" shall be called and entered upon the record. To pass or
adopt any bylaw, ordinance, or any resolution or order, a concurrence of a
majority of the whole number of the members elected to the Council shall be
required.



(Prior Code, § 1-919)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-503, 19-615



§ 33.52  FAIR LABOR STANDARDS.



   In awarding contracts for public works, all contractors bidding shall
be required to file with the city a statement that they are complying with,
and will continue to comply with, fair labor standards in the pursuit of his
or her business and in the execution of the contract on which he or she is
bidding. There shall be written into each and every contract for public
works, in addition to, such other provisions as are necessary and prescribed
by law, a provision that in the execution of the contract fair labor
standards shall be maintained.



(Prior Code, § 1-923)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 73-102



§ 33.53  WARRANT PAYMENT.



   The City Manager is hereby authorized to make payment by issuance of
warrant check on city accounts for expenses properly due and payable in
accord with the adopted budget for the fiscal year and the annual
appropriation ordinance. Warrant checks drawn on city accounts will bear the
signature of the City Manager and the City Treasurer. Requests for payment
shall be reviewed and payments made in accordance with the city Manual of
Accounting Procedure. An itemized list of warrants issued, to whom and the
amount paid, shall be published in accordance with state law.



(Prior Code, § 1-917)



§ 33.54  UNCOLLECTED DEBTS.



   (A)   The City Manager is hereby authorized to dismiss and write off
all uncollected debts owed to the city of an amount of $200 or less after all
reasonable efforts to collect the debt have been made without result. All
uncollectible debts owed to the city in an amount greater than $200 shall be
presented to the City Council for consideration and dismissal after all
reasonable efforts to collect the debt have failed.



   (B)   Each year in August, the City Manager shall present to the
Council an itemized report of all uncollectible debts dismissed by the City
Manager during the preceding fiscal year.



(Prior Code, § 1-927)  (Ord. 2007-2789, passed 3-5-2007)



§ 33.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions
of any section of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Unless otherwise specified in the particular section for which the person
stands convicted of violating, the penalty for the violation shall be in any
amount not to exceed $1,000 and/or imprisonment for any length of time not to
exceed three months, in the discretion of the court.



   (B)   Whenever any section of this chapter shall declare a nuisance,
a violation of that section shall be penalized by a fine of not more than
$1,000, in which case a new violation shall be deemed to have been committed
every 24 hours of the failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 1-1201)



CHAPTER 34:  PURCHASING REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   34.01   Title



   34.02   Definitions



   34.03   Exceptions to regulations



Purchasing Agent



   34.15   Appointment of agent



   34.16   Duties and responsibilities



Purchasing Procedure



   34.30   Formal contract purchase



   34.31   Informal purchase



   34.32   Non-competitive purchasing



   34.33   Emergency purchase



   34.34   Verification of encumbered funds



   34.35   Professional service procurement



Conduct of City Employees



   34.50   Employee requisitions



   34.51   Conflict of interest



   34.52   Gifts and rebates prohibited



 



   34.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 34.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Purchasing
Ordinance of the City of McCook".



(Ord. 2007-2787, passed 3-5-2007; Ord. 2012-2873, passed 5-7-2012)



§ 34.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BID.  All bids and proposals.



   CITY.  The City of McCook, Nebraska.



   CONTRACTUAL SERVICES.  Work performed by an independent contractor
requiring specialized knowledge, experience, expertise, or similar
capabilities wherein the service rendered does not consist primarily of
acquisition of supplies, materials, and equipment. The services may include
(by way of illustration, not limitation) services such as maintenance of
buildings or equipment, employee training, postage, equipment service
contracts, rental of equipment and machinery, and cleaning services. The term
shall not include professional services, as defined in this chapter, or other
contractual services which are in their nature unique and not subject to
competition such as public utility services, telephone, and cable services.



   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.  All architect, engineering, accounting, legal,
medical, and consultant services.



   SUPPLIES.  All supplies, materials, and equipment.



   USING AGENCY.  Any department, division, commission, or other unit in
the city using supplies, procuring contractual services, or procuring
professional services as provided for in this chapter.



(Ord. 2007-2787, passed 3-5-2007; Ord. 2012-2873, passed 5-7-2012)



§ 34.03  EXCEPTIONS TO REGULATIONS.



   Insofar as the authority of the Purchasing Agent, or his or her
designee, is concerned, this chapter shall not apply to construction
contracts for state or federally funded programs that mandate a different
contracting procedure.



(Ord. 2007-2787, passed 3-5-2007; Ord. 2012-2873, passed 5-7-2012)



PURCHASING AGENT



§ 34.15  APPOINTMENT OF AGENT.



   The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall be the Purchasing Agent
of the city.



(Ord. 2007-2787, passed 3-5-2007; Ord. 2012-2873, passed 5-7-2012)



§ 34.16  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)  The Purchasing Agent, or his or her designee, shall have the
responsibility:



      (1)   To purchase or contract for all supplies, equipment, and
contractual services needed by any using agency which derives its support
wholly or in part from the city, in accordance with procedures as prescribed
by city ordinance and such rules and regulations as the Purchasing Agent, or
his or her designee, shall adopt for the internal management and operation of
the purchasing functions;



      (2)   To procure for the city the highest quality in supplies,
equipment, and contractual services at the least expense to the city, to
discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open
competition as possible on all purchases and sales, and to establish and
amend, when necessary, all rules and regulations authorized by city ordinance
and any others necessary to its operations;



      (3)   To explore the possibilities of purchasing "in bulk", so
as to take full advantage of discounts, to procure for the city all tax
exemptions to which it is entitled, and to secure for the city the maximum
efficiency in budgeting and accounting;



      (4)   To prescribe and maintain such forms as shall be
reasonably necessary to the operation of purchasing, and to prepare and adopt
standard purchasing terms for city departments, divisions, agencies and
suppliers;



      (5)   To prepare, or cause to be prepared, written
specifications of all standard supplies;



      (6)   To have the authority to declare vendors who default on
their quotation irresponsible vendors and to disqualify them from receiving
any business from the city for a stated period of time; and



      (7)   To keep informed on current developments in the field of
purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products, and secure for the
city the benefits of research done in the field of purchasing by other
governmental jurisdictions having national recognition and by private
businesses and organizations.



   (B)   All departments shall submit to the Purchasing Agent, or his
or her designee, at such time and in such form as he or she shall prescribe,
reports showing stocks of all supplies which are no longer used or which have
become obsolete, worn out, or scrapped.



   (C)   The Purchasing Agent, or his or her designee, shall have the
authority to sell or dispose of all surplus supplies and equipment of less
than $20,000 in value which have become unsuitable or unnecessary for public
use. The Purchasing Agent, or his or her designee, shall sell or dispose of
the property by any method which is most advantageous to the city, including
auction, sealed bid, private or public sale, trade-in for other property, or
disposal at the landfill. All sales of equipment or supplies of $20,000 or
more in value shall require the prior approval of the City Council.



(Ord. 2007-2787, passed 3-5-2007; Ord. 2012-2873, passed 5-7-2012)



PURCHASING PROCEDURE



§ 34.30  FORMAL CONTRACT PURCHASE.



   (A)   When the estimated cost of supplies, equipment, or contractual
services exceeds $30,000, no formal contract for purchase shall be authorized
until the contract has been reviewed by the City Attorney, and without prior
approval of the City Council. All supplies, equipment, and contractual
services in this category shall be purchased by formal written contract, from
the lowest responsible and responsive bidder, after due notice inviting bids.



   (B)   Notice inviting bids shall be published once in at least one
official newspaper in the city and at least seven days preceding the last day
set for the receipt of bids. The notice shall include a general description
of the items to be purchased, and shall state where bid blanks and
specifications may be secured, and the date, time and place for opening bids.
The city shall also endeavor to distribute bid documents to responsible
prospective suppliers of whom the Purchasing Agent, or his or her designee,
may be aware.



   (C)   When deemed necessary, bid deposits shall be prescribed in the
public notice inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to a
return of surety required. The successful bidder shall forfeit his or her bid
deposit upon failure on his or her part to enter a contract within ten days
after the award.



   (D)   Bids shall be submitted sealed to the City Clerk and shall be
identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public on the
date and at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of
all bids received shall be available for public inspection.



      (1)   The City Council shall have the authority to reject all
bids, parts of all bids, or all bids for any one or more supplies or
contractual services included in the proposed contract, when the public
interest will be served thereby.



      (2)  If the city receives fewer than two on a contract, or if
the bids received contain a price which exceeds the estimated cost, the
governing body may negotiate a contract in an attempt to complete the
proposed enlargement or general improvements at a cost commensurate with the
estimate given.



      (3)   The City Council shall have the authority to not accept
the bid of a contractor who is in default on the payment of taxes, licenses,
or other monies due the city.



   (E)   Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible and
responsive bidder. In determining "lowest responsible bidder", in addition to
price, the City Council shall consider:



      (1)   The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to
perform the contract required;



      (2)   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment,
experience, and efficiency of the bidder;



      (3)   Whether the bidder can perform the contract within the
time specified;



      (4)   The quality of performance of previous contracts;



      (5)   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with
laws and ordinances relating to the contract;



      (6)   The life-cost of the personal property in relation to
the purchase price and specific use of the item;



      (7)   The performance of the personal property, taking into
consideration any commonly accepted tests and standards of product usability
and user requirements;



      (8)   Energy efficiency ratio as stated by the bidder for
alternative choices of appliances or equipment;



      (9)   The information furnished by each bidder when deemed
applicable by the Purchasing Agent, or his or her designee, concerning
life-cycle costs between alternatives for all classes of equipment, evidence
of expected life, repair and maintenance costs, and energy consumption on a
per-year basis; and



      (10)   Such other information as may be secured having a
bearing on the decision to award the contract.



   (F)   A RESPONSIVE BIDDER shall be defined as a person or company
who has submitted a bid that conforms in all material respects to the
"invitation for bids".



   (G)   When the award is not given to the lowest bidder, a full and
complete statement of the reasons for placing the order elsewhere shall be
prepared by the Purchasing Agent, or his or her designee, and filed with
other papers relating to the transaction.



   (H)   No contract in excess of $30,000 for enlargements or general
improvements, such as (by way of illustration, not limitation) water/sewer
main extensions, street improvements, park improvements, or airport
improvements, shall be awarded by the City Council until the
plans/specifications and estimate of the cost are approved by the City
Council.



   (I)   Except in the case of tie bids, there shall be neither formal
nor tacit local vendor's preference policies. The city shall neither impose
nor condone any bidding or procurement policies that result in exclusionary
or anti-competitive bidding or violate state or federal antitrust laws. If
all bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and
service being equal, the contract shall be awarded to a local bidder. Where
there is no local bidder or when two or more local bidders are equal, the
Purchasing Agent, or his or her designee, shall award the contract to one of
the tie bidders by drawing lots in public.



   (J)   The city, whenever applicable, may, by the use of purchasing
under a state contract, purchase supplies, equipment, or services without the
necessity of using the formal bid requirements as set forth in this section.



(Ord. 2007-2787, passed 3-5-2007; Ord. 2012-2873, passed 5-7-2012)



§ 34.31  INFORMAL PURCHASE.



   (A)   When the estimated cost of supplies, equipment or contractual
services is less than $30,000, the purchase shall be made in the open market,
without newspaper advertisement and without observing the procedure
prescribed for the award of formal contracts in this chapter and shall be
referred to as open market purchases. All such purchases shall be awarded by
the Purchasing Agent, or his or her designee.



   (B)   All open market purchases greater than $2,500 and not more
than $30,000 shall be acquired after solicitation of two quotations.
Purchases provided for under this subsection should be made from the "lowest
responsible and responsive bidder", in accordance with the same criteria
established in this chapter for the formal contract procedure.



   (C)   All open market purchases of $2,500 or less may be made
without the necessity of soliciting two quotations.



   (D)   The Purchasing Agent, or his or her designee, may solicit open
market quotes by direct mail request to prospective vendors, by public notice
on the bulletin board at City Hall, by telephone, by facsimile transmission,
by electronic mail, or other electronic means.



(Ord. 2007-2787, passed 3-5-2007; Ord. 2012-2873, passed 5-7-2012)



§ 34.32  NON-COMPETITIVE PURCHASING.



   A contract may be awarded without competition when the Purchasing
Agent, or his or her designee, determines that there is only one source for
the required supplies, materials, or contractual services. The Purchasing
Agent, or his or her designee, shall conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as
to price, delivery, and terms.



(Ord. 2007-2787, passed 3-5-2007; Ord. 2012-2873, passed 5-7-2012)



§ 34.33  EMERGENCY PURCHASE.



   (A)   In the event of an emergency which requires immediate purchase
of supplies or contractual services, the Purchasing Agent, or his or her
designee, shall be empowered to secure by open market procedure as herein set
forth, at the lowest obtainable price, any supplies or contractual services.



   (B)   EMERGENCY shall be defined as any event that interrupts the
normal administration of city services, thereby jeopardizing the life, health
or convenience of citizens.



   (C)   Should an emergency situation arise on a weekend or holiday,
and where it is not possible or convenient to reach the Purchasing Agent, or
his or her designee, any purchase necessary shall be made by the department
in charge and the purchase reported to the Purchasing Agent, or his or her
designee, without delay.



   (D)   A report of the circumstances of an emergency purchase shall
be filed by the Purchasing Agent, or his or her designee. Purchases in excess
of $30,000 shall be forwarded to the City Council for confirmation.



(Ord. 2007-2787, passed 3-5-2007; Ord. 2012-2873, passed 5-7-2012)



§ 34.34  VERIFICATION OF ENCUMBERED FUNDS.



   Except in cases of emergency, the Purchasing Agent, or his or her
designee, shall not issue any order for delivery on a contract or open market
purchase until it has been certified, after pre-audit, that there is
sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance to the credit of the using
agency or department, in excess of all unpaid obligations, to defray the
amount of the orders.



(Ord. 2007-2787, passed 3-5-2007)



§ 34.35  PROFESSIONAL SERVICE PROCUREMENT.



   For the purpose of procuring professional services, any using agency
requiring the services may procure them on its own behalf. A using agency
procuring the services shall consult with the Purchasing Agent, or his or her
designee. No contract for professional services exceeding $30,000 may be
awarded until the contract has been reviewed by the City Attorney, and
without the prior approval of the City Council.



(Ord. 2007-2787, passed 3-5-2007; Ord. 2012-2873, passed 5-7-2012)



CONDUCT OF CITY EMPLOYEES



§ 34.50  EMPLOYEE REQUISITIONS.



   Insofar as the sale or purchasing procedures of this policy are
concerned, the following authority structure shall apply. Every city employee
shall requisition for supplies, equipment, or contractual services only with
the approval of the employee’s department or division head or duly
authorized representative.



(Ord. 2007-2787, passed 3-5-2007; Ord. 2012-2873, passed 5-7-2012)



§ 34.51  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   Any purchase or contract within the purview of this chapter in which
the Purchasing Agent, or any other city employee, is financially interested,
directly or indirectly, shall be void, except that before the execution of a
purchase or contract, the City Council shall have the authority to waive
compliance with this section when it finds the action to be in the best
interest of the city.



(Ord. 2007-2787, passed 3-5-2007; Ord. 2012-2873, passed 5-7-2012)



§ 34.52  GIFTS AND REBATES PROHIBITED.



   Any city employee is expressly prohibited from accepting, directly or
indirectly, from any person, company, firm, or corporation to which any
purchase order or contract is or might be awarded, any rebate, gift, money,
or anything of value whatsoever, except where given for the use and benefit
of the city.



(Ord. 2007-2787, passed 3-5-2007; Ord. 2012-2873, passed 5-7-2012)



§ 34.99  PENALTY



   (A)   Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions
of any section of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Unless otherwise specified in the particular  section for which the person
stands convicted of violating, the penalty for the violation shall be in any
amount not to exceed $1,000 and/or imprisonment for any length of time not to
exceed three months, in the discretion of the court.



   (B)   Whenever any section of this chapter shall declare a nuisance,
a violation of that section shall be penalized by a fine of not more than
$1,000, in which case a new violation shall be deemed to have been committed
every 24 hours of the failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 1-1201)  (Ord. 2012-2873, passed 5-7-2012)



CHAPTER 35:  CITY ORGANIZATIONS



Section



Commissions



   35.001   Planning Commission



   35.002   Airport Advisory Commission



Community Development Agency



   35.015   Agency established



Boards



   35.030   Board of Zoning Adjustment



   35.031   Library Advisory Board



   35.032   Senior Citizens Advisory Board



   35.033   Parks Advisory Board



   35.034   Building and Housing Code Advisory and Appeals Board



   35.035   Tree Advisory Board



Board of Health



   35.045   Establishment



   35.046   Authority to regulate



   35.047   Quarantine Officer



   35.048   State rules adopted by reference



   35.049   Cooperation with County Health Board



Housing Agency



   35.075   Agency created



   35.076   Board of Commissioners



   35.077   Removal of Commissioner



   35.078   Agency autonomy



   35.079   Housing Agency Act adopted by reference



   35.080   Authority of Agency



   35.081   Annual report



   35.082   Plans to be filed



 



   35.999   Penalty



COMMISSIONS



§ 35.001  PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Planning Commission shall consist of nine regular members
who shall represent, insofar as is possible, the different professions or
occupations in the city and shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the
approval of a majority vote of the members elected to the City Council. Two
of the regular members may be residents of the area over which the city is
authorized to exercise extraterritorial zoning and subdivision regulation.
When there is a sufficient number of residents in the area over which the
city exercises extraterritorial zoning and subdivision regulation, one 
regular member of the Commission shall be a resident from such area. If it is
determined by the City Council that a sufficient number of residents reside
in the area subject to extraterritorial zoning and subdivision regulation,
and no such resident is a regular member of the Commission, the first
available vacancy on the Commission shall be filled by the appointment of
such an individual.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, a sufficient number of residents
shall mean 1,000 residents. The term of each regular member shall be three
years, except that three regular members of the first Commission shall serve
for terms of one year, three for terms of two years, and three for terms of
three years. All regular members shall hold office until their successors are
appointed. Any member may, after a public hearing before the City Council, be
removed by the Mayor, with the consent of a majority vote of the members
elected to the City Council, for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance
in office, or other good and sufficient cause. Vacancies occurring otherwise
than through the expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired portion
of the term by the Mayor.



   (C)   All regular members of the Commission shall serve without
compensation and shall hold no other city office except when appointed to
serve on the Board of Adjustment as provided in Neb. RS 19-908. All members
of the Commission may be required, in the discretion of the City Council, to
give bond in a sum set by resolution of the Council, and conditioned upon the
faithful performance of their duties. The Commission shall elect its
Chairperson and a Secretary from its members and create and fill other
offices as it may determine. The term of the Chairperson and the Secretary
shall be one year, and they shall be eligible for reelection. No member of
the Commission shall serve in the capacity of both the Chairperson and
Secretary of the Commission. It shall be the duty of the Secretary to keep
the full and correct minutes and records of all meetings and to file the same
with the City Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection
during office hours. The Commission shall be funded by the City Council from
time to time out of the General Fund. The expenditures of the Commission,
exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for that purpose
by the City Council, and no expenditures nor agreements for expenditures
shall be valid in excess of those amounts.



   (D)   A number of Commissioners equal to a majority of the number of
regular members appointed to the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of any business. The Commission shall hold at least one regular
meeting in each calendar quarter, except the City Council may require the
Commission to meet more frequently and the Chairperson of the Commission may
call for a meeting when necessary to deal with business pending before the
Commission. Special meetings may also be held upon the call of any three
members of the Commission. The Commission shall adopt rules and regulations
for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions,
transactions, findings, and determinations, which shall be a public record.
The Commission shall make and adopt plans for the physical development of the
city, including any areas outside its boundaries which, in the Commission's
judgment, bear relation to the planning of the city, and shall carry out the
other duties and exercise the powers specified in Neb. RS 19-929.



   (E)   All actions by the Commission shall be subject to the review
and supervision of the Mayor and City Council. The Commission shall make its
recommendations to the City Council so that they are received by the City
Council within 30 days after the Commission begins consideration of a matter
relating to the comprehensive development plan, capital improvements,
building codes, subdivision development, the annexation of territory, or
zoning. The Commission shall be responsible for making such reports and
performing such other duties as the City Council may, from time to time,
designate.



   (F)   The Mayor, with the approval of a majority vote of the elected
members of the City Council, shall appoint one alternate member to the
Commission. The alternate member shall serve without compensation and shall
hold no other city office. The term of the alternate member shall be three
years, and he or she shall hold office until his or her successor is
appointed and approved. The alternate member may be removed from office in
the same manner as a regular member. If the alternate member position becomes
vacant other than through the expiration of the term, the vacancy shall be
filled for the unexpired portion of the term by the Mayor with the approval
of a majority vote of the elected members of the City Council. The alternate
member may attend any meeting and may serve as a voting and participating
member of the Commission at any time when less than the full number of
regular Commission members is present and capable of voting.



(Prior Code, § 2-101)  (Ord. 99-2514, passed 4-15-1999)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 19-924 through 19-929



§ 35.002  AIRPORT ADVISORY COMMISSION.



   There is hereby created a City Airport Advisory Board to be known as
the McCook Municipal Airport Advisory Commission. The Airport Advisory
Commission shall consist of seven members, who shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the consent of the City Council. Members shall serve for a period
of three years from and after their date of appointment, provided that
initial terms shall be shortened in order to provide for staggered terms with
two terms ending at the end of the first year, two terms ending at the end of
the second year, and three terms ending at the end of the third year. Members
shall be appointed from among users of the Airport or consumers of
aeronautical services at the Airport, provided that one position on the Board
shall be reserved for appointment of a representative to represent the Fixed
Base Operator operating on the airport.



   (B)   No compensation shall be paid to any member of the Airport
Advisory Commission. Members of the Airport Advisory Commission may be
removed from their office by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council
as may be deemed necessary and appropriate. Vacancies on the Airport Advisory
Commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled for
the unexpired term by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council.



   (C)   The Airport Advisory Commission shall meet at least three
times a year, and at other times as it may deem necessary. All meetings shall
be publicly advertised and open to the public.



   (D)   At its annual meeting, which shall fall in the month of
September of each year, the Airport Advisory Commission shall elect a
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and Secretary from among its members to serve
in the respective capacities for the following year, provided that the member
appointed to represent the fixed base operator may not be nominated or
elected to the office of Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson of the Commission.
All officers and members may succeed themselves upon appropriate appointment
or election. The Commission may adopt any rules and governing procedures for
the transaction of business as it may deem necessary and appropriate.



   (E)   The Airport Advisory Commission shall consider all matters
concerning the McCook City Airport referred to it by the City Council or the
City Manager. The Commission shall review the matters and make studies as it
may deem necessary and appropriate and shall tender recommendations to the
originator of the request. These matters may include, but are not limited to,
physical plant planning, rules and regulations for use of the airport,
airport maintenance and operational considerations. Each year on or before
June 1, the Airport Advisory Commission shall review and make recommendations
to the City Manager with regard to the upcoming budget for the McCook
Municipal Airport.



   (F)   The Airport Advisory Commission shall have no authority to
enter into financial obligations or expend funds of any kind, but the city
may provide funds for use by the Commission as it shall deem necessary and
appropriate.



(Prior Code, § 2-105)  (Ord. 91-2012, passed 10-21-1991)



COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AGENCY



§ 35.015  AGENCY ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   There is hereby established pursuant to Neb. RS 18-2101.01 a
Community Development Agency for the city.



   (B)   The Mayor and City Council of the city are hereby designated
to be the Community Development Agency for the city.



   (C)   The Mayor of the city shall be the Chairperson of the
Community Development Agency, the Vice-President of the City Council shall be
the Vice-Chairperson, and the City Clerk shall be the Secretary of the
Community Development Agency.



   (D)   The Community Development Agency shall have the power and
authority to exercise the power and authority granted to a community
redevelopment authority under Neb. RS 18-2101` to 18-2144. The Community
Development Agency shall also have the power and authority to do all
community development activities, and to do all things necessary to cooperate
with the federal government in all matters relating to community development
program activities as a grantee, or as an agent or otherwise, under the
provisions of the Federal Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as
amended through the Housing and Community Development Amendments of 1981. The
Community Development Agency may levy taxes for the exercise of this
jurisdiction and authority and may issue general obligation bonds, general
obligation notes, revenue bonds, and revenue notes, including those general
obligation and revenue refunding bonds and notes for the purposes set forth
in  the sections and under the powers granted to any community redevelopment
authority described therein.



   (E)    All of the rights and property, both real and personal of the
existing Community Redevelopment Authority of the city, and all obligations,
including leases, bonds, redevelopment contracts, agreements and other
evidence of debt of the Authority, are hereby transferred to and assumed by
the City Community Development Agency, created pursuant to this section.



(Ord. 2006-2764, passed 2-20-2006)



BOARDS



§ 35.030  BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Board of Zoning Adjustment. The
word BOARD, when used in the Zoning Ordinance, shall be construed to mean the
Board of Zoning Adjustment. The Board of Zoning Adjustment is appointed by
the City Council and shall consist of five regular members, plus one
additional member designated as an alternate who shall attend and serve only
when one of the regular members is unable to attend for any reason.  One
member only of the city Board of Zoning Adjustment shall be appointed by the
City Council from membership of the Planning Commission and the loss of
membership on the Planning Commission by such member shall also result in the
immediate loss of membership on the Board of Zoning Adjustment and the
appointment of another Planning Commissioner to the Board of Zoning
Adjustment.  At least one member of the Board of Adjustment shall reside
outside of the corporate boundaries of the city but within its
extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction.



   (B)   The members appointed shall serve for terms of three years and
be removable for cause by the City Council upon written charges and after
public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired
term.



   (C)   The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall annually in October elect
one of its members as Chairperson, another as Vice-Chairperson, who shall act
as Chairperson in the Chairperson's absence, and appoint a Secretary, who may
be an officer or an employee of the city. Each shall serve until his or her
successor has been selected. The presence of four members of the Board shall
be necessary to constitute a quorum.



   (D)   All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.
Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at
such other times as the Board may determine. The Board shall keep minutes of
its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, if
absent or failing to vote, indicating the fact, and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately
filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record. The Board
shall adopt from time to time any rules and regulations as it may deem
necessary, to carry the appropriate provisions of the Zoning Ordinance into
effect and all of its resolutions and order shall be in accordance therewith.



(Prior Code, § 2-102)  (Ord. 2017-2949, passed 6-5-2017)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 19-907 through 19-910



§ 35.031  LIBRARY ADVISORY BOARD.



   (A)   The Library Advisory Board shall be chosen by appointment by a
majority vote of the members of the City Council. The Board shall consist of
five members who shall be residents of the city. The members of the Library
Advisory Board shall serve a four-year term of office. In case of vacancies
by resignation, removal, illness or any other reason, the City Council shall
immediately appoint a new member to the Board for the unexpired vacated term.
The Board shall serve without compensation.



   (B)   At the time of the Board's first meeting in October of each
year, the Board shall organize by selecting from its number a Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson and Secretary. It shall be the duty of the secretary to keep
the full and correct minutes and records of all meetings, and to file the
same with the City Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection
at any reasonable time. A majority of the Board members shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business. The Board shall meet at times as the
City Council may designate. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the
Chairperson, or any three members of the Board.



   (C)   The members of the Board shall have powers and perform duties
as may be conferred upon and required of them by the City Council. The Board
is an advisory board, thus having only those powers and duties to advise and
recommend to the City Council, City Manager, and Library Director as are
granted to it by the City Council. It shall be the duty of the Board to
advise the City Council on the establishment of appropriate rules and
regulations for the management, operation, and use of the same.



   (D)   No member of the City Council shall serve as a member of the
Library Advisory Board while serving a term of office as a member of the City
Council. No member of the Library Advisory Board shall serve in the capacity
of both the Chairperson and Secretary of the Board.



(Prior Code, § 2-110)  (Ord. 2007-2794, passed 6-4-2007)



§ 35.032  SENIOR CITIZENS ADVISORY BOARD.



   (A)   The Mayor, with the Council, shall appoint the Senior Citizens
Advisory Board. The Board shall consist of seven members who are residents of
the city. The members shall represent, insofar as is feasible, different
interests and occupations. The members of the Board shall serve a two-year
term of office unless reappointed. Two members of the Board shall be
appointed or reappointed in each even-numbered year and three members of the
Board shall be appointed or reappointed in each odd-numbered year. Each Board
member so appointed shall serve until his or her successor is appointed and
qualified.



   (B)   Any Board member may be removed from office for the causes and
in the manner prescribed by law. Two members of the original Board shall be
appointed for a one-year term and three members for a two-year term. The
Board shall serve without compensation and may be required, in the discretion
of the governing body, to give a bond in a sum set by resolution of the
governing body, and conditioned upon the faithful performances of their
duties.



   (C)   At its annual October meeting, the Board shall organize by
selecting from its membership a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Secretary.
It shall be the duty of the Secretary to keep the full and correct minutes
and records of all meetings and to file the same with the City Clerk where
they shall be available for public inspection at any reasonable time. The
Senior Citizens Advisory Board shall be funded by the governing body from
time to time out of the General Fund. A majority of the Board shall
constitute a quorum for the purpose of doing business. The Board shall meet
quarterly. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the Chairperson, or
any two members of the Board. All meetings shall be publicly advertized and
open to the public.



   (D)   It shall be the duty of the Board to advise the City Council
on the Senior Citizens Center and Senior Public Transit and other issues
concerning senior citizens in the community. The Board shall be responsible
for making reports and performing other duties as the governing body may,
from time to time, designate. No member of the Senior Citizens Advisory Board
shall serve in the capacity of both the Chairperson and Secretary of the
Board.



(Prior Code, § 2-111)  (Ord. 1684, passed 3-21-1983; Ord. 2015-2917, passed
7-20-2015)



§ 35.033  PARKS ADVISORY BOARD.



   (A)   There is hereby created a City Parks Advisory Board to be
known as the "McCook Parks Advisory Board".



   (B)   The Parks Advisory Board shall consist of five members, who
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council. Members
shall serve for a period of three years from and after the date of their
appointment, provided that initial terms shall be shortened in order to
provide for staggered terms with one term ending at the end of the first
year, two terms ending at the end of the second year, and two terms ending at
the end of the third year. Members shall be appointed from among the citizens
at large of the city; provided, no member of the City Council shall be
eligible for membership on the Board while holding the office of Council
member.



   (C)   No compensation shall be paid to any members of the Parks
Advisory Board. Members of the Parks Advisory Board may be removed from their
office by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council as may be deemed
necessary and appropriate. Vacancies on the Parks Advisory Board occurring
otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term
by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council.



   (D)   The Parks Advisory Board shall meet in April of each year, and
at other times as the Board by its own rules shall determine. A majority of
the Board members shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting
business. All meetings shall be publicly advertised and open to the public.



   (E)   At its annual April meeting, the Parks Advisory Board shall
elect a Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson from among its members to serve in
that capacity for the following year. The Public Works Director, or his or
her designee, shall be ex-officio the Secretary of the Board, but shall not
be a member of the Board. The Secretary shall keep a true and complete record
of the proceedings of the Board, and shall file same with the City Clerk. All
officers and members may succeed themselves upon appropriate appointment or
election. The Board may adopt rules and governing procedures for the
transaction of business as may be deemed necessary and appropriate.



   (F)   The Parks Advisory Board shall consider all matters concerning
the city's parks and recreational facilities referred to it by the City
Council or the City Manager. The Board shall review the matters and make
studies as they may deem necessary and appropriate and shall tender
recommendations to the originator of the request. The matters may include,
but are not limited to, matters concerning future parkland acquisition and
development, rules and regulations for use of the parks and recreational
facilities, and maintenance and operational considerations. Each year, on or
before June 1, the Parks Advisory Board shall submit to the Mayor and City
Council a report on the status of the parks and associated recreational
facilities.



   (G)   The Parks Advisory Board shall have no authority to enter into
financial obligations or expend funds of any kind, but the city may provide
funds for use by the Board as it shall deem necessary and appropriate.



(Prior Code, § 2-112)  (Ord. 1835, passed 4-18-1988)



§ 35.034  BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE ADVISORY AND APPEALS BOARD.



   (A)   There is hereby created a Building and Housing Code Advisory
and Appeals Board consisting of five members, and such Building and Housing
Code Advisory and Appeals Board shall hereinafter be referred to as the Board
of Appeals. Membership on the Board of Appeals shall consist of one 
engineer, architect, or building designer, one master plumber, one member
qualified to perform mechanical work, one member who works as a general
contractor, and one citizen of the city who is not an employee of the city.



   (B)   The members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent
of the City Council for terms of four years each. Three of the members
specified above shall be initially appointed to two-year terms. Two of the
above listed members shall be initially appointed to four-year terms. Each
two years thereafter, new members shall be appointed, replacing those members
whose terms have expired. Members may succeed themselves if so appointed. In
September of every even numbered year after the date of adoption of this
section, the Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, shall appoint the
required members to the Board. Vacancies on the Board of Appeals shall be
filled by appointment for the unexpired term only. The Board of Appeals shall
annually select one of its members to serve as chairperson. The Building
Inspector shall be a permanent secretary of the Board and shall keep a record
of all meetings.



   (C)   The Board of Appeals shall conduct examinations and pass upon
qualifications of persons coming before the Board requesting issuance of
licenses to conduct plumbing or other work for which a license is required
within the city. The Board shall act in an advisory capacity to the Building
Official and Code Official concerning matters of code interpretation and
evaluation of circumstances and situations relating to code enforcement. The
Board of Appeals shall exercise other powers and duties as are conferred upon
it in the municipal code.



   (D)   The Board of Appeals shall adopt reasonable rules and
regulations for conducting its investigations and shall render all decisions
and recommendations in writing to the City Manager. One copy of the rules and
regulations shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk.



   (E)   The Board of Appeals shall meet at the call of the City
Manager or upon a written request signed by two or more of its members and
filed with the secretary. The City Manager shall refer all properly and
timely filed appeals to the Board of Appeals for hearing. The City Manager
shall in each appeal notify the appellant in writing of the date, time, and
place of hearing before the Board, which shall be no later than 30 days from
the filing of the appeal. The notice shall be served upon the appellant by
personal service or registered mail.



   (F)   Hearings on appeal need not be conducted according to
technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Oral evidence shall be
taken only on oath or affirmation. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if
it is the type of evidence upon which responsible persons are accustomed to
rely upon in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of
any common law or statutory rule which may make improper the admission of the
evidence over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction
in this state. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.
The appellant, the City Manager, and any other party to an appeal hereunder
shall have these rights, among others:



      (1)   To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to
the issues of the hearing;



      (2)   To introduce documentary and physical evidence;



      (3)   To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter
relevant to the issues of the hearing;  and



      (4)   To rebut the evidence against him or her.



   (G)   The Board of Appeals shall then, within a reasonable time
after the hearing, render a written decision which shall state its findings
and conclusions. Decisions of the Board may be appealed as provided by law.



   (H)   Except as otherwise provided in this municipal code,
enforcement of any decision, notice, or order of the Building Official or
Code Official that is the subject of an appeal shall be stayed during the
pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed, except in
cases of emergency, where enforcement of the same is necessary for the
protection of life, limb, or property.



(Ord. 2005-2739, passed 7-18-2005)



§ 35.035  TREE ADVISORY BOARD.



   (A)   There is hereby created and established a City Tree Advisory
Board to be known as the "McCook Tree Advisory Board".



   (B)   The Tree Advisory Board shall consist of five members,
citizens and residents of the city who shall be appointed by the Mayor upon
ratification by the Council. The term of the five persons to be appointed by
the Mayor shall be five years except that the term of two of the members
appointed to the first Board shall be for only two years. All subsequent
terms shall be five years in length. In the event that a vacancy shall occur
during the term of any member, his successor shall be appointed in a manner
provided for above for the unexpired portion of the members term. Members of
the Advisory Board shall serve without compensation.



   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the Advisory Board to study
and investigate the tree stock and community forestry situation in the
community. Findings of such study investigations shall be compiled into a
report which shall be presented to the Council. Such report shall be reviewed
from time to time and updated as the Advisory Board may deem necessary.



   (D)   Based on the findings in the report the Advisory Board shall
develop a long range Community Forestry Program including regulatory as well
as action elements. Such programs shall be presented to the Council and upon
approval and adoption by the Council shall constitute the official
Comprehensive Community Tree Plan for the City of McCook, Nebraska.



   (E)   The Advisory Board shall annually review and update, if
needed, the Comprehensive Community Tree Plan. In addition, the Board shall
prepare and present an annual work plan to the City Council in May of each
year for their consideration in preparing the budget for the succeeding
fiscal year. As a part of the annual work plan, the Board shall give a report
on the status of the tree stock and community forestry situation in McCook.



   (F)   The Advisory Board when requested by the City Council shall
consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special
matter of question coming within the scope of community forestry for the City
of McCook, Nebraska, and its surrounding environs.



   (G)   The Advisory Board shall meet at least four times each year
with an annual meeting being held in October at which the Board shall elect a
chairman and vice-chairman, and a secretary for the Board. Such officers
shall serve one year from the date at which they will take office in October
at the annual meeting. The Advisory Board shall keep a record of its
proceedings and business meeting. A majority of the members shall be a quorum
sufficient for the transaction of business. In addition, the Advisory Board
shall adopt such rules and regulations for conducting business as may be
deemed appropriate.



(Prior Code, § 2-107)  (Ord. 2012-2885, passed 10-1-2012)



BOARD OF HEALTH



§ 35.045  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   The governing body shall appoint a Board of Health which shall
consist of five members. The members of the Board shall include the President
of the City Council, who shall serve as Chairperson; the Police Chief, who
shall serve as Secretary and Quarantine Officer; a physician, who shall serve
as the Medical Advisor, and the City Manager and one other member. The
members of the Board shall serve, without compensation, a one-year term of
office, unless reappointed, and shall reorganize at the first meeting in June
of each year. It shall be the duty of the Secretary to keep the full and
correct minutes and records of all meetings and to file the same with the
City Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection at any
reasonable time.



   (B)   The Board of Health shall be funded by the governing body from
time to time out of the General Fund.



   (C)   A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the
purpose of doing business. The Board shall meet at times as the governing
body may designate. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the
Chairperson, or any two members of the Board. It shall be the duty of the
Board to enact rules and regulations which shall have the full force and
effect of law, to safeguard the health of the residents of the city. Included
in the duties of the Board shall be to enforce the rules and regulations, and
to provide fines and punishments for any violations thereof. It may regulate,
suppress, and prevent the occurrence of nuisances and shall actively enforce
all laws of the state and ordinances of the city relating to matters of
sanitation which affect the health and safety of the people.



   (D)   The Board shall regularly inspect premises and businesses as
the governing body may direct. All members of the Board shall be responsible
for making reports and performing other duties as the governing body may,
from time to time, designate. No member of the Board of Health shall hold
more than one Board of Health position.



(Prior Code, § 2-103)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-238



§ 35.046  AUTHORITY TO REGULATE.



   For the purpose of promoting the health and safety of the residents of
the city, the Board of Health shall, from time to time, adopt rules and
regulations relative thereto and shall make  inspections, prescribe
penalties, and make reports as may be necessary toward that purpose.



(Prior Code, § 4-101)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-238



§ 35.047  QUARANTINE OFFICER.



   The city Police Chief, as the Quarantine Officer, shall be the chief
health officer of the city. It shall be his or her duty to notify the
governing body and the Board of Health of health nuisances within the city
and its zoning jurisdiction.



(Prior Code, § 4-102)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-238



§ 35.048  STATE RULES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The Rules and Regulations Relating to Public Health, Department of
Health of the state, are hereby incorporated by reference when the same are
applicable to the city, in their present form and as they may hereafter be
amended. Three copies of the pamphlet are filed at the office of the City
Clerk and shall be available for public inspection at any reasonable time.



(Prior Code, § 4-103)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 18-132



§ 35.049  COOPERATION WITH COUNTY HEALTH BOARD.



   It shall be the duty of the Board of Health to work closely with the
County Health Board in protecting the health and welfare of the residents of
the city.



(Prior Code, § 4-104)



HOUSING AGENCY



§ 35.075  AGENCY CREATED.



   The previously created and existing Housing Authority shall continue to
exist as a Housing Agency under the state Housing Agency Act and shall
hereafter conduct its operation consistent with the Act. It shall be named
the Housing Agency, and all property, rights and land, buildings, records and
equipment, and any funds, money, revenue, receipts, or assets of the Housing
Authority shall belong to the Housing Agency as successor. All obligations,
debts, commitments, and liabilities of the Housing Authority shall become
obligations, debts, commitments, and liabilities of the Housing Agency. Any
previously passed Resolutions of the Housing Authority, and any actions taken
by the Housing Authority prior to January 1, 2000, with regard to any project
or program which is to be completed within or to be conducted for a 12-month
period following January 1, 2000, and which resolution or action is lawful
under state law as it exists to the operative date of LB-105, shall be a
lawful resolution or action of the Housing Agency, binding upon and
enforceable by or against the Housing Agency, not withstanding that such
resolution or action is inconsistent with, not authorized, or prohibited
under the provisions of the state Housing Agency Act. All commissioners of
the Housing Authority and all officers, technical experts, directors, and
other appointees or employees of the Housing Authority holding office or
employment by virtue of any prior law on January 1, 2000, shall be deemed to
have been appointed or employed under the state Housing Agency Act.



(Prior Code, § 2-201)  (Ord. 2000-2545, passed 3-20-2000)



§ 35.076  BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.



   (A)   (1)   The Mayor shall appoint, subject to confirmation by
the Council, five persons who, including the Resident Commissioner, if any,
shall constitute the Housing Agency Board, and such persons shall be called
the Commissioners. One Commissioner shall be appointed each year. Each
Commissioner shall serve a five-year term of office or until his or her
successor is duly appointed and qualified, provided that all vacancies shall
be filled for the un-expired terms. The Council may appoint one of its
members to serve as one of the five members of the Housing Agency for such
term as the Council may determine. No person shall serve as a Commissioner
unless he or she resides within the area of McCook Housing Agency.



      (2)   A certificate of the appointment or reappointment of any
Commissioner shall be filed with the City Clerk, and the certificate shall be
conclusive evidence of the proper appointment of the Commissioner. The
Commissioner shall receive no compensation for his or her services, but he or
she shall be entitled to the necessary expenses, including travel expenses,
incurred in discharge of his or her duties as provided by Neb. RS 81-1175
through 81-1177.



      (3)   A majority of Commissioners shall constitute a quorum of
the agency for the purpose of conducting its business, exercising its powers,
and for all other purposes. Action may be taken by the agency upon the vote
of the majority of the Commissioners present and voting, unless the by-laws
of the agency or the ordinance creating the agency require a larger number.
The Commissioners shall elect a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson from among
the Commissioners and shall have the power to employ an executive director
who shall serve as ex-officio Secretary of the Agency. The Agency may also
employ legal counsel for services as it may require. It may employ
accountants, appraisers, technical experts, and such other officers, agents,
and employees as it may require and shall determine their qualifications,
duties, compensations, and terms of office. The Agency may delegate other
powers and duties to its agents or employees, as it may deem proper.



      (4)   During his or her tenure and for one year thereafter, no
Commissioner, officer, or employee of the Housing Agency shall voluntarily
acquire any interest, direct or indirect, in any project or in any property
included or planned to be included in any project, or in any contract or
proposed contract relating to an housing project. If any Commissioner,
officer, or employee involuntarily acquires any interest, or voluntarily or
involuntarily acquired any interest prior to appointment or employment as
commissioner, officer, or employee, he or she shall immediately disclose his
or her interest in writing to the agency, and the disclosure shall be entered
upon the minutes of the agency, and he or she shall not participate in any
action by the agency relating to the property or contract in which he or she
has any  interest. Any violation of the provisions of this division shall
constitute misconduct in office. This prohibition shall not apply to the
acquisition of any interest in notes or bonds of the agency issued in
connection with any housing project, or to the execution of the agreements by
banking institutions for deposit or handling of funds in connection with a
project or to act as trustee under any trust indenture, or to utility
services, the rates for which are fixed or controlled by a governmental
agency.



   (B)   This section shall not be construed to preclude, regulate, or
restrict the participation of any tenant of the agency from serving, if
appointed, as a Commissioner of the authority, but he or she may not
participate in any decision solely affecting his or her individual interest.



(Prior Code, § 2-202)



   (C)   (1)   A fifth  Commissioner, to be known as the Resident
Commissioner, shall be appointed to the governing body by the Mayor, subject
to confirmation of the Council. To select the initial Resident Commissioner,
or to fill subsequent vacancies in the position, the Housing Agency shall
notify any Resident Advisory Board or other Resident Organization and all
adult persons directly assisted by the agency to the effect that the position
of Resident Commissioner is open and that if any person is interested in
being considered as a candidate for the position, the person should notify
the Housing Agency, in writing, within 30 days of the person's willingness to
be considered and to serve as Resident Commissioner.



      (2)   The names of all persons interested who have notified
the Housing Agency of their interests in so serving shall be forwarded to the
Mayor, and the Resident Commissioner shall be appointed from the list of
names, subject to confirmation by the Council. Upon the appointment of a
Resident Commissioner, the certificate of appointment shall state the term is
for five years or when no longer an eligible resident, whichever occurs first.



      (3)   In the event that no qualified person has submitted his
or her name to the Housing Agency as being interested as a candidate for the
position, and the Housing Agency has received no notification of interest in
serving as a Resident Commissioner by any person, no Resident Commissioner
shall be required to be selected. In the event a Resident Commissioner is
appointed and resigns from the position prior to completion of the appointed
term, or is no longer an eligible resident, or is otherwise disqualified or
removed from the Board, and a vacancy is created, the Housing Agency shall
solicit new candidates for the position following the same procedure set
forth above. In the event that no Resident Commissioner is selected and the
position is not filled, the agency shall re-notify all adult persons directly
assisted by the agency that the position of Resident Commissioner is open and
solicit these persons for candidates for the position not less than once
annually.



(Prior Code, § 2-203)



(Ord. 2000-2545, passed 3-20-2000; Ord. 2007-2795, passed 9-6-2007)



§ 35.077  REMOVAL OF COMMISSIONER.



   The Mayor may remove a Commissioner for neglect of duty, misconduct in
office, or conviction of any felony, in the manner prescribed hereinafter.
The Mayor shall send a notice of removal to the Commissioner, which notice
shall set forth the charges against him or her. Unless within the ten days
from the receipt of notice, the Commissioner files with the Clerk a request
for a hearing before the Council, the Commissioner shall be deemed removed
from office. If a request for a hearing is filed with the Clerk, the Council
shall hold a hearing not sooner than ten days after the date a hearing is
requested, at which time the Commissioner shall have the right to appear in
person or by counsel and the Council shall determine whether the removal
shall be upheld. If the removal is not upheld, the Commissioner shall
continue to hold his or her office.



(Prior Code, § 2-204)  (Ord. 2000-2545, passed 3-20-2000)



§ 35.078 AGENCY AUTONOMY.



   The Housing Agency is a political subdivision, independent from the
city and operated by the Housing Agency. The Housing Agency shall constitute
a public body, corporate and politic, and shall have all the powers necessary
or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of the
state Housing Agency Act.



(Prior Code, § 2-205)  (Ord. 2000-2545, passed 3-20-2000)



§ 35.079  HOUSING AGENCY ACT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   Except as otherwise herein specifically provided, the definitions,
terms, provisions, and conditions set forth under the state Housing Agency
Act are hereby adopted by reference, as they now exist, or may hereafter be
amended, for the operation and management of the Housing Agency, and the
Housing Agency Commission shall fully comply with and be governed by the
terms of the state Housing Agency Act.



(Prior Code, § 2-206)  (Ord. 2000-2545, passed 3-20-2000)



§ 35.080  AUTHORITY OF AGENCY.



   (A)   The Housing Agency shall adopt and promulgate fair and
equitable policies establishing a plan for selection of applicants. The plan
shall include standards for eligibility, procedures for prompt notification
of eligibility or disqualification, and procedures for maintaining a waiting
list of eligible applicants for whom vacancies are not immediately available.
Eligible applicants shall be offered available vacancies as provided in the
policies.



(Prior Code, § 2-207)



   (B)   The Housing Agency may adopt, promulgate, and enforce rules
and regulations related to carrying out the purposes of the local housing
agency and exercising its powers and to amend to repeal the rules and
regulations from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 2-208)



(Ord. 2000-2545, passed 3-20-2000)



§ 35.081  ANNUAL REPORT.



   Within six months after the end of the Housing Agency's fiscal year,
the Housing Agency shall prepare an annual report. This report shall contain
financial statements and the results of the operations. The report shall be
approved by the Board of Commissioners and signed by the Chairperson. The
annual report of the Housing Agency shall be a public record and available
for inspection and copying by members of the general public at the Housing
Agency office. The annual report shall be placed on file with the City Clerk
upon completion thereof.



(Prior Code, § 2-209)  (Ord. 2000-2545, passed 3-20-2000)



§ 35.082  PLANS TO BE FILED.



   The Housing Agency shall file with the City Clerk a copy of the
five-year plan and annual plan required by § 511 of The Federal Quality
Housing and Work Responsibility Act of 1998. The plans shall be filed within
30 days after the date the plan is filed with the Department of Housing and
Urban Development.



(Prior Code, § 2-210)  (Ord. 2000-2545, passed 3-20-2000)



§ 35.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions
of any section of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Unless otherwise specified in the particular section for which the person
stands convicted of violating, the penalty for the violation shall be in any
amount not to exceed $1,000 and/or imprisonment for any length of time not to
exceed three months, in the discretion of the court.



(Prior Code, §§ 1-1201, 2-301, 3-1301)



CHAPTER 36:  TAXATION



Section



Occupations Taxed



   36.01   Amount of tax



   36.02   Payment due date



   36.03   Tax certificate



   36.04   Remedy for failure to pay tax



   36.05   Exemption from tax



   36.06   License term; refund



Cross-reference:



   Taxation and Appropriation, see §§ 33.20 through 33.25



OCCUPATIONS TAXED



§ 36.01  AMOUNT OF TAX.



   For the purpose of raising revenue, an occupation tax is levied on the
businesses set out in the fee schedule set forth in Chapter 38 in the amounts
set out therein.



(Prior Code, § 10-1501)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-205



§ 36.02  PAYMENT DUE DATE.



   All occupation taxes shall be due and payable on May 1 of each year,
except in the event that the tax is levied daily, and upon the payment
thereof by any person or persons to the City Clerk, the Clerk shall give a
receipt, properly dated, and specifying the person paying the  tax, and the
amount paid. The revenue collected shall then be immediately deposited into
the General Fund by the City Treasurer. The City Treasurer shall keep an
accurate account of all revenue turned over to him or her. All forms and
receipts herein mentioned shall be issued in duplicate. One copy shall then
be kept by each party in the transaction.



(Prior Code, § 10-1502)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-205



§ 36.03  TAX CERTIFICATE.



   The receipt issued after the payment of any occupation tax shall be the
occupation tax certificate. The certificate shall specify the amount of the
tax and the name of the person, and business that paid the  tax. The
occupation tax certificate shall then be displayed in a prominent place or
carried in such a way as to be easily accessible, while business is being
conducted.



(Prior Code, § 10-1503)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-205



§ 36.04  REMEDY FOR FAILURE TO PAY TAX.



   If any person, company, or corporation fails or neglects to pay the
occupation taxes as provided herein on the day it becomes due and payable,
the city shall then proceed by civil suit to collect the amount due. All
delinquent taxes shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per month until paid.



(Prior Code, § 10-1504)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-205



§ 36.05  EXEMPTION FROM TAX.



   (A)   No occupation tax shall be levied upon any business or
occupation which is done or conducted by any department of the government of
the United States or of the state, or of the officers thereof in the course
of their official duties, or by any county or subdivision of this state or
its officers in the course of their official duties.



(Prior Code, § 10-1505)



   (B)   It is hereby declared that the provisions of this chapter
shall not extend to nor affect individuals selling meat, milk, butter, eggs,
vegetables, fruit, hay, grain, or fuel raised or produced by those vendors.



(Prior Code, § 10-1506)



(Ord. 1818, passed 2-16-1987)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-205, 16-699



§ 36.06  LICENSE TERM; REFUND.



   Every occupation tax levied at a yearly rate must be paid in one
payment, whether the license is issued at the beginning of the year or at any
time thereafter, but no license shall be issued at the beginning of the year
for any certain time less than the full year. No person paying occupation tax
shall be entitled to a refund of part of the tax so paid.



(Prior Code, § 10-1507)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-205



CHAPTER 37:  CIVIL SERVICE



Section



General Provisions



   37.01   Covered positions



   37.02   Creation and elimination of positions



   37.03   Salaries and compensation



   37.04   Duties and responsibilities of city



   37.05   Prohibition against political retribution



   37.06   Obstruction of civil service examinations



Civil Service Commission



   37.20   Creation of Commission



   37.21   Appointment of members; term of office



   37.22   Removal from office



   37.23   Member compensation



   37.24   Meetings; quorum



   37.25   Chairperson



   37.26   Secretary; Chief Examiner



   37.27   Powers and duties



Civil Service Regulations



   37.40   Appointments and promotions



   37.41   Applicant requirements



   37.42   Filling vacant positions



   37.43   Probationary period



   37.44   Tenure of employment



   37.45   Causes for disciplinary action



   37.46   Procedure for disciplinary action



   37.47   Reduction in force



   37.48   Leave of absence



Civil Service Retirement Committees



   37.60   Police Officers' Retirement Committee



   37.61   Firefighters' Retirement Committee



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 37.01  COVERED POSITIONS.



   (A)   This chapter shall apply only to all present full-time
Firefighters or full-time Police Officers of the city, including any paid
full-time Police or Fire Chief, and future appointees to such full-time
positions.



   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      FULL-TIME FIREFIGHTERS.  Duly appointed Firefighters who are
paid regularly by the city and for whom firefighting is a full-time career,
but shall not include clerical, custodial, or maintenance personnel who are
not engaged in fire suppression.



      FULL-TIME POLICE OFFICERS.  Police officers in positions which
require certification by the Nebraska Law Enforcement Training Center, who
have the power of arrest, who are paid regularly by the city, and for whom
law enforcement is a full-time career, but shall not include clerical,
custodial, or maintenance personnel.



(Prior Code, § 12-101)  (Ord. 1800, passed 4-7-1986)



§ 37.02  CREATION AND ELIMINATION OF POSITIONS.



   All positions subject to the Civil Service Act shall be created or
eliminated by the Mayor and Council.



(Prior Code, § 12-102)  (Ord. 1800, passed 4-7-1986)



§ 37.03  SALARIES AND COMPENSATION.



   (A)   This chapter shall not be construed to infringe upon the power
and authority of the City Manager to establish salaries and compensation of
all employees within the compensation schedule or ranges established by the
Mayor and Council for the positions.



(Prior Code, § 12-103)



   (B)   No treasurer, auditor, comptroller, or other officer or
employee of the city subject to the Civil Service Act shall approve the
payment of or be in any manner concerned in paying, auditing, or approving
any salary, wage, or other compensation for services to any person subject to
the jurisdiction and scope of the Civil Service Act unless the person to
receive the salary, wage, or other compensation has been appointed or
employed in compliance with the Act.



(Prior Code, § 12-104)



(Ord. 1800, passed 4-7-1986)



§ 37.04  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF CITY.



   The Mayor and Council shall provide the Commission with suitable and
convenient rooms and accommodations and cause the same to be furnished,
heated, lighted, and supplied with all office supplies and equipment
necessary to carry on the business of the Commission and with clerical
assistance as may be necessary. It shall be the duty of the city to
appropriate each fiscal year, from the general funds of the city, a sum of
money sufficient to pay the necessary expenses involved in carrying out the
purposes of the act, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney's
fees for any special counsel appointed by the Commission when the City
Attorney is not authorized by the City Manager to represent the Commission.
The City Manager may establish the hourly or monthly rate of pay of special
counsel. The city shall afford the Commission, its members and employees, all
reasonable facilities and assistance to inspect all books, papers, documents,
and accounts applying or in any way appertaining to any and all positions and
employments subject to civil service and shall produce the books, papers,
documents, and accounts. All city officers and employees shall attend and
testify whenever required to do so by the Commission, the accused, or the
City Manager.



(Prior Code, § 12-105)  (Ord. 1800, passed 4-7-1986)



§ 37.05  PROHIBITION AGAINST POLITICAL RETRIBUTION.



   No person holding any position subject to civil service shall be under
any obligation to contribute to any political fund or to render any political
service to any person or party whatsoever. No person shall be removed,
reduced in position or salary, or otherwise prejudiced for refusing so to do.
No public officer, whether elected or appointed, shall discharge, promote,
demote, or in any manner change the official rank, employment, or
compensation of any person under civil service, or promise or threaten to do
so for giving, withholding, or neglecting to make any contribution of money,
services, or any valuable thing for any political purposes.



(Prior Code, § 12-106)  (Ord. 1800, passed 4-7-1986)



§ 37.06  OBSTRUCTION OF CIVIL SERVICE EXAMINATIONS.



   No Commissioner or any other person shall by himself or herself or in
cooperation with one or more persons:



   (A)   Defeat, deceive, or obstruct any person in respect to the
right of examination according to the rules and regulations made pursuant to
the Civil Service Act;



   (B)   Falsely mark, grade, estimate, or report upon the examination
and standing of any person examined or certified in accordance with the act
or aid in so doing;



   (C)   Make any false representation concerning the same or
concerning the person examined;



   (D)   Furnish any person any special or secret information for the
purpose of improving or injuring the prospects or chances of any person so
examined or certified to be examined or certified; or



   (E)   Persuade any other person to permit or aid in any manner any
other person to impersonate him or her in connection with any examination,
application, or request to be so examined.



(Prior Code, § 12-107)  (Ord. 1800, passed 4-7-1986)



CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION



§ 37.20  CREATION OF COMMISSION.



   There is hereby created in the city, a Civil Service Commission which
shall have three members who shall each be a citizen of the United States, a
resident of the city for at least three years immediately preceding his or
her appointment, and an elector of the county wherein the person resides.



(Prior Code, § 12-201)  (Ord. 1800, passed 4-7-1986)



§ 37.21  APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; TERM OF OFFICE.



   (A)   The members of the Civil Service Commission shall be appointed
by the City Manager. At the time of any appointment, not more than three
members of the Civil Service Commission, including the one or ones to be
appointed, shall be registered electors of the same political party.
Confirmation of the appointments by any other legislative body shall not be
required.



(Prior Code, § 12-202)



   (B)   The first persons appointed to the Civil Service Commission
shall serve for terms of two years, four years, and six years respectively.
Thereafter, all appointments shall be for six years. For purposes of this
section, the Civil Service Commission created hereunder shall be deemed a
continuing entity with regard to the currently existing Civil Service
Commission and terms set accordingly.



(Prior Code, § 12-203)



(Ord. 1800, passed 4-7-1986)



§ 37.22  REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.



   Any member of the Civil Service Commission may be removed from office
for incompetency, dereliction of duty, malfeasance in office, or other good
cause, by the City Manager, except that no member of the Civil Service
Commission shall be removed until written charges have been preferred, due
notice given the member, and a full hearing had before the City Manager.



(Prior Code, § 12-204)  (Ord. 1800, passed 4-7-1986)



§ 37.23  MEMBER COMPENSATION.



   Members of the Civil Service Commission shall serve without
compensation.



(Prior Code, § 12-205)  (Ord. 1800, passed 4-7-1986)



§ 37.24  MEETINGS; QUORUM.



   (A)   The Civil Service Commission shall hold meetings as may be
required for the proper discharge of its duties.



(Prior Code, § 12-206)



   (B)   Two members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business.



(Prior Code, § 12-209)



(Ord. 1800, passed 4-7-1986)



§ 37.25  CHAIRPERSON.



   The Civil Service Commission shall annually elect one of its members as
Chairperson.



(Prior Code, § 12-207)  (Ord. 1800, passed 4-7-1986)



§ 37.26  SECRETARY; CHIEF EXAMINER.



   The Civil Service Commission shall appoint a Secretary and a Chief
Examiner who shall keep the records of the Commission, preserve all reports
made to it, superintend and keep a record of all examinations held under its
direction, and perform other duties as the Commission may prescribe. The
Commission may merge the positions of Secretary and Chief Examiner and
appoint one person to perform the duties of both positions. The Commission
shall appoint the city's Personnel Officer as Secretary and Chief Examiner,
if requested to do so by the City Manager. The Secretary and Chief Examiner
shall be subject to suspension or discharge upon the vote of a majority of
the appointed members of the Commission.



(Prior Code, § 12-208)  (Ord. 1800, passed 4-7-1986)



§ 37.27  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Commission shall adopt and promulgate procedural rules and
regulations which shall provide in detail the manner in which examinations
may be held and any other matters assigned to it by the City Manager. At
least one copy of the rules and regulations, and any amendments, shall be
made available for examination and reproduction by members of the public. One
copy of the rules and regulations and any amendments shall be given to each
full-time firefighter and full-time police officer.



   (B)   The Commission shall provide that all tests shall be practical
and consist only of subjects which will fairly determine the capacity of
persons who are to be examined to perform the duties of the position to which
an appointment is to be made and may include, but not be limited to, tests of
physical fitness and of manual skill and psychological testing.



   (C)   The Commission shall provide, by the rules and regulations,
for a credit of 10% in favor of all applicants for an appointment to an entry
level position, as defined by the City Manager, under Civil Service, who in
time of war or in any expedition of the Armed Forces of the United States,
have served in and been honorably discharged from the Armed Forces of the
United States and who have equaled or exceeded the minimum qualifying
standards established by the City Manager.



   (D)   The Commission may conduct an investigation concerning and
report upon all matters regarding the enforcement and effect of the Civil
Service Act and the rules and regulations prescribed.



   (E)   The Commission may inspect all institutions, departments,
positions, and employments affected by the Act to determine whether the Act
and all the rules and regulations are being obeyed. The investigations may be
conducted by the Commission or by any Commissioner designated by the
Commission for that purpose. The Commission shall also make a like
investigation on the written petition of a citizen, duly verified, stating
that irregularities or abuses exist or setting forth, in concise language,
the necessity for an investigation. The Commission may be represented in
investigations by the City Attorney, if authorized by the City Manager. If
the City Attorney does not represent the Commission, the Commission may be
represented by special counsel appointed by the Commission in any
investigation. In the course of an investigation, the Commission, designated
Commissioner, or chief examiner shall have the power to administer oaths,
issue subpoenas to require the attendance of witnesses and the production by
them of books, papers, documents, and accounts appertaining to the
investigation, and to cause the deposition of witnesses, residing within or
without the state, to be taken in the manner prescribed by law for like
depositions in civil actions in the courts of this state. The oaths
administered and subpoenas issued shall have the same force and effect as the
oaths administered by a District Judge in a judicial capacity and subpoenas
issued by the state District Courts. The failure of any person so subpoenaed
to comply shall be deemed a violation of the Civil Service Act and shall be
punished as such. No investigation shall be made pursuant to this section if
there is a written accusation concerning the same subject matter against a
person in the Civil Service. The accusation shall be handled pursuant to §
37.46 of this chapter.



   (F)   The Commission shall provide that all hearings and
investigations before the Commission, designated Commissioner, or chief
examiner shall be governed by the Civil Service Act and the rules of practice
and procedure to be adopted by the Commission. In the conduct thereof, they
shall not be bound by the technical rules of evidence. No informality in any
proceedings or hearing or in the manner of taking testimony shall invalidate
any order, decision, rule, or regulation made, approved, or confirmed by the
Commission, except that no order, decision, rule, or regulation made by any
designated Commissioner conducting any hearing or investigation alone shall
be of any force or effect unless it is concurred in by a majority of the
appointed members of the Commission, including the vote of any Commissioner
making the investigation.



   (G)   The Commission shall establish and maintain a roster of
officers and employees.



   (H)   The Commission shall provide for, establish, and hold
competitive tests to determine the relative qualifications of persons who
seek employment in any position and, as a result thereof, establish eligible
lists for the various positions.



   (I)   The Commission shall make recommendations concerning a
reduction in force policy to the City Manager.



   (J)   The Commission shall keep such records as may be necessary for
the proper administration of the Civil Service Act.



   (K)   The Commission, upon request of the City Manager, shall
establish and maintain a list of names and addresses, for a period of time
established by the City Manager, of those eligible for appointment to or
promotion within the department.



   (L)   The Commission, upon request of the City Manager, shall
certify the name of the persons who are the three highest on the eligible
list, following the most recent examination, and whose qualifications have
been validated by the Commission for a vacant position.



   (M)   The Commission shall begin and conduct all civil suits which
may be necessary for the proper enforcement of the Civil Service Act and the
rules of the Commission. The Commission may be represented in these suits and
all investigations pursuant to the Act by the City Attorney if authorized by
the City Manager. If the City Attorney does not represent the Commission, the
Commission may be represented by special counsel appointed by it in any
particular case.



(Prior Code, § 12-210)  (Ord. 1800, passed 4-7-1986)



CIVIL SERVICE REGULATIONS



§ 37.40  APPOINTMENTS AND PROMOTIONS.



   (A)   All appointments to, and promotions in, the Police or Fire
Department shall be made solely on merit, efficiency, and fitness, which
shall be ascertained by open competitive examination and impartial
investigation by the Commission.



   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      APPOINTMENTS.  All means of selecting, appointing, or employing
any person to hold any position or employment subject to civil service.



      POSITION.  An individual job which is designated by an official
title indicative of the nature of the work.



      PROMOTION or DEMOTION.  Changing from one position to another,
accompanied by a corresponding change in current rate of pay.



(Prior Code, § 12-301)  (Ord. 1800, passed 4-7-1986)



§ 37.41  APPLICANT REQUIREMENTS.



   An applicant for a position of any kind under civil service shall be
able to read and write the English language, meet the minimum job
qualifications of the position as established by the City Manager, and be of
good moral character. An applicant shall be required to disclose his or her
past employment history and his or her criminal record, if any and submit a
full set of his or her fingerprints and a written statement of permission
authorizing the appointing authority to forward the fingerprints for
identification. Prior to certifying to the City Manager the names of the
persons eligible for the position or positions, the Commission shall validate
the qualifications of the persons.



(Prior Code, § 12-302)  (Ord. 1800, passed 4-7-1986)



§ 37.42  FILLING VACANT POSITIONS.



   (A)   (1)   If the City Manager fills a vacancy in a position
subject to the Civil Service Act, he or she shall consider factors,
including, but not limited to:



         (a)   The multiple job skills recently or currently
being performed by the applicant which are necessary for the position;



         (b)   The knowledge, skills, and abilities of the
applicant which are necessary for the position;



         (c)   The performance appraisals of any applicant who is
already employed in the Department, including any recent or pending
disciplinary actions involving the employee;



         (d)   The employment policies and staffing needs of the
Department, together with contracts, ordinances, and statutes related thereto;



         (e)   Required federal, state, or local certifications
or licenses necessary for the position; and



         (f)   The qualifications of the applicants who are
already employed in the department and have successfully completed all parts
of the examination for the position.



      (2)   No person shall be reinstated in or transferred,
suspended, or discharged from any such position or employment contrary to the
Civil Service Act.



   (B)   Whenever a position subject to the Civil Service Act becomes
vacant, the City Manager shall make requisition upon the Commission for the
name and addresses of the persons eligible for appointment and may decline to
fill such vacancy for an indefinite period. If the Commission certifies fewer
than three names for each vacancy to the City Manager, the City Manager may
appoint one of such persons to fill the vacancy, may decline to fill the
vacancy, or may order that another examination be held by the Civil Service
Commission.



   (C)   If a vacancy occurs and there is no eligible list for the
position or if the Commission has not certified persons from the eligible
list, a temporary appointment may be made by the City Manager. This temporary
appointment shall not continue for a period longer than four months. No
person shall receive more than one temporary appointment or serve more than
four months. No person shall receive more than four months as a temporary
appointee in any one fiscal year.



(Prior Code, § 12-303)  (Ord. 1800, passed 4-7-1986)



§ 37.43  PROBATIONARY PERIOD.



   To enable the City Manager to exercise a choice in the filling of
positions, no appointment, employment, or promotion in any position under the
Civil Service Act shall be deemed complete until after the expiration of a
period of three to six months probationary service for firefighters and not
less than six months nor more than one year after certification by the state
Law Enforcement Training Center for police officers, as may be provided in
the rules of the Civil Service Commission, during which time the City Manager
may terminate the employment of the person appointed by him or her if, during
the performance test thus afforded and upon an observation or consideration
of the performance of duty, the City Manager deems the person unfit or
unsatisfactory for service in the Department. The City Manager may appoint
one of the other persons certified by the Commission and that person shall
likewise enter upon the duties until some person is found who is fit for
appointment, employment or promotion for the probationary period provided and
then the appointment, employment, or promotion shall be complete.



(Prior Code, § 12-304)  (Ord. 1800, passed 4-7-1986)



§ 37.44  TENURE OF EMPLOYMENT.



   The tenure of a person holding a position of employment under the Civil
Service Act shall be only during good behavior.



(Prior Code, § 12-305)  (Ord. 1800, passed 4-7-1986)



§ 37.45  CAUSES FOR DISCIPLINARY ACTION.



   Any person may be removed or discharged, suspended with or without pay,
demoted, reduced in rank, or deprived of vacation, benefits, compensation, or
other privileges, except pension benefits, for any of the following reasons:



   (A)   Incompetency, inefficiency, or inattention to or dereliction
of duty;



   (B)   Dishonesty, prejudicial conduct, immoral conduct,
insubordination, discourteous treatment of the public or a fellow employee,
any act of omission or commission tending to injure the public service, any
willful failure on the part of the employee to properly conduct himself or
herself, or any willful violation of the Civil Service Act or the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant to such act;



   (C)   Mental or physical unfitness for the position which the
employee holds;



   (D)   Drunkenness or the use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics, or
any other habit-forming drug, liquid or preparation to such an extent that
the use interferes with the efficiency or mental or physical fitness of the
employee or precludes the employee from properly performing the functions and
duties of his or her position;



   (E)   Conviction of a felony or misdemeanor tending to injure the
employee's ability to effectively perform the duties of his or her position;
or



   (F)   Any other act or failure to act which, in the judgment of the
Civil Service Commissioners is sufficient to justify the offender to be an
unsuitable and unfit person to be employed in the public service.



(Prior Code, § 12-305)  (Ord. 1800, passed 4-7-1986)



§ 37.46  PROCEDURE FOR DISCIPLINARY ACTION.



   (A)   No employee in the Civil Service who shall have been
permanently appointed or inducted into Civil Service shall be removed,
suspended, demoted, or discharged, except for cause, and then only upon the
written accusation of the Police or Fire Chief, City Manager or any citizen
or taxpayer.



   (B)   (1)   The written accusation shall set forth the alleged
misconduct, charges, or grounds for investigation against the employee. The
written accusation shall be filed by the complainant with the Secretary of
the Commission who shall cause a copy of the written accusation to be
delivered promptly after the filing:



         (a)   To the Police or Fire Chief;



         (b)   To the City Manager; and



         (c)   To the employee personally or by certified mail,
addressed to the employee at the residence address of the employee shown in
the personnel records.



      (2)   The Secretary of the Commission shall cause a return
showing the delivery or mailing to be executed and filed in the Secretary's
office.



   (C)   The Police or Fire Chief shall have the authority to
immediately suspend, with pay, an employee against whom a written accusation
has been filed, pending the confirmation of the suspension, or a decision of
the City Manager to reinstate the employee, remove, demote, discharge, or
suspend the employee with or without pay. In the case of an accusation
against the Police or Fire Chief, the City Manager shall have the authority
to immediately suspend, with pay, until the investigation provided for by
this section is completed and pending the final decision of the City Manager.



   (D)   (1)   Prior to the decision of the City Manager to
reinstate the employee or remove, demote, discharge, or suspend the employee,
with or without pay, the Police or Fire Chief shall, if not already
completed, within a reasonable period of time investigate the alleged
misconduct, charges, or grounds against the employee and explain the basis of
the employer's evidence to the employee and provide the employee an
opportunity to present his or her version of the circumstances which resulted
in the filing of the written accusation. If the Chief's investigation reveals
other misconduct, charges, or grounds against the employee, the additionally
discovered alleged misconduct, charges, or grounds may be considered by
filing an amendment to the written accusation with the Secretary of the
Commission who shall cause a copy of such amended accusation to be delivered
promptly after the filing:



         (a)   To the Police or Fire Chief;



         (b)   To the City Manager; and



         (c)   To the employee personally or by certified mail,
addressed to the employee at the residence address of the employee shown in
the personnel records.



      (2)   The Secretary of the Commission shall cause a return
showing the delivery or mailing to be executed and filed in the Secretary's
office.



   (E)   In the event of a written complaint against the Police or Fire
Chief, the City Manager shall promptly appoint a special investigator to
investigate the alleged misconduct, charges, or grounds and, in the place of
the Police or Fire Chief, file the recommendation of the City Manager as
required herein. All of the other procedures under the Act shall apply to
discipline proceedings involving the Police or Fire Chief. Upon completion of
this procedure within a reasonable period of time, the Police or Fire Chief
shall recommend in writing to the City Manager that the alleged misconduct,
charges, or grounds set forth in the written accusation be deemed:



      (1)   To be without merit;



      (2)   To not warrant disciplinary action;



      (3)   To warrant disciplinary action less severe than removal,
demotion, discharge, or suspension, with or without pay, such as an oral or
written reprimand; or



      (4)   To warrant removal, demotion, discharge, or suspension,
with or without pay.



   (F)   Within seven calendar days after receiving the written
recommendation of the Police or Fire Chief, the City Manager shall decide to
accept the recommendation of the Police or Fire Chief, or shall decide that
the alleged misconduct, charges, or grounds for investigation against the
employee set forth in the written accusation be deemed:



      (1)   To be without merit;



      (2)   To not warrant disciplinary action;



      (3)   To warrant disciplinary action less severe than removal,
demotion, discharge, or suspension, with or without pay, such as an oral or
written reprimand; or



      (4)   To warrant removal, demotion, discharge or suspension,
with or without pay.



   (G)   The City Manager shall file a copy of his or her decision
within seven calendar days after receiving the written recommendation of the
Police or Fire Chief, with the Secretary of the Commission who shall cause a
copy of such decision to be filed promptly after the filing:



      (1)   To the Police or Fire Chief; and



      (2)   To the employee, personally or by certified mail,
addressed to the employee at the residence address of the employee shown in
the personnel records.



   (H)   The Secretary of the Commission shall cause a return showing
the delivery or mailing to be executed and filed in the Secretary's office.



   (I)   Any employee so removed, suspended, demoted or discharged may,
within ten calendar days after receiving written notice of the City Manager's
decision, file a written demand for an investigation and public hearing by
the Civil Service Commission. The employee shall file the request for the
hearing with the Secretary of the Commission and simultaneously send a copy
of the request to the City Manager. The failure to file such a request with
the Secretary of the Commission within ten calendar days of receipt of notice
of the action by the City Manager shall constitute a waiver of the employee's
right to review by the Civil Service Commission and the City Manager's
decision shall become final.



   (J)   Within three calendar days of receipt of the employee's notice
of appeal, the City Manager shall cause to be mailed or delivered the
following notice to the employee and Secretary of the Civil Service
Commission:



      (1)   A statement of the charge(s);



      (2)   The names of the witnesses who will be called on behalf
of the City Manager and a general statement of the nature of their testimony;
and



      (3)   Copies of the documents to be introduced.



   (K)   Within seven calendar days after the filing of the written
demand for an investigation and public hearing by the Commission, the
employee shall mail or deliver the following upon the City Manager and the
Commission;



      (1)   A response to the statement of the charge(s);



      (2)   The names of witnesses who will be called on behalf of
the employee and a general statement of the nature of their testimony; and



      (3)   Copies of the documents to be introduced.



   (L)   Upon receipt of a written demand, the Commission shall conduct
an investigation. The Commission may be represented in the investigation and
public hearing by the City Attorney if authorized by the City Manager. If the
City Attorney does not represent the Commission, the Commission may be
represented by special counsel appointed by the Commission for any such
investigation and hearing. The investigation shall consist solely of a review
of the written submissions of the City Manager and employee to determine
whether any individuals or documents should be subpoenaed by the Commission
for the subsequent public hearing before the Commission ultimately to
determine whether the City Manager acted in good faith for cause. GOOD FAITH
FOR CAUSE shall mean that the action was not arbitrary or capricious and was
not made for political or religious reasons.



   (M)   The Commission shall schedule a public hearing no less than
ten  nor more than twenty calendar days from the date of filing of the
employee's written demand for an investigation. The Commission shall notify
the City Manager and employee in writing at least two calendar days prior to
the date of the hearing, of the date, time and place of hearing.



   (N)   The City Manager shall be permitted to appear in person and by
counsel and to present his or her case. The City Manager may present evidence
by testimony and documents and shall be permitted to cross-examine the
employee's witnesses. At the hearing, the employee shall be permitted to
appear in person and by counsel and to present his or her defense. The
employee may present evidence by testimony and documents and shall be
permitted to cross-examine the witnesses called by the City Manager.



   (O)   The Commission may affirm the action taken by the City Manager
if the action is supported by a preponderance of the evidence. If the
Commission finds that the removal, suspension, demotion, or discharge was
made for political or religious reasons or was not made in good faith for
cause, it shall order the immediate reinstatement or reemployment of the
employee in the position or employment from which the employee was removed,
suspended, demoted, or discharged, which reinstatement shall, if the
Commission in its discretion so provides, be retroactive and entitle the
person to compensation and restoration of benefits and privileges from the
time of the removal, suspension, demotion, or discharge.



   (P)   After the hearing, in lieu of affirming the removal,
suspension, demotion, or discharge, the Commission may modify the order of
removal, suspension, demotion, or discharge by directing a suspension, with
or without pay, for a given period and the subsequent restoration to duty or
demotion in position or pay. No later than ten calendar days after the
hearing, the Commission shall certify its findings in writing to the employee
and the City Manager who shall enforce them.



(Prior Code, § 12-305)  (Ord. 1800, passed 4-7-1986)



§ 37.47  REDUCTION IN FORCE.



   (A)   The Mayor and City Manager, in establishing a reduction in
force policy, shall consider recommendations from the Civil Service
Commission, but shall not be bound by them. Prior to the adoption of a
reduction in force policy, the Mayor and City Manager shall, after giving
reasonable notice to each police officer and firefighter by first-class mail,
conduct a public hearing.



   (B)   The Mayor and City Manager shall adopt a reduction in force
policy which shall consider factors including but not limited to:



      (1)   The multiple job skills recently or currently being
performed by the employee;



      (2)   The knowledge, skills, and abilities of the employee;



      (3)   The performance appraisal of the employee, including any
recent or pending disciplinary actions involving the employee;



      (4)   The employment policies and staffing needs of the
department together with contracts, ordinances and statutes related thereto;



      (5)   Required federal, state, or local certifications or
licenses; and



      (6)   Seniority.



(Prior Code, § 12-306)  (Ord. 1800, passed 4-7-1986)



§ 37.48  LEAVE OF ABSENCE.



   A leave of absence with or without pay may be granted by the City
Manager to any person under civil service. The City Manager shall give notice
of the leave to the Commission. All appointments for temporary employment
resulting from the leaves of absence shall be made from the eligible lists,
if any, of the civil service.



(Prior Code, § 12-307)  (Ord. 1800, passed 4-7-1986)



CIVIL SERVICE RETIREMENT COMMITTEES



§ 37.60  POLICE OFFICERS' RETIREMENT COMMITTEE.



   (A)   There shall be and is hereby created a Police Officers'
Retirement Committee to supervise the general operation of the retirement
system established pursuant to Neb. RS 16-1001 to 16-1019. The Committee
shall consist of six members. Members of the Committee shall serve for terms
of four years. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the term by a
person with the same representation as his or her predecessor. Four members
shall be selected from the police force of the city. Election of police
officers shall be by secret ballot. Results of the election shall be verified
by the City Clerk. Two members shall be designated by the City Council. The
City Manager and the Director of Finance of the city shall be and hereby are
appointed to the Committee and shall be deemed to be reappointed each
four-year term hereafter unless otherwise specified by the City Council.
Members who are not participants in the retirement system shall have a
general knowledge of retirement plans. Members of the retirement committee
shall receive no salary and shall not be compensated for expenses.



   (B)   The funds of the retirement system established pursuant to
Neb. RS 16-1001 to 16-1019 shall be invested under the general direction of
the Police Officers' Retirement Committee. All funds of the retirement system
shall be invested pursuant to the policies established by the state
Investment Council.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Police Officers' Retirement
Committee to:



      (1)   Elect a Chairperson and other officers as the Committee
deems appropriate;



      (2)   Provide each employee a summary of plan eligibility
requirements and benefit provisions;



      (3)   Provide, within 30 days after a request is made by a
participant, a statement describing the amount of benefits the participant is
eligible to receive; and



      (4)   Make available for review an annual report of the
system's operations describing both:



         (a)   The amount of contributions to the system from
both employee and employer sources; and



         (b)   An identification of the total assets of the
retirement system.



      (5)   Beginning December 31, 1998, and each December 31
thereafter, the Chairperson of the Retirement Committee shall file with the
Public Employees Retirement Board an annual report on each retirement plan
established pursuant to § 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code and
administered by a retirement system established pursuant to Neb. RS 16-1001
to 16-1019, and shall submit copies of the report to the members of the state
Retirement Systems Committee of the legislature. The annual report shall be
in a form prescribed by the Public Employees Retirement Board and shall
contain the following information for each retirement plan:



         (a)   The number of persons participating in the
retirement plan;



         (b)   The contribution rates of participants in the plan;



         (c)   Plan assets and liabilities;



         (d)   The names and positions of persons administering
the plan;



         (e)   The names and positions of persons investing plan
assets;



         (f)   The form and nature of investments;



         (g)   For each defined contribution plan, a full
description of investment policies and options available to plan
participants; and



         (h)   For each defined benefit plan, the levels of
benefits of participants in the plan, the number of members who are eligible
for a benefit, and the total present value of the members' benefits, as well
as the funding sources which will pay for the benefits. If a plan contains no
current active participants, the Chairperson may file in place of the report
a statement with the Public Employees Retirement Board indicating the number
of retirees still drawing benefits, and the sources and amount of funding for
the benefits.



      (6)   Beginning December 31, 1998, and every four years
thereafter, if the retirement plan is a defined benefit plan, the Retirement
Committee shall cause to be prepared a quadrennial report and the Chairperson
shall file the same with the Public Employees Retirement Board and submit to
the members of the Nebraska Retirement Systems Committee of the legislature a
copy of the report. The report shall consist of a full actuarial analysis of
each retirement plan administered by a system established pursuant to Neb. RS
16-1001 to 16-1019. The analysis shall be prepared by an independent private
organization or public entity employing actuaries who are members in good
standing of the American Academy of Actuaries, and which organization or
entity has demonstrated expertise to perform this type of analysis and is
unrelated to any organization offering investment advice or which provides
investment management services to the retirement plan.



(Ord. 2005-2738, passed 7-7-2005)



§ 37.61  FIREFIGHTERS' RETIREMENT COMMITTEE.



   (A)   There shall be and is hereby created a Firefighters'
Retirement Committee to supervise the general operation of the retirement
system established pursuant to Neb. RS 16-1020 to 16-1042. The Firefighters'
Retirement Committee shall consist of six members. Members of the committee
shall serve for terms of four years. Vacancies shall be filled for the
remainder of the term by a person with the same representation as his or her
predecessor. Four members shall be selected by the active paid firefighters
excluding firefighters identified in Neb. RS 16-1039. Election of
firefighters shall be by secret ballot. Results of the election shall be
verified by the City Clerk. Two members shall be designated by the City
Council. The City Manager and Director of Finance of the city shall be and
hereby are appointed to the Firefighters' Retirement Committee and shall be
deemed to be reappointed each four-year term hereafter unless otherwise
specified by the City Council. Members who are not participants in the
retirement system shall have a general knowledge of retirement plans. Members
of the Firefighters' Retirement Committee shall, subject to approval by the
City Council, be reimbursed for their actual and necessary expenses incurred
in carrying out their duties.



   (B)   The funds in the Firefighters' Retirement System Fund shall be
invested by the Firefighters' Retirement Committee. The city, subject to the
approval of the Retirement Committee, shall contract with a funding agent or
agents to hold or invest the assets of the retirement system and to provide
for the benefits provided by Neb. RS 16-1020 to 16-1042. The Firefighters'
Retirement Committee, subject to the approval of the city, may also select an
investment manager. The city, subject to approval of the Retirement
Committee, may contract with investment managers registered under the
Investment Advisers Act of 1940 to invest, reinvest, and otherwise manage the
portion of the assets of the retirement system as may be assigned by the city
or Firefighters' Retirement Committee. All funds of the retirement system
established pursuant to Neb. RS 16-1020 to 16-1042 shall be invested pursuant
to the policies established by the state Investment Council. The
Firefighters' Retirement Committee shall establish an investment plan which
allows each member of the retirement system to allocate all contributions to
his or her employee account and, if he or she commenced his or her employment
after January 1, 1984, his or her employer account to the various investment
options or combinations of investment options described in the plan. Each
firefighter shall have the option of investing his or her employee account
and, if he or she commenced his or her employment after January 1, 1984, his
or her employer account in any proportion, including full allocation, in any
investment option offered by the plan. Upon the direction of the city,
firefighters employed on January 1, 1984, may have the option to allocate
their employer account to various investment options or combinations of
investment options in any proportion, including full allocation, in any
investment option offered by the plan. Each firefighter shall be given a
summary of the investment plan and a detailed current description of each
investment option prior to making or revising his or her allocation.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Firefighters' Retirement Committee
to:



      (1)   Elect a Chairperson, a Vice-Chairperson, and other
officers as the Committee deems appropriate;



      (2)   Hold regular quarterly meetings and special meetings
upon the call of the Chairperson;



      (3)   Conduct meetings pursuant to the Open Meetings Act;



      (4)   Provide each employee a summary of plan eligibility
requirements and benefit provisions and investment options available to the
employees;



      (5)   Provide, within 30 days after a request is made by a
participant, a statement describing the amount of benefits the participant is
eligible to receive;



      (6)   Make available for review an annual report of the
system's operations describing both:



         (a)   The amount of contributions to the system from
both employee and employer sources; and



         (b)   An identification of the total assets of the
retirement system.



      (7)   Beginning December 31, 1998, and each December 31
thereafter, the Chairperson of the Retirement Committee shall file with the
Public Employees Retirement Board an annual report on each retirement plan
established pursuant to § 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code and
administered by a retirement system established pursuant to Neb. RS 16-1020
to 16-1042 and shall submit copies of the report to the members of the state
Retirement Systems Committee of the legislature. The annual report shall be
in a form prescribed by the Public Employees' Retirement Board and shall
contain the following information for each retirement plan:



         (a)   The number of persons participating in the
retirement plan;



         (b)   The contribution rates of participants in the plan;



         (c)   Plan assets and liabilities;



         (d)   The names and positions of persons administering
the plan;



         (e)   The names and positions of persons investing plan
assets;



         (f)   The form and nature of investments;



         (g)   For each defined contribution plan, a full
description of investment policies and options available to plan
participants; and



         (h)   For each defined benefit plan, the levels of
benefits of participants in the plan, the number of members who are eligible
for a benefit, and the total present value of the members' benefits, as well
as the funding sources which will pay for the benefits. If a plan contains no
current active participants, the Chairperson may file in place of the report
a statement with the Public Employees Retirement Board indicating the number
of retirees still drawing benefits, and the sources and amount of funding for
the benefits.



      (8)   Beginning December 31, 1998, and every four years
thereafter, if the retirement plan is a defined benefit plan, the Retirement
Committee shall cause to be prepared a quadrennial report and the Chairperson
shall file the same with the Public Employees Retirement Board and submit to
the members of the state Retirement Systems Committee of the legislature a
copy of the report. The report shall consist of a full actuarial analysis of
each retirement plan administered by a system established pursuant to Neb. RS
16-1020 to 161042. The analysis shall be prepared by an independent private
organization or public entity employing actuaries who are members in good
standing of the American Academy of Actuaries, and which organization or
entity has demonstrated expertise to perform this type of analysis and is
unrelated to any organization offering investment advice or which provides
investment management services to the retirement plan.



(Ord. 2005-2738, passed 7-7-2005)



CHAPTER 38:  FEE SCHEDULE



Appendix



   A.   Building use fees



   B.   City cemetery fees



   C.   Delinquent bill charges



   D.   Sewer Department rates and fees



   E.   Water Department rates and fees



   F.   Solid waste collection fees



   G.   Parking fees and fines



   H.   Animal impoundment and boarding fees



   I.   Fireworks fees



   J.   Occupation taxes



   K.   Oil and natural gas fees



   L.   Alarm systems fees



   M.   Building regulation and zoning application fees



   N.   Hangar rental fees



APPENDIX A:  BUILDING USE FEES



   (A)   City Auditorium rental.  The following rental charges have
been set by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of § 54.046
of this code.



      (1)   Main floor balcony and stage.  The following schedule
of charges shall include the use of the main floor, balcony and stage of the
city auditorium.



         (a)   Non-profit groups and governmental subdivisions: 
$50 per day.



         (b)   All others:  $150 per day.



         (c)   Rehearsals, set up and clean up:



            1.   Non-profit groups and governmental
subdivisions:  $25 per day.



            2.   All others:  $75 each.



         (d)   City provided extras:



            1.   Set up:  $50.



            2.   Spotlight:  $10 per day.



            3.   Flood lights:  $10 per day.



         (e)   Deposits:  No part of this division (A) shall be
construed to mean various deposits may be added to another deposit. In the
event an activity falls in the category of two or more deposits, as defined
by this division (A), the deposit requiring the greater dollar amount shall
be charged and all other eligible deposit(s) shall be waived.



         (f)   Damage deposit:  There shall be a $100 damage
deposit required for ALL activities, regardless of the size or scope of the
activity, for the use of the main floor, balcony and stage of the Auditorium.
The deposit shall be in the form of cash or a cashier's check, payable to the
city. The deposit shall remain in full force and effect and be held by the
City Clerk for a period of 72 hours after the scheduled event. If property
damage occurs, the city may use the deposit to pay the costs of repairs.



         (g)   Clean up/damage deposit (events with food and
drink):  There shall be a $400 clean up/damage deposit required of any
group, regardless of the size or scope of the activity, when food or
beverages are to be provided. This $400 deposit will be returned to the
renter if the group provides persons to "clean up" to the satisfaction of the
City Manager or the City Clerk after the event. If the renter does not clean
up after the event, an amount sufficient to compensate the city's janitorial
staff for the cleaning up of the Auditorium shall be deducted from the
cleanup deposit before it is returned. The deposit shall be in the form of
cash or a cashier's check payable to the City of McCook. The cleanup/damage
deposit shall remain in full force and effect and be held by the City Clerk
for a period of 72 hours after the scheduled event. If property damage
occurs, the city may use the deposit to pay the costs of repairs.



         (h)   Clean up/damage deposit (events serving alcohol): 



            1.   There shall be a $800 clean up/damage deposit
required of any group, regardless of the size or scope of the activity, when
alcoholic beverages are to be provided. This $800 deposit will be returned to
the renter if the group provides persons to "clean up" to the satisfaction of
the City Manager or the City Clerk after the event. If the renter does not
clean up after the event, an amount sufficient to compensate the city's
janitorial staff for the cleaning up of the Auditorium shall be deducted from
the cleanup deposit before it is returned. The deposit shall be in the form
of cash or a cashier's check payable to the City of McCook. The clean
up/damage deposit shall remain in full force and effect and be held by the
City Clerk for a period of 72 hours after the scheduled event. If property
damage occurs, the city may use the deposit to pay the costs of repairs.



            2.   For all events serving alcohol, the lessee
shall be required to provide at least two security guards to be on duty the
entire time that the event is going on. The names and ages of the security
guards must be provided to the Chief of Police at least five days prior to
the event and are subject to the approval of the Chief of Police.



         (i)   Dances:



            1.   The hours shall be from 8:00 p.m. to 12:00
midnight on any given day. The Auditorium shall not be open for the setting
up of any equipment until 6:00 p.m. on the day of the event.



            2.   Dances will be assessed the same clean
up/damage deposit as required for an event serving alcohol.



            3.   For all dances, the lessee shall be required
to provide at least three security guards to be on duty the entire time that
the dance is going on. The names and ages of the security guards must be
provided to the Chief of Police at least five days prior to the event and are
subject to the approval of the Chief of Police.



   (B)   Council chambers.  The City Council Chambers may be leased at
the following rates.



      (1)   Governmental subdivisions:  No charge.



      (2)   All others:



 

8:00 a.m.-12:00 noon
 
$15


1:00 p.m.-5:00 p.m.
 
$15


5:00 p.m.-midnight
 
$25


All day
 
$35



 



      (3)   The Council Chambers shall not be available for leasing
on any Monday after 4:00 p.m.



   (C)   Heritage Senior Center.  The following rental charges have
been set by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of § 35.061
of this code.



      (1)   The following schedule of charges shall be for the use
of the dining room of the Heritage Senior Center.



         (a)   Governmental subdivision.



            1.   Single use:  No charge.



            2.   Consecutive use:  $100 per day



         (b)   Non-profit groups:  $100 per day



         (c)   All others:  $100 per day.



         (d)   Damage deposit:  There shall be a $100 dollar
damage deposit  required for ALL activities, regardless of the size or scope
of the activity, for the use of the Senior Center. The deposit shall be in
the form of cash or a cashier's check, payable to the city. The deposit shall
remain in full force and effect and be held by the Senior Services Director
for a period of 72 hours after the scheduled event. If property damage
occurs, the city may use the deposit to pay the costs of repairs.



         (e)   Clean up deposit:  There shall be a $200 clean up
deposit required of any group, regardless of the size or scope of the
activity, when food or beverages are to be provided. This $200 deposit will
be returned to the renter if the group provides persons to clean up to the
satisfaction of the Senior Services Director, after the event. If the renter
does not clean up after the event, an amount sufficient to compensate the
city's janitorial staff for the cleaning up of the room shall be deducted
from the clean up deposit before it is returned. The deposit shall be in the
form of cash or a cashier's check payable to the city. The clean up deposit
shall remain in full force and effect and be held by the Senior Services
Director for a period of 72 hours after the scheduled event.



      (2)   The following schedule of charges shall be for the use
of the divided meeting room of the Heritage Senior Center.



         (a)   Meeting room only:  $50 per day.



         (b)   Non-profit groups:  $50 per day.



         (c)   Damage deposit:  There shall be a $50 damage
deposit required for ALL activities, regardless of the size or scope of the
activity, for the use of the Senior Center. The deposit shall be in the form
of cash or a cashier's check, payable to the city. The deposit shall remain
in full force and effect and be held by the Senior Services Director for a
period of 72 hours after the scheduled event. If property damage occurs, the
city may use the deposit to pay the costs of repairs.



         (d)   Clean up deposit:  There shall be a $200 clean up
deposit required of any group, regardless of the size or scope of the
activity, when food or beverages are to be provided. This $200 deposit will
be returned to the renter if the group provides persons to clean up to the
satisfaction of the Senior Services Director, after the event. If the renter
does not clean up after the event, an amount sufficient to compensate the
city's janitorial staff for the cleaning up of the room shall be deducted
from the clean up deposit before it is returned. The deposit shall be in the
form of cash or a cashier's check payable to the city. The clean up deposit
shall remain in full force and effect and be held by the Senior Services
Director for a period of 72 hours after the scheduled event.



   (3)   In addition to the above basic charges, there shall be charges
for extras as follows.



      (a)   Dances:



         1.   All dances will be charged a fee of $100 for a
4-hour period. The hours shall be from 8:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight on any
given day. The Senior Center shall not be open for the setting up of any
equipment until 6:00 p.m. on the day of the event.



         2.   The lessee of the Senior Center for any dance shall
be required to post a damage deposit in the form of cash or a cashier's
check, payable to the city, with the Senior Services Director in the amount
of $300, which will protect the city against property damages. The deposit
will be held by the Senior Services Director for a period of 72 hours after
the scheduled event. If property damage occurs, the city may use the deposit
to pay the costs of repairs.



         3.   For all dances, the lessee shall be required to
provide at least three security guards to be on duty the entire time that the
dance is going on. The names and ages of the security guards must be provided
to the Senior Services Director at least five days prior to the dance and are
subject to the approval of the City Manager and the Chief of Police.



(Ord. 1679, passed 4-4-1983; Ord. 1765, passed 12-4-1984)  (Res. 91-07,
passed 1-6-1992; Res. 93-10, passed 11-1-1993; Res. 2007-20, passed
9-17-2007; Ord. 2010-2837, 5-3-2010)



APPENDIX B:  CITY CEMETERY FEES



   (A)   For the purpose of this appendix, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      CITY RESIDENT.  Any person, spouse or blood relative who at the
time of death was residing within the corporate city limits (excluding
hospitals, nursing homes, retirement homes or hotels/motels) or can provide
evidence of residing within the corporate city limits for a period of greater
than one year.



   (B)   Lot/niche prices.  The following prices for cemetery lots and
columbarium niches have been set by the City Council in accordance with the
provisions of § 54.084 of this code. The prices of all cemetery lots and
columbarium niches shall be governed by the following schedule unless
hereafter changed by the City Council.



      (1)   Adult grave space for city resident:  $300;



      (2)   Adult grave space for non-resident:  $400;



      (3)   Infant grave space for city resident:  $75;



      (4)   Infant grave space for non-resident:  $150;



      (5)   Columbarium niche for city resident:  $650*; and



      (6)   Columbarium niche for non-resident:  $750*.



   *Price includes niche, engraving, initial opening and closing.
Subsequent openings and closings are $25.



   (C)   Price for opening graves.  The following prices for the
opening of graves have been set by the City Council with the provisions of §
54.087 of this code. The prices charged for opening graves shall be governed
by the following schedule.



      (1)   (a)   City resident.  For the opening of a grave for
the burial of a person who at the time of death was eight years of age or
older:  $300; and



         (b)   Non-resident.  For the opening of a grave for the
burial of a person who at the time of death was eight years of age or
older:  $325.



      (2)   For the opening of a grave for the burial of a person
who at the time of death was under eight years of age:  $75.



      (3)   For the opening of a grave for the burial of the
cremated remains of a person:  $90.



      (4)   Removal of grave from one location to another in the
cemetery:  Actual labor and costs.



      (5)   For Saturday interments for a city resident or
non-resident:  add $100.



      (6)   There will be no Sunday and/or designated city holiday
interments.



   (D)   Monument and marker permit fee.  The fee required for the
obtaining of a monument or marker permit has been set by the City Council in
accordance with the provisions of § 54.115 of this code.



      (1)   Monument/marker permit fee:  $30 per space.



   (E)   Perpetual care fee.  The following fee to be charged for
perpetual care has been set by the City Council in accordance with the
provisions of § 54.088 of this code. A one time fee for each space or niche
purchased will provide for eternal care of the cemeteries:  $150.



(Ord. 1778, passed 9-3-1985; Ord. 1933, passed 9-4-1990; Ord. 2002-2630,
passed 7-1-2002)



APPENDIX C:  DELINQUENT BILL CHARGES.



   All bills of the city for utility service charges shall be delinquent
22 days after the date of the bill. All utility service charges not paid
within that time shall incur an administrative handling charge of $15 to
reflect the additional costs incurred by the city in rebilling, sending
delinquency notices, and otherwise handling the unpaid account. Payment of
this handling charge will be required to avoid disconnection, and before
reconnection.



APPENDIX D:  SEWER DEPARTMENT RATES AND FEES



   (A)   Sewer connection permit.   The fee required for the
obtaining of a sewer connection permit as required by § 51.020 is hereby set
at $500.



   (B)   Sewer connection fees.  The fees required by § 51.022
pertaining to sewer connections are hereby set as follows:



      (1)   Where connection to an existing Y or T branch is
requested, a fee of $5 will be required for inspection of the connection by
the city Building Inspector in order to verify that the connection has been
made properly.



      (2)   In those cases where entrance into a sewer main is
requested by installation of a T or Y saddle by the city, a fee of $45 will
be charged to defray the cost of materials, equipment, and labor involved in
installing the connection.



      (3)   In certain cases, where a larger than normal service
connection is required, a fee will be charged to the applicant based on labor
and material charges involved in installing the sewer connection.



      (4)   All fees required by this section are due and payable in
advance of the inspection or sewer connection.



   (C)   Private sewage disposal permit.  The fee required by §
51.055 pertaining to private sewage disposal permits is hereby set at $10.



   (D)   Sewer use charges.



      (1)   Residential.  The residential sewer use charges
provided for in § 51.072 are as follows:



         (a)   Minimum charges of $15.279 per month based on the
first 333 cubic feet of water usage.



         (b)   $3.299 per 100 cubic feet for everything over 333
cubic feet water usage.



      (2)   Commercial.  The commercial sewer use charges provided
for in § 51.072 are as follows:



         (a)   Minimum charge of $22.259 per month based on the
first 333 cubic feet of water usage.



         (b)   $3.299 per 100 cubic feet for everything over 333
cubic feet water usage.



      (3)   Sewage disposal at the treatment plant.  All sewage
that is transported by truck or any vehicle to the plant for disposal will be
assessed a fee of $.10 per gallon.



(Ord. 1662, passed 9-20-1981; Ord. 1704, passed 9-6-1983; Ord. 92-2112,
passed 9-8-1992; Ord. 99-2531, passed 9-7-1999; Ord. 2003-2678, passed
9-2-2003; Ord. 2008-2813, passed 9-2-2008; Ord. 2010-2840, passed 9-20-2010;
Ord. 2011-2864, passed 9-6-2011; Ord. 2016-2941, passed 10-17-2016)



APPENDIX E:  WATER DEPARTMENT RATES AND FEES



   (A)   Water rates.  The following rates for water have been set by
the City Council in accordance with the provisions of § 52.01 of this code.



      (1)   Customers within the city.  The rates for water used by
customers within the city shall be as follows:



         (a)   1.716 dollars per 100 cubic feet for the first
5,000 cubic feet of water used.



         (b)   1.271 dollars per 100 cubic feet for all water
used over 5,000 cubic feet.



         (c)   In addition to the above, a ready-to-serve fee of
$16.82 per month shall be charged to each customer.



      (2)   Customers outside the city.  The amount to be charged
for water used by customers outside the city boundaries shall be computed by
taking the water consumption of the customer times the rates fixed in
division (A) (1) above, plus additional charges as specified therein, and
multiplying the final sum times the factor of one and one-half to get the
total charge to be billed the customer.



   (B)   Deposit.  The deposit required of customers of the City Water
Department as set out in § 52.03 is hereby set at $150.



   (C)   Reconnection fee.  Any account disconnected for nonpayment of
water charges shall be required to pay a $50 reconnection charge during
regular business hours and a $75 reconnection charge outside of normal
business hours, including weekends and holidays, in addition to all unpaid
water charges and sewer charges, monthly service charges, and sales tax,
before the service will be reconnected. Reconnection will require the full
deposit required hereunder. If the deposit has been refunded or depleted, it
must be restored to the full amount required herein before service will be
reconnected.



   (D)   Insufficient fund fees.  There shall be assessed a fee of $20
against the account of any customer who issues or passes a check, draft or
similar signed order for the payment of money when there are insufficient
funds in or credit with the drawee for the payment of the check, draft or
order in full upon presentation. This fee shall be assessed for each
occurrence.



   (E)   Customer request for disconnect or reconnect.  Any account
disconnected or reconnected at the customers request shall be required to pay
a $35 fee for the service provided during normal business hours. The City
Manager has the authority to waive fee if it is of an emergency nature to
preserve property.



   (F)   New account charge.  Any new account connected upon the
customer request shall be required to pay a $5 new account fee.



(Ord. 1661, passed 9-20-1982; Ord. 1703, passed 9-6-1983; Ord. 1825, passed
7-20-1987; Ord. 96-2371, passed 9-16-1996; Ord. 2001-2602, passed 1-21-2002;
Ord. 2004-2715, passed 12-6-2004; Ord. 2007-2799, passed 9-17-2007; Ord.
2011-2863, passed 9-6-2011; Ord. 2012-2882, passed 9-17-2012)



APPENDIX F:  SOLID WASTE COLLECTION FEES



   (A)   In order to pay for the cost of operation and maintenance of
the Transfer Station and to provide funds necessary for equipment and future
land acquisition, the following fees are hereby established in compliance
with § 55.02.



      (1)   All residents of the corporate limits of the city shall
not be charged a fee at the Transfer Station for any refuse or debris that is
generated on their own residential property and personally delivered to the
Transfer Station. Except as provided in division (E) of this Appendix,
residents and nonresidents delivering construction, demolition, or remodeling
and all persons hauling for hire, commercial, contract for commercial tree
trimmers, lawn caretakers, or nonresidents of the city shall be assessed
according to the solid waste collection schedule of fees.



      (2)   The city will operate in accordance with state
Department of Environmental Quality's Title 132 Integrated Solid Waste
Management regulations.



   (B)   (1)   Solid waste collection schedule of fees.  See
Chapter 38, Fee Schedule.



 

Household/commercial waste-no yard waste
 
$.031000 per pound ($62.00 per ton)
minimum charge-$5


Yard waste only
 
$.011675 per pound ($23.35 per ton)
minimum charge-$5


Non solid waste scale fee
 
$ 5



 



      (2)   Solid waste collection payment due.  Payment of the
above fees is due and payable upon entrance into the Transfer Station.



   (C)   Fee for U-Load-It Clean-Up program.  A fee of $50 for the use
of a city truck is hereby provided for use of the city's U-Load-It Clean-Up
program. Scale fees will be charged according to the above schedule as
outlined in Sections A and B of this Appendix.



   (D)   Solid waste collection/disposal fee.



      (1)   All residential units within the corporate city limits
shall be charged a monthly solid waste collection/disposal fee of $20.50 and
a monthly recycling fee of $2.



      (2)   All residential units within the corporate city limits
may request an additional container to be used for yard waste only, and shall
be charged a monthly disposal fee of $5 per month, effective April 1, 2002,
during those months that yard waste is banned from landfills.



      (3)   Tracts of land or buildings containing three or more
residential units may choose alternative solid waste collection/disposal
methods upon the approval of the City Manager.



      (4)   All solid waste collection/disposal fees prescribed by
this Appendix shall be a lien upon the premises and real estate for which the
service is supplied and if not paid when due the charge shall be certified to
the City Treasurer and may be recovered by the city in an action at law and
it may be certified to the County Clerk and assessed against the real estate
and premises served and be collected and returned in the same manner as other
city taxes are certified, assessed, collected, and returned.



      (5)   Bills for solid waste collection/disposal fees charged
pursuant to this Appendix shall be rendered at the same time that bills are
rendered for water service, and all collection/disposal fees levied by this
Appendix which are not paid at or before water service charges are required
to be paid, shall be deemed delinquent and the water service of the user may
be discontinued.



   (E)   Waiver of fees for affordable housing projects.  Disposal
fees shall be waived for the deposit at the Transfer Station of solid waste
that was generated by the remodeling or clean up of a residential dwelling
located within the corporate limits of the city using funds provided by the
state Department of Economic Development pursuant to the state Affordable
Housing Trust Fund Act.



   (F)   Partial waiver of fees for demolition of certain residential
dwelling units.  Thirty percent of the total disposal fees shall be waived
for the deposit at the Transfer Station of solid waste generated by the
demolition of a residential dwelling unit located within the corporate limits
of the city along with an accessory detached garage if the requirements set
forth in this division are satisfied. In order to qualify for the partial
waiver of disposal fees, the owner of the dwelling unit must apply in writing
to the Building Inspector of the city for a partial waiver of fees at least
14 days prior to commencement of the demolition work and must establish to
the satisfaction of the Building Inspector that:



      (1)   The owner received written confirmation from the
Building Inspector that the demolition qualifies for a partial waiver of
disposal fees prior to commencing with the demolition work;



      (2)   All asbestos and other hazardous materials were abated
and removed from the structures prior to commencing demolition work in
accordance with all federal, state, and local laws;



      (3)   The dwelling unit has been abandoned for a continuous
period of at least 12 months prior to submission of the application for
partial waiver of fees as shown by water, gas, or electric utility records;



      (4)   The dwelling unit is so old, dilapidated, or has become
so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary, or otherwise unfit
for human habitation or occupancy that it is unreasonable to repair the
structure;



      (5)   There is no reimbursement for disposal fees available
from any other source such as homeowner's insurance; and



      (6)   The owner obtained a permit authorizing the demolition
from the city prior to commencement of the demolition work.



(Ord. 1796, passed 4-21-1986; Ord. 1932, passed 8-20-1990; Ord. 92-2100,
passed 7-20-1992; Ord. 93-2174, passed 8-2-1993; Ord. 94-2238, passed
7-27-1994; Ord. 95-2329, passed 8-7-1995; Ord. 96-2370, passed 9-16-1996;
Ord. 97-2386, passed 10-20-1997; Ord. 2001-2582, passed 10-1-2001; Ord.
2004-2713, passed 12-6-2004; Ord. 2008-2812, passed 9-2-2008; Ord. 2009-2829,
passed 9-8-2009; Ord. 2016-2939, passed 9-19-2016)



APPENDIX G:  PARKING FEES AND FINES



   (A)   Parking fine.  Pursuant to § 72.51 of this code, the penalty
for all violations of all parking regulations, zones, and ordinances, where
specific penalties are not otherwise set out, shall be $25 for each violation.



   (B)   Parking penalty.  The minimum penalty for a violation of the
provisions of Chapter 74, Schedule I of this code of ordinances shall be $25.
The maximum penalty shall be as provided in Neb. RS 18-1741.02.



(Res. 1179, passed 3-22-1983; Res. 1248, passed 10-7-1985; Res. 95-07, passed
4-3-1995)



APPENDIX H:  ANIMAL IMPOUNDMENT AND BOARDING FEES



   Pursuant to § 90.28 of this code, the following fees have been set for
dogs impounded within the City Animal Shelter.



      (1)   Shelter impoundment fee:  $15



      (2)   Daily board fee (per day):  $3



(Ord. 1768, passed 2-4-1985)



APPENDIX I:  FIREWORKS FEES



   Permit fee:  Pay to the city the sum of $75, which sum shall be
retained by the city as an occupation tax.



APPENDIX J:  OCCUPATION TAXES



   Occupation tax amounts.  For the purpose of raising revenue an
occupation tax is hereby levied on the following businesses.



   (A)   Alcoholic beverage licenses.



      (1)   Table.



 

Licensee
 
License Amount




Manufacturer alcohol and spirits, per year
 
$1,000


Manufacturer beer, per year
 
Same amount as license


Manufacturer wine, per year
 
$250


Liquor distributor, per year
 
$750


Beer distributor, per year
 
$500


Class A-retailer of beer on sale only, per year
 
$100


Class B-retailer of beer off sale only, per year
 
$50


Class D-retailer of alcoholic liquor (beer, wine and distilled spirits) off
sale only, per year
 
$300


Class I-retailer (except nonprofit corporations without full-time employees)
of alcoholic liquor (beer, wine & distilled spirits) on sale only, per year
 
$200


Class 1-retailer of alcoholic liquor (beer, wine & distilled spirits) on sale
only by nonprofit corporations without full-time employees, per year
 
$ 20


Railroad
 
$100


Boating
 
$50


1 non-beverage user
 
$5


2 non-beverage user
 
$25


3 non-beverage user
 
$50


4 non-beverage user
 
$100


5 non-beverage user
 
$250


Airline
 
$100




 



      (2)   Applicants for new and renewal retail liquor licenses
shall be limited to premises where the principal business conducted is the
retail sale of alcoholic beverages, a restaurant, a hotel, or providing
recreational goods and services.



      (3)   The occupation tax year for Alcoholic Beverage Licenses
shall begin on May 1 of each year and end on the following April 30. No
occupation tax in an amount less than the sum provided for in this section
for a yearly period shall be accepted, regardless of the time when the
application for the license has been made, except that the occupation taxes
shall be prorated on a quarterly basis as of the date of issuance:



         (a)   When there is a purchase of an existing licensed
business and a new license of the same class is issued; or



         (b)   Upon the issuance of a new license for a location
which has not been previously licensed.



   (B)   Commercial garbage collectors:  $25 per year.



(Ord. 1683, passed 3-21-1983; Ord. 1818, passed 2-16-1987; Ord. 1918, passed
7-16-1990; Ord. 95-2336, passed 10-2-1995; Ord. 2006-2785, passed 12-18-2006;
Ord. 2016-2935, passed 8-1-2016)



APPENDIX K:  OIL AND NATURAL GAS FEES



   (A)   Before commencing the drilling of an oil and gas well within
the city, the person, firm, or corporation desiring to drill a well shall
first obtain a permit from the city. The applicant shall, at the time of
making application for the drilling permit, deposit with the City Clerk a fee
of $200, payable to the city. If the city grants the application, the fee
shall be retained by the city. If a license is not granted, the city shall
retain the sum of $100 for administrative expenses and the balance of the fee
shall be returned to the applicant.



   (B)   No permit or renewal permit shall be assigned or transferred
to any other person, firm, or corporation unless a notice of transfer is
filed with the city, giving the name of the assignee. A fee of $100 shall
accompany the notice of transfer. No transfer shall be complete until all of
the requirements of this section shall have been met.



   (D)   All persons, firms, or corporations having obtained a license
for oil or gas wells within the city, which wells are producing oil or gas,
shall pay an annual license renewal fee of $200 per each well which continues
to produce oil or gas at any time during the calendar year. The fee shall be
due and payable by December 31 of each year and shall be paid to the City
Clerk.



APPENDIX L:  ALARM SYSTEMS FEES



   (A)   The application for an alarm system permit shall be
accompanied by a connection fee in the amount of $100.



   (B)   The owner or lessee shall pay annually, in addition, a
maintenance and monitoring fee in the amount of $90.



   (C)   If the alarm component is an automatic dialer to be
interconnected to a telephone in a city department, or is a system which
provides for a third party relay of calls to such a telephone, the owner or
lessee shall pay to the city department annually a monitoring fee in the
amount of $50, and a fee in such amount shall be paid, in the first instance,
with the application for a permit.



 

Excessive Number of False Alarms


Number of False Alarms
 
Amount (Each Occurrence)


5-10
 
$25


11-20
 
$50


21 and more
 
$100



 



APPENDIX M:  BUILDING REGULATION AND ZONING APPLICATION FEES



   MINIMUM FEE - ALL PERMITS.  $15



   (A)   Building permit fee.



      (1)   New construction.



         (a)   Residential (one and two family dwelling units): 
$.07 per square foot (Includes all levels, basements & garages)



         (b)   Commercial:  $.10 per square foot (Hotels, motels
and multi-family dwelling units, includes all levels, basements and garages)



      (2)   Alterations.



         (a)   $0-$1,000 cost  $15; $2.50 per $1,000 additional
cost.



         (b)   Review by City Engineer of drainage report,
sanitary sewage disposal report, and water distribution report:  $100
minimum fee, or the City Engineer's standard hourly rate plus 10%, whichever
is greater. Additional fees will be assessed should the project require
extraordinary review by the City Engineer.



   (B)   Plumbing permit fee:  $2.50 per opening.



   (C)   Mechanical permit fee: $2.50 per item.



   NOTE:   Failure to obtain permit and pay fee prior to commencement
of work for Items A, B and C above shall result in the charge of a penalty of
$100 for each permit required.



   (D)   Building moving permit:  $100.



   (E)   Mobile home set down permit:  $25.



   (F)   Demolition permit: $15 for $0 - $1,000; $2.50 per $1,000
additional cost.



   (G)   Sign permit: $15 for $0 - $1,000; $2.50 per $1,000 additional
cost.



   (H)   Contractors license fee: $75 new applicant; $25 renewal.



   (I)   Zoning applications.



      (1)   Zoning classification:  $75.



      (2)   Zoning special exception:  $75.



      (3)   Zoning variance:  $25.



      (4)   Subdivisions.



         (a)   Preliminary plat:  $500.



         (b)   Final plat.  $200 per lot, with a maximum of
$5,500.



      (5)   Lot split:  $75.



      (6)   Mobile home park:  $100.



      (7)   Right of way vacation:  $50.00 plus $.01 per square
foot.



      (8)   Right of way closing:  $25.



(Ord. 95-2335, passed 10-2-1995; Ord. 2000-2544, passed 2-21-2000; Ord.
2004-2688, passed 3-15-2004; Ord. 2004-2703, passed 8-16-2004; Ord.
2016-2936, passed 8-15-2016)



APPENDIX N:  HANGAR RENTAL FEES



   The rates for hangar rental at the City of McCook, Nebraska, McCook Ben
Nelson Regional Airport shall be as follows:



   (A)   Individual T-Hangars: $36 per month.



   (B)   Standard Hangar with sliding doors: $45 per month.



   (C)   Hangar used for storage purposes: $65 per month.



   (D)   Large 40' x 60' Hangar: $64 per month.



   (E)   Small Hangar with Bi-Fold doors: $79 per month.



   (F)   Large Hangar with Bi-Fold doors: $93 per month.



   (G)   Six Plex Hangar (per unit): $125 per month.



(Res. 2016-17, passed 10-17-2016)



TITLE V: DEPARTMENTS



      Chapter




         50.   MUNICIPAL UTILITIES





         51.   SEWER REGULATIONS





         52.   WATER





         53.   POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS





         54.   CITY PARKS AND PROPERTY





         55.   SOLID WASTE





         56.   SENIOR SERVICES




CHAPTER 50:  MUNICIPAL UTILITIES



Section



   50.01   Delinquent bill charges



   50.02   Procedure for discontinuance of service



 



   50.99   Penalty



§ 50.01  DELINQUENT BILL CHARGES.



   All bills of the city for utility service charges shall be delinquent
22 days after the date of the bill. All utility service charges not paid
within that time shall incur an administrative handling charge as set forth
in Chapter 38, Fee Schedule to reflect the additional costs incurred by the
city in rebilling, sending delinquency notices, and otherwise handling the
unpaid account. Payment of this handling charge will be required to avoid
disconnection, and before reconnection.



(Prior Code, § 3-1103)  (Ord. 2006-2782, passed 11-6-2006)



§ 50.02  PROCEDURE FOR DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.



   (A)   The city shall have the right to discontinue services and
remove its properties if the charges for the services are not paid within ten
days after the date that the same becomes delinquent. Before any termination,
the city shall give notice by first class mail or in person to any domestic
subscriber whose service is proposed to be terminated. If notice is given by
first class mail, the mail shall be conspicuously marked as to its
importance. Service shall not be discontinued for at least seven days after
notice is sent or given, weekends and holidays excluded. As to any subscriber
who has previously been identified as a welfare recipient to the utility by
the Department of Health and Human Services, the notice shall be by certified
mail and notice of the proposed termination shall be given to the Department.



   (B)   The notice of proposed termination shall contain the following
information:



      (1)   The reason for the proposed disconnection;



      (2)   A  statement of the intention to disconnect unless the
domestic subscriber either pays the bill or reaches an agreement with the
city regarding payment of the bill;



      (3)   The date upon which service will be disconnected if the
domestic subscriber does not take appropriate action;



      (4)   The name, address, and telephone number of the employee
or department to whom the domestic subscriber may address an inquiry or
complaint;



      (5)   The domestic subscriber's right, prior to the
disconnection date, to request a conference regarding any dispute over the
proposed disconnection;



      (6)   A statement that the Department may not disconnect
service pending the conclusion of the conference;



      (7)   A statement to the effect that disconnection may be
postponed or prevented upon presentation of a duly licensed physician's
certificate which shall certify that the domestic subscriber or resident
within the subscriber's household has an existing illness or handicap which
would cause the subscriber or resident to suffer an immediate and serious
health hazard by the disconnection of the utility's service to that
household. The certificate shall be filed within five days of receiving
notice under this section and will prevent the disconnection of the utility's
services for a period of 30 days from the filing. Only one postponement of
disconnection shall be allowed under this division for each incidence of
non-payment of any due account;



      (8)   The cost that will be borne by the domestic subscriber
for restoration of service;



      (9)   A statement that the domestic subscriber may arrange
with the city for an installment payment plan;



      (10)   A statement to the effect that those domestic
subscribers who are welfare recipients may qualify for assistance in payment
of their utility bills and that they should contact their case workers in
that regard; and



      (11)   Any additional information may be included so long as
it is not inconsistent with this section.



   (C)   A domestic subscriber may dispute the proposed discontinuance
of service by notifying the city with a written statement that sets forth the
reasons for the dispute and the relief requested. If a conference has been
requested, or a dispute statement has been filed by the subscriber, the
conference shall be held before the utility may discontinue services.



   (D)   This section shall not apply to any disconnections or
interruptions of services made necessary by the city for reasons of repair or
maintenance or to protect the health or safety of the domestic subscriber or
of the general public.



(Prior Code, § 3-1102)  (Ord. 2001-2599, passed 1-21-2002)



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   The city may bring a civil action for damages against any
person who commits, authorizes, solicits, aids, abets, or attempts 
bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized metering when the act results in
damages to a municipal utility. The city may bring a civil action for damages
pursuant to this section against any person receiving the benefit of utility
service through means of bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized metering.



   (B)   In any civil action brought pursuant to this section, the city
shall be entitled, upon proof of willful or intentional bypassing, tampering,
or unauthorized metering, to recover as damages:



      (1)   The amount of actual damage or loss if the amount of the
damage or loss is susceptible of reasonable calculation; or



      (2)   Liquidated damages of $750 if the amount of actual
damage or loss is not susceptible of reasonable calculation.



   (C)   In addition to damage or loss under division (B) above, the
city may recover all reasonable expenses and costs incurred on account of the
bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized metering including, but not limited to,
disconnection, reconnection, service calls, equipment, costs of the suit, and
reasonable attorneys' fees in cases within the scope of Neb. RS 25-1801.



   (D)   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a tenant or
occupant at any premises where bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized metering
is proven to exist caused or had knowledge of the bypassing, tampering, or
unauthorized metering if the tenant or occupant:



      (1)   Had access to the part of the utility supply system on
the premises where the bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized metering is
proven to exist; and



      (2)   Was responsible or partially responsible for payment,
either directly or indirectly, to the utility or to any other person for
utility services to the premises.



   (E)   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a customer at any
premises where bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized metering is proven to
exist caused or had knowledge of the bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized
metering if the customer controlled access to the part of the utility supply
system on the premises where the bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized
metering was proven to exist.



   (F)   The remedies provided by this section shall be deemed to be
supplemental and additional to powers conferred by existing laws and the
remedies provided in this section are in addition to and not in limitation of
any other civil or criminal statutory or common law remedies.



(Prior Code, § 3-1101)  (Ord. 1710, passed 10-3-1983)



CHAPTER 51:  SEWER REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   51.001   Definitions



   51.002   Superintendent duties



   51.003   Inspections



   51.004   Excavations



   51.005   Unauthorized openings; protection against deposits



   51.006   Unlawful deposits of waste



Sewer Connections



   51.020   Permit required



   51.021   Plumber liability



   51.022   Connection methods; fee



Discharge



   51.035   Prohibited water discharges



   51.036   Discharge permit requirements



   51.037   Hazardous or damaging discharge



   51.038   Superintendent's remedies for hazardous or damaging
discharge



   51.039   Grease, oil and sand interceptors



   51.040   Maintenance of preliminary treatment and flow equalizing
facilities



   51.041   Control manhole or sampling station



Private Sewage Disposal



   51.055   Allowance restricted; permit required; fee



   51.056   Permit not effective until inspection



   51.057   Specifications



Charges



   51.070   Use charge purpose



   51.071   Consumer classification



   51.072   Determination of use charge



   51.073   Purpose and calculation of use surcharge



   51.074   Toxic waste charge increase



   51.075   Charge for service outside city limit



Billing and Collection



   51.090   General provision



   51.091   Use of water meters; determination if meter unavailable



   51.092   Charges as lien; collection of delinquent charges



   51.093   Billing cycle; discontinuance of service for non-payment



   51.094   Annual review of charges by classification; biannual notice
of sewage treatment apportionment



   51.095   Disposition of collected charge funds



   51.096   Special charges



Repair and Replacement



   51.110   Duty of property owner



 



   51.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 51.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD).  The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five days at 20ºC, expressed in milligrams per liter.



   BUILDING DRAIN.  That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, or other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the
inner face of the building wall.



   BUILDING SEWER.  The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.



   CITY.  The City of McCook, Nebraska.



   COMBINED SEWER.  A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.



   GARBAGE.  Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of
produce.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES.  The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



   MUNICIPALITY.  The City of McCook, Nebraska.



   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or
other body of surface or groundwater.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation, or group.



   pH.  The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE.  The wastes from the preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (one
and twenty-seven one hundredths centimeters) in any dimension.



   PUBLIC SEWER.  A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.



   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.



   SEWAGE.  A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments together with
such ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present.



   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT.  Any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating sewage.



   SEWAGE WORKS.  All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and
disposing of sewage.



   SEWER.  A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



   SLUG.  Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.



   STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER.  A drain or sewer which carries storm and
surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other
than unpolluted cooling water.



   SUPERINTENDENT.  The Superintendent of Sewage Works and/or Water
Pollution Control of the City of McCook, or his or her authorized deputy,
agent, or representative.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  Solids that either float on the surface of, or are
in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and are removable by
laboratory filtering.



   WATERCOURSE.  A channel in which a flow of water occurs either
continuously or intermittently.



(Prior Code, § 3-201)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 51.002  SUPERINTENDENT DUTIES.



   The construction, repair, and maintenance of all sewers, drains and
cesspools, whether public or private, shall be under the supervision and
control of the Superintendent. The Office of the Superintendent may be
combined with any other office at any time by resolution of the City Council
and the person performing such duties shall receive the compensation as the
Council shall fix at the time the combination is made. Whenever the terms
SEWER SUPERVISOR or SEWER INSPECTOR are used in this chapter, they shall be
understood to mean the Superintendent.



(Prior Code, § 3-203)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 51.003  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the
city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, and testing systems in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter. The Superintendent or his or her representatives shall have
no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical,
chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries, beyond that
point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the
sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.



(Prior Code, § 3-218)



   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties
referred to in division (A) above, the Superintendent or duly authorized
employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the
premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless
for injury or death to the municipal employees and the city shall indemnify
the company against loss or damage to its property by municipal employees and
against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling
operation, except as may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to
maintain safe conditions.



(Prior Code, § 3-219)



   (C)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the
city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the municipality holds a duly
negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of
the sewage works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if
any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the
duly negotiated easements pertaining to the private property involved.



(Prior Code, § 3-220)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 51.004  EXCAVATIONS.



   (A)   Excavations in the streets and alleys for sewer purposes shall
be made in a manner as to impede travel as little as possible, and the City
Manager may determine and limit the time the excavation may remain open and
when unnecessarily delayed, the City Manager may direct the number of workers
be increased to hasten the work to an extent as the City Manager may deem
necessary. Warning lights shall be maintained upon all unfinished work at
night, from dark to sunrise, and sufficient barricades shall be in place at
all times until the work is completed. The refilling of trenches shall be
well and thoroughly done in uniform layers of not exceeding six inches per
lift and mechanically packed or tamped to a compaction of 95% as directed by
the Sewer Inspector, or other agents of the city entrusted with the
supervision of the work, so as to replace all excavation materials and leave
the surface in as good of condition as found before the commencement of the
work.



   (B)   Excavation and backfill must comply with local requirements
and specific requirements of the state. Special attention is directed to
Title 29 Labor, Part 1518, Safety and Health Regulations for Constructions,
and detailed requirements of Subpart P, Excavations, Trenching and Shoring.



   (C)   Excavate for appurtenant structures to provide at least 12
inches (minimum) clear distance between outer surface and embankment and in
full observation of safety rules. Trenches shall be excavated only to a width
sufficient to provide a free working space on each side of the pipe at the
bottom for backfilling and compacting around the pipe. Widths shall comply
with state requirements for trenching, provide adequate working space and
pipe clearances for proper pipe installation, jointing, and embedment.
Cutting trench banks on slopes to reduce earth load to prevent sliding and
caving will be permitted only in areas where the increased trench width will
not interfere with surface features, encroach on right-of-way limits, or
require additional removal and replacements. Slopes shall not extend lower
than one foot above the top of the pipe.



   (D)   Trenches greater than five feet in depth shall be properly
braced and shored, and the party excavating shall be liable for all damages
arising by reason of any neglect in this respect.



   (E)   Trenches shall be sheeted, shored and braced as necessary to
comply with all applicable laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
Compliance with this requirement shall rest solely with the contractor. The
sheeting, shoring and bracing shall not be removed until backfilling has
progressed to  a stage that no damage to utilities or structures will result
from its removal.



   (F)   Brace trenches running near walls or columns to prevent any
settlement or other disturbance of walls or columns. Make trench excavation
that runs parallel to footing bottom with maximum slope of one to one.



   (G)   The contractor shall contain his or her work to public street
and highway rights-of-way and easements or shall be liable to damage claims
for any damages resulting from his or her operation.



(Prior Code, § 3-204)  (Ord. 2002-2627, passed 8-5-2002)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-232



§ 51.005  UNAUTHORIZED OPENINGS; PROTECTION AGAINST DEPOSITS.



   No person except the Utilities Director, Sewer Superintendent, Plumbing
Inspector, Chief of Police or a duly authorized assistant shall open or
uncover any manhole, flush tank, or private connection with the public sewer
without the permission of the Sewer Inspector or Plumbing Inspector, nor
shall any person leave openings in sewers without ample protection against
admission of dirt, rubbish, storm water, or other matter tending to block the
flow of sewage or overload the sewer line.



(Prior Code, § 3-206)  (Ord. 2004-2707, passed 9-20-2004; Ord. 2002-2613,
passed 9-2-2008)  Penalty, see § 51.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 51.006  UNLAWFUL DEPOSITS OF WASTE.



   No person shall deposit any wash or waste water, liquid or solid filth,
or sewage, or permit this matter to be deposited upon any premises owned,
occupied or under his or her control, or upon any ground, or in any hold or
vault in the ground, except a cesspool, septic tank or sanitary privy which
has been approved by the Superintendent.



(Prior Code, § 3-207)  Penalty, see § 51.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



SEWER CONNECTIONS



§ 51.020  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be
unlawful for any person to connect to any sewer line in the city without
first having obtained a permit to do so from the City Clerk. The City Clerk
shall issue a sewer connection permit upon a certificate from the Building
Inspector that the applicant therefor has complied with all applicable
building regulations and upon receipt from the applicant of the sum set by
ordinance of the Council for each permit. The amount is set out herein in
Chapter 38, Fee Schedule.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to property
located within a duly established sewer improvement district of the city.



   (C)   In the event that the property for which a sewer connection
fee has been paid shall at a later date be included in a duly established
sewer improvement district, the amount paid as a connection fee shall be
credited upon any assessments that may be levied by reason of the improvement
district.



(Prior Code, § 3-202)  Penalty, see § 51.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 51.021  PLUMBER LIABILITY.



   The licensed plumber who connects with the public sewers shall be held
responsible on his or her bond for any damages he or she may cause to the
sewers, public streets, or alleys. He or she shall restore the streets or
alleys to the satisfaction of the Sewer Inspector, and make good any
settlement of ground or pavement caused by the excavations made by him or her
under, or by virtue of, any permit issued under the provisions of this
chapter. In the event of ground settling within one year after being
refilled, the Sewer Inspector shall have the right and it shall be his or her
duty to demand and require the restoration of the same by the party who made
the excavation.



(Prior Code, § 3-205)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-246



§ 51.022  CONNECTION METHODS; FEE.



   (A)   No connection to a sewer main or lateral of the city shall be
made prior to obtaining a permit from the city offices. The permit shall
specify the property to be served by the sewer tap, the size of the service
line to be laid into the sewer main, the method of entrance into the sewer
main either through an existing Y or T branch or by sewer saddle installed by
the city, and other information as may be deemed necessary and appropriate.



   (B)   Connections to the main sewer or laterals shall be made into
an existing Y or T branch installed at the time of the construction of the
sewer line, or into a Y or T saddle installed by the city. No other entrances
shall be made into the city sewer main other than those specified above. In
those cases where an entrance into the sewer main is requested which requires
the installation of a saddle by the city, the applicant will apply at least
24 hours in advance of the time that the tap is required, and shall comply
with all procedures required by the City Building Inspector in order to
accomplish the sewer tap, including the excavation of dirt down to the sewer
line, the clearing of dirt around the sewer at the point where the tap is
requested, and the proper back-filling around the sewer main after the saddle
has been installed. All excavations in the public streets or alleys shall be
properly back-filled and compacted and the original surface restored as
nearly as possible to the satisfaction of the City Building Inspector.



   (C)   Wherever practicable, every building shall have an independent
connection with a public or private sewer.



   (D)   Connection fees shall be set by ordinance and on file in the
office of the City Clerk. The fees are set out herein in Chapter 38, Fee
Schedule.



(Prior Code, § 3-208)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



DISCHARGE



§ 51.035  PROHIBITED WATER DISCHARGES.



   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
including interior and exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling
water, or unpolluted industrial waters to any sanitary sewer.



   (B)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or
storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process water may be discharged, on
approval of the Superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural
outlet.



(Prior Code, § 3-210)  Penalty, see § 51.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 51.036  DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   Any person permitting the discharge of water into a storm sewer or
watercourse shall comply with all federal, state, and municipal rules and
regulations. The person shall either obtain the required permits from the
state Department of Environmental Quality or connect to the city's sanitary
sewer system as provided in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 3-210.01)  (Ord. 2002-2628, passed 7-1-2002)



§ 51.037  HAZARDOUS OR DAMAGING DISCHARGE.



   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the
following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears
likely in the opinion of the Superintendent that the wastes can harm either
the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on
the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property
or constitute a nuisance. In forming his or her opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the Superintendent will give consideration to
such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of
the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, and
other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:



      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150°F (65°C);



      (2)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas;



      (3)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous
solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage
treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two 
mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer;



      (4)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works;



      (5)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such
size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, unground garbage, whole blood,
paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk
containers and the like, either whole or ground by garbage grinders;



      (6)   Any waters or wastes having the following shall be
subject to the review of the Superintendent:



         (a)   A five-day BOD greater than 250 parts per million
by weight;



         (b)   Containing more than 300 parts per million by
weight of suspended solids; or



         (c)   Having an average daily flow greater than 2% of
the average sewage flow of the city.



      (7)   (a)   Where necessary in the opinion of the
Superintendent, the owner shall provide, at his or her expense, such
preliminary treatment as may be necessary to:



            1.   Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 250
parts per million by weight;



            2.   Reduce the suspended solids to 300 parts per
million by weight; or



            3.   Control the quantities and rates of discharge
of such waters or wastes.



         (b)   Plans, specifications, and other pertinent
information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be
submitted for the approval of the Superintendent and no construction of 
facilities shall be commenced until the approvals are obtained in writing.



      (8)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/1 or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°
and 150°F (0 and 65°C).



      (9)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor
three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Superintendent;



      (10)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron
pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;



      (11)   Any water or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper,
zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an
excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any material received in
the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the Superintendent for these materials;



      (12)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste-
or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of state, federal, or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for the discharge to the receiving waters;



      (13)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of a half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;



      (14)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;



      (15)   Materials which exert or cause:



         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids
(such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime
residues) or of dissolved solids, (such as but not limited to, sodium
chloride or sodium sulfate);



         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited
to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);



         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the
sewage treatment works; and/or



         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting slugs as defined herein.



      (16)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to the degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies
having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.



(Prior Code, § 3-211)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 51.038  SUPERINTENDENT'S REMEDIES FOR HAZARDOUS OR DAMAGING  DISCHARGE.



   (A)   (1)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are
proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 51.037, and which
in the judgment of the Superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the
sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life to constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent
may:



         (a)   Reject the wastes;



         (b)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition
for discharge to the public sewers;



         (c)   Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and/or



         (d)   Require payment to cover the added cost of
handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer
charges under the provisions of this section.



      (2)   If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent,
and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.



(Prior Code, § 3-212)



   (B)   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the municipality and
any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the municipality for treatment, subject to
payment therefor, by the industrial concern.



(Prior Code, § 3-217)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 51.039  GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.



   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients, except that interceptors shall
not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Superintendent
and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.



(Prior Code, § 3-213)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 51.040  MAINTENANCE OF PRELIMINARY TREATMENT AND FLOW EQUALIZING
FACILITIES.



   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.



(Prior Code, § 3-214)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 51.041  CONTROL MANHOLE OR SAMPLING STATION.



   (A)   When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole together with the necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes. The manhole, when required, shall be accessible
and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans
approved by the Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner
at his or her expense, and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe
and accessible at all times.



(Prior Code, § 3-215)



   (B)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics
of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter, shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon
suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the event no special
manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the
nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The
particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of
all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses
are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are
determined from periodic grab samples.)



(Prior Code, § 3-216)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL



§ 51.055  ALLOWANCE RESTRICTED; PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.



   (A)   (1)   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not
available within 300 feet, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   At such a time as a public sewer becomes available to a
property served by a private waste-water disposal system, a direct connection
shall be made to the public sewer within 60 days and the private sewage
system shall be abandoned in accordance with the state Department of
Environmental Quality Title 124, Rules and Regulations for the Design,
Operation and Maintenance of Septic Tank Systems. Any septic tanks,
cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be
cleaned of sludge and filled with tamped sand or earth by the owner.



(Prior Code, § 3-221)



   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage
disposal system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
Superintendent. The application for the permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the municipality, which the applicant shall supplement by any
plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the
Superintendent. A permit and inspection fee, set by ordinance of the City
Council and on file in the office of the City Clerk, shall be paid to the
municipality at the time the application is filed. The fee is set out in
Chapter 38, Fee Schedule.



(Prior Code, § 3-222)  (Ord. 97-2376, passed 3-17-1997)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-246



§ 51.056  PERMIT NOT EFFECTIVE UNTIL INSPECTION.



   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent. He or she shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage
of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify
the Superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, and before
any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 24
hours of the receipt of notice by the Superintendent.



(Prior Code, § 3-223)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-246



§ 51.057  SPECIFICATIONS.



   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with the state Department of Environmental Quality Title
124, Rules and Regulations for the Design, Operation and Maintenance of
Septic Tank Systems. No septic tank shall be permitted to discharge to any
natural outlet nor be within 50 feet of any private well or within 500 feet
of any municipal well. The soil absorption system shall have a set back of
100 feet from any private well or 500 feet from any municipal well.



(Prior Code, § 3-224)  (Ord. 97-2376, passed 3-17-1997)



CHARGES



§ 51.070  USE CHARGE PURPOSE.



   The purpose of §§ 51.070 through 51.072 shall be to provide
sufficient revenue for payment of the costs relative to the city's sewage
treatment and collection facilities. Costs to be provided for include
operation and maintenance, bond retirement, and equipment replacement
reserves. All costs shall be distributed equitably to all users of the
wastewater system.



(Prior Code, § 3-225)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 51.071  CONSUMER CLASSIFICATION.



   Any person whose premises are served by the sewerage system, including
tenants of the premises connected thereto, who in any way use same or
discharge or otherwise contribute to the sewage, industrial waste, water,
night soil, or other liquids either directly or indirectly into the sewerage
system, shall hereafter be designated as USER and shall be classified as
follows.



   COMMERCIAL USER.  All other users not previously herein classified,
except concerns depositing industrial wastes.



   INDUSTRIAL USER.  Users who deposit industrial wastes into the
sewerage system including the following divisions of industries as identified
in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management
and Budget, as amended and supplemented:



      (1)   Division A.  Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing;



      (2)   Division B.  Mining;



      (3)   Division D.  Manufacturing;



      (4)   Division E.  Transportation, Communications, Electric,
Gas, and Sanitary Services; and



      (5)   Division I.  Services.



   RESIDENTIAL USER.  Users whose premises are used exclusively for
residential purposes by no more than two families.



(Prior Code, § 3-226)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 51.072  DETERMINATION OF USE CHARGES.



   (A)   Residential users served by the sewerage system shall pay the
charges provided for by ordinance of the City Council and set out in Chapter
38, Fee Schedule.  Sewer charge shall be based on water consumed annually
during the months of December, January, and February.  One-third of that
charge will be billed monthly, starting with the bill mailed on or about May
1.  In the case of multiple dwelling units or trailer courts served by a
single meter, the rate shall be the same as for residential units served by
the meter, provided the minimum charge for sewer service shall be the minimum
average charge times the number of units that have used any quantity of water
during the months of December, January, and February, or 333 cubic feet of
water usage times the number of units that have used any quantity of water
during those months, whichever is smaller.  The sewage contribution of a new
residential user either within or without the corporate limits of the city
with no established winter months water record shall be based on the regular
average charge until such time as the base contribution of sewage is
determined. Use of minimum charge for schools during summer months will be
determined by the city.



   (B)   Commercial users served by the sewage system shall pay the
charges provided by ordinance of the City Council and set out in Chapter 38,
Fee Schedule.  Sewer charge shall be based on water consumed during the
months of December, January, and February.  One-third of that charge will be
billed monthly, starting with the bill mailed on or about May 1.  In the
case of industries discharging only non-process related wastewater, the rate
shall be the same as for commercial users.  In the case of vehicle washing
facilities, the rate shall be the same as for commercial users and based on
water consumed monthly.



   (C)   (1)   Industrial users contributing process waste to the
sewerage system shall be billed monthly and charged according to the average
daily contribution of flow, suspended solids, and BOD.  The formula for
determining the total amount to be charged each industrial process waste
contributor is as follows:



     A = (1/3) C (Vu) + (1/3) C (Su) = (1/3) C (Bu)
         V      S      B



   Where      A=   Amount owed by industrial user for sewage
treatment and collection



         C=   Total sewage treatment collection expense for the
year



         Vu=   Volume of flow from industrial user (gallons)



         V=   Total volume of flow to sewer system (gallons)



         Su=   Suspended solids from industrial user (pounds)



         S=      Total suspended solids to sewer system
(pounds)



         Bu=   BOD from industrial user (pounds)



         B=   Total BOD to sewer system (pounds)



      (2)   Obtaining and analyzing sewage samples for use in
determining the industrial sewer use charge to be billed against a given
industrial user shall be the responsibility of the city and performed
according to § 51.041 of this chapter.



   (D)   All sewage that is transported by truck or any vehicle to the
plant for disposal shall pay the charges provided for by ordinance of the
City Council and set out in Chapter 38, Fee Schedule.



(Prior Code, § 3-227)  (Ord. 2001-2601, passed 1-21-2002; Ord. 2002-2620,
passed 5-20-2002; Ord. 2016-2942, passed 10-17-2016)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 51.073  PURPOSE AND CALCULATION OF USE SURCHARGE.



   (A)   If the concentration of the sewage from any user, except those
subject to industrial charges, exceeds the level of 250 mg/l BOD and 300 mg/l
suspended solids, they shall be subject to a surcharge for that portion of
the contribution which exceeds those limits. Any industrial user which
discharges an amount of flow, BOD, or suspended solids in excess of their
allocated industrial capacity as documented in letters of intent submitted to
the state Department of Environmental Control and the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency shall be subject to a surcharge for that portion of the
contribution which exceeds their allocated industrial capacity. The formula
for determining the surcharge is as follows:



   Surcharge= [BC (B)+SC (S)+PC (P)]



   BC=   Cost for plant operation and maintenance and plant equipment
replacement of a unit of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)



   B=   Concentration of BOD from a user above base level



   SC=   Cost for plant operation and maintenance and plant equipment
replacement of a unit of suspended solids



   S=   Concentration of suspended solids from a user above base level



   PC=   Cost for plant operation and maintenance and plant equipment
replacement of a unit of any pollutant



   P=   Concentration of any pollutant from a user above a base level



   (B)   If the experienced additional cost associated with high
strength wastes are not recovered by the industrial rate charges or above
surcharges, the city shall have the option to review the effect any user (all
classifications) has on the wastewater system and establish a higher rate, if
necessary, for the excessive amount of BOD, SS, or other applicable
pollutants.



   (C)   Any user who violates the limitations of this section or
discharges a contaminate that proves detrimental to the proper operation of
the sewage treatment facilities shall be liable for its proportionate share
of any and all fines and penalties assessed against the city as a result of
such violation.



(Prior Code, § 3-228)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 51.074  TOXIC WASTE CHARGE INCREASE.



   Any user which discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase
in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge from the city's treatment
works, or any user which discharges any substance which singly or by
interaction with other substances causes identifiable increases in the cost
of operation, maintenance, or replacement of the treatment works, shall pay
for the increased costs. The charge to each user shall be as determined by
the responsible plant operating personnel and approved by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 3-229)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 51.075  CHARGE FOR SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.



   For connection with and service by the municipal sewerage system, each
user outside the city shall pay a sewer use charge as prescribed in §
51.071. Connections with systems outside the corporate limits of the city may
be made only when permission therefor is granted by the city.



(Prior Code, § 3-231)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



BILLING AND COLLECTION



§ 51.090  GENERAL PROVISION.



   The sewer use charges prescribed by this chapter shall be collected at
the same time and in the same manner and by the same officers as water
charges are collected by the city.



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 51.091  USE OF WATER METERS; DETERMINATION IF METER UNAVAILABLE.



   (A)   The sewer use charges pursuant to this chapter shall be
applied separately to each individual water meter which measures water
contributing to or discharging into the city sewerage system and shall be
determined by the water meter readings for water furnished by the water works
system of the city or by privately owned water supply which may contribute to
or discharge into the sewerage system. In the case of unmetered water supply,
the quantity of water used and discharged into the sewerage system shall be
determined to the satisfaction of the City Manager at the expense of the
owner of the unmetered water supply. If the quantity of unmetered water
discharged into the sewerage system is estimated by the City Manager to be in
excess of the amount permitted to be used under the minimum charge as applied
to the user, the City Manager may require that the water supply be metered at
the expense of the owner or user thereof.



   (B)   Should any meter get out of order or repair and fail to
register properly, the user using the meter will be charged at the average
quarterly consumption as shown by the meter when in order for six  months
previous, or fraction thereof if the same has not been used that long.



(Prior Code, § 3-232)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 51.092  CHARGES AS LIEN; COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT CHARGES.



   All sewer use charges prescribed by this chapter shall be a lien upon
the premises and real estate for which the sewer service is supplied and used
and if not paid when due, the charge shall be certified to the City Treasurer
and may be recovered by the city in an action at law and it may be certified
to the County Clerk and assessed against the real estate and premises served,
and be collected and returned in the same manner as other city taxes are
certified, assessed, collected, and returned.



(Prior Code, § 3-233)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 51.093  BILLING CYCLE; DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE FOR  NON-PAYMENT.



   Bills for sewer use charges pursuant to this chapter shall be rendered
at the same time that bills are rendered for water service, and all sewer use
charges levied by this chapter which are not paid at or before water service
charges are required to be paid, shall be deemed to be delinquent and the
water service of the user may be discontinued.



(Prior Code, § 3-234)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 51.094  ANNUAL REVIEW OF CHARGES BY CLASSIFICATION; BIANNUAL NOTICE OF
SEWAGE TREATMENT APPORTIONMENT.



   (A)   The sewer use charges for all user classifications established
in this chapter shall be reviewed annually to assure equity of the sewer use
charges established herein, and revised, as necessary, to reflect actual
sewage treatment and collection costs. Each user shall be notified at least
bi-annually of that portion of the sewer use charges which are attributable
to sewage treatment.



(Prior Code, § 3-235)



   (B)   The provisions of §§ 51.070 through 51.075, and 51.090
through 51.096 do not apply to water discharged into the storm sewers.



(Prior Code, § 3-238)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 51.095  DISPOSITION OF COLLECTED CHARGE FUNDS.



   (A)   All moneys collected from sewer use charges pursuant to this
chapter shall be set aside and placed in one of three separate accounts. That
portion of the sewer use charge attributable to the operation and maintenance
of the sewage treatment and collection facilities shall be deposited in a
(non-lapsing) fund to be used only for the purpose of defraying operation and
maintenance costs of the treatment and collection facilities. Funds
transferred from other revenue sources to meet temporary shortages in the
operation and maintenance account shall be refunded following an appropriate
adjustment in the portion of the sewer use charge allocated for operation and
maintenance of the sewage treatment and collection facilities.



   (B)   A non-lapsing account shall be established to accrue funds to
provide adequate revenues to meet equipment replacement needs of the sewage
treatment plant and shall be used for no other purpose. REPLACEMENT is
defined in the Federal Regulations as "Expenditures for obtaining and
installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during
the service life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and
performance for which such works were designed and constructed." A
non-lapsing account shall be established for the deposit of funds to be used
only for the purpose of paying the interest and principal of the revenue
bonds issued on the sewage treatment facility. This and the two other
accounts shall carry over fiscal year-end balances to meet costs in the
subsequent fiscal year.



(Prior Code, § 3-236)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 51.096  SPECIAL CHARGES.



   Where, in the judgment of the City Council, special conditions surround
the use of city water to the extent that the application of the service
charges, rates or rentals as specified in this chapter would be inequitable
and unfair to either the city or the user, the Council shall establish a
special rate applying to the user. The special rates when adopted by
ordinance shall apply to all users under like circumstances.



(Prior Code, § 3-237)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT



§ 51.110  DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNER.



   (A)   The City Sewer Department may require the owner of any
property which is within the municipality and connected to the public sewers
or drains to repair or replace any connection line which serves the owner's
property and is broken, clogged or otherwise in need of repair or
replacement. The property owner's duty to repair or replace a connection line
shall include those portions upon the owner's property and those portions
upon public property or easements up to and including the point of junction
with the public main.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall give the property owner notice by
registered letter or certified mail, directed to the last-known address of
the owner or the agent of the owner, directing the repair or replacement of
the connection line. If within 30 days of mailing the notice the property
owner fails or neglects to cause the repairs or replacements to be made, the
Utilities Director may cause the work to be done and assess the cost upon the
property served by the connection.



(Neb. RS 18-1748)  (Prior Code, § 3-241)  (Ord. 1756, passed 10-1-1984)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1748



§ 51.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter
shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
the notice, permanently cease all violations. Any person who shall continue
any violation beyond the time limit provided for shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not less
than $25 and not exceeding $100 for each violation. Each 24-hour period in
which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.



(Prior Code, § 3-240)



   (B)   The city reserves the right to disconnect any sewer which has
not been properly connected according to the procedures as set out in this
chapter. In addition, any person who installs a connection into a sewer line
in a manner not provided for shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to
a fine of $100.



(Prior Code, § 3-209)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-225, 16-681



CHAPTER 52:  WATER



Section



General Provisions



   52.01   Water Department operation and funding



   52.02   Definitions



   52.03   Application for service; contract terms; deposit



   52.04   Contract non-transferrable



   52.05   Service to non-residents



   52.06   Right to inspect by Superintendent



   52.07   Water use restrictions



   52.08   Destruction of Water Department property



   52.09   Pollution of source water prohibited



   52.10   Regulations enforced by Police Department



   52.11   Limitation of city liability



   52.12   Restrictions on hydrant use



Construction



   52.25   Installation requirements



   52.26   Installation expense



   52.27   Repairs and maintenance



   52.28   Unsafe connection; backflow hazard



   52.29   Licensed plumber required



   52.30   Industrial fire mains; charge



Charges and Billing



   52.45   Fees and collections



   52.46   Payment due date



   52.47   Delinquent payment; charge as lien



   52.48   Diverting water prohibited



Water Conservation, Drought and Emergency Plan



   52.60   Purpose



   52.61   Classes of water use



   52.62   Definitions



   52.63   Water plan established



   52.64   Plan enforcement



   52.65   Emergency termination



   52.66   Permit for exemptions



 



   52.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 52.01  WATER DEPARTMENT OPERATION AND FUNDING.



   The municipality owns and operates the City Water Department through
the Utilities Director. The governing body, for the purpose of defraying the
cost of the care, management, and maintenance of the City Water Department,
may each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state
law, on the actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within
the corporate limits that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the tax
shall be known as the Water Fund and shall remain in the custody of the City
Treasurer. The Utilities Director shall have the direct management and
control of the City Water Department and shall faithfully carry out the
duties of his or her office. The Utilities Director shall have the authority
to adopt rules and regulations for the sanitary and efficient management of
the Water Department subject to the supervision and review of the City
Manager and the governing body. The governing body shall set the rates to be
charged for services rendered by ordinance and shall file a copy of the rates
in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection at any reasonable time.
The rates are also set out in Chapter 38, Fee Schedule.



(Prior Code, § 3-101)  (Ord. 2004-2707, passed 9-20-2004; Ord. 2002-2613,
passed 9-2-2008)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 19-618



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-675, 19-1305



§ 52.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MAIN.  Any pipe other than a supply or service pipe that is used for
the purpose of carrying water to, and dispersing the same in, the
municipality.



   SEPARATE PREMISE.  More than one consumer procuring water from the
same service or supply pipe. The second premise may be a separate dwelling,
apartment, building, or structure used for a separate business.



   SERVICE PIPE.  Any pipe extending from the shut-off, stop box, or curb
cock at or near the lot line to and beyond the property line of the consumer
to the location on the premise where the water is to be dispersed.



   SUPPLY PIPE.  Any pipe tapped into a main and extending from there to
a point at or near the lot line of the consumer's premise where the shut-off,
stop box, or curb cock is located.



(Prior Code, § 3-102)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 52.03  APPLICATION FOR SERVICE; CONTRACT TERMS; DEPOSIT.



   (A)   Every person or persons desiring a supply of water must make
application therefor to the Utilities Director. Water may not be supplied to
any house or private service pipe except upon the order of the Utilities
Director.



(Prior Code, § 3-103)



   (B)   (1)   From and after the date of this section, all new
water customers will be required to sign an application for service, and 
all new water customers and all water customers whose water has been shut off
by reason of delinquency of payment of the customers shall pay a deposit for
the purpose of guaranteeing the payment of current bills. The deposit shall
be an amount set by ordinance of the City Council and on file in the office
of the City Clerk. The amount is also set out in Chapter 38, Fee Schedule.



      (2)   In addition, the City Manager may demand from any
customer or prospective customer a security deposit for the purpose of
guaranteeing payment of current bills in a sum not to exceed the estimated
amount of a 90-day bill for each customer. Following a period of one year
after which the deposit has been on account with the city, if the payment
record of the customer indicates that they have had no delinquent bills for
12 consecutive months, and that no other condition exists which would require
retention of the security deposit, the deposit shall be refunded to the
customer without interest. At the time of termination of water service the
deposit shall be returned to the customer, less all outstanding obligations
for water, sewer, trash collection and recycling service due to the city. If
a water account is shut off by reason of delinquency in payment, the water
meter shall be read out and all obligations to the city for water charges
shall be deducted from the deposit on hand if a deposit exists. Deposit money
in excess of the charges, less unpaid sewer, trash collection fees, and
recycling fees, shall be returned to the customer.



(Prior Code, § 3-104)



   (C)   The municipality, through its Water Department, shall furnish
water to persons within its corporate limits whose premises abut a street or
alley in which a commercial main now is or may hereafter be laid. The
municipality may furnish water to persons within its corporate limits whose
premises do not abut a street or alley in which a municipal commercial main
is now or may hereafter be laid and may also furnish water to persons whose
premises are situated outside the corporate limits of the municipality, as
and when, according to law, the governing body may see fit to do so. The
rules, regulations, and water rates hereinafter named in this chapter, shall
be considered a part of every application hereafter made for water service
and shall be considered a part of the contract between every consumer now or
hereafter served. Without further formality, the making of application on the
part of any applicant or the use or consumption of water service by present
consumers thereof and the furnishing of water service to the consumer shall
constitute a contract between the consumer and the municipality, to which
contract both parties are bound. If the consumer shall violate any of the
provisions of the contract or any reasonable rules and regulations that the
governing body may hereafter adopt, the Utilities Director or his or her
agent may cut off or disconnect the water service from the building or
premise or place of the violation. No further connection for water service to
the building, premise, or place shall again be made save or except by order
of the Water Superintendent or his or her agent.



(Prior Code, § 3-106)



(Ord. 1891, passed 1-29-1990; Ord. 2001-2594, passed 1-21-2002)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 52.04  CONTRACT NON-TRANSFERRABLE.



   Contracts for water service are not transferable. Any person wishing to
change from one location to another shall make a new application and sign a
new contract. If any consumer shall move from the premise where service is
furnished, or if the premise is destroyed by fire or other casualty, he or
she shall at once inform the Water Superintendent who shall cause the water
service to be shut off at the  premise. If the consumer should fail to give
notice, he or she shall be charged for all water used on the  premise until
the Water Superintendent is otherwise advised of the circumstances.



(Prior Code, § 3-119)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 52.05  SERVICE TO NON-RESIDENTS.



   The Department shall not supply water service to any person outside the
corporate limits without special permission from the governing body, provided
the entire cost of laying mains, service pipe, and supply pipe shall be paid
by the consumer. Nothing herein shall be construed to obligate the
municipality to provide water service to non-residents.



(Prior Code, § 3-105)



§ 52.06  RIGHT TO INSPECT BY SUPERINTENDENT.



   The Utilities Director, or his or her duly authorized agents, shall
have free access, at any reasonable time, to all parts of each premise and
building to or in which water is delivered for the purpose of examining the
pipes, fixtures, and other portions of the system to ascertain whether there
is any disrepair or unnecessary waste of water.



(Prior Code, § 3-120)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 52.07  WATER USE RESTRICTIONS.



   Immediately upon the occurrence of a fire alarm, all persons shall
cease using water for all but domestic purposes and shall not resume other
uses until notice or permission has been given by the city. No person shall
turn the water on or off at any premises owned or controlled by him or her
without first giving the Utilities Director written notice of his or her
intention and securing written permission to do so. In case of a general
water shortage, the use of water for domestic purposes shall take precedence
over its use for all other purposes. Furthermore, the city may establish
other water use priorities beneath domestic use as it may deem necessary and
appropriate in dealing with a water shortage. Also in dealing with a water
shortage, the city may establish such rationing procedures as it may deem
necessary and appropriate in dealing with the water shortage.



(Prior Code, § 3-116)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 52.08  DESTRUCTION OF WATER DEPARTMENT PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break,
injure, or deface any building, machinery, apparatus, fixture, attachment, or
appurtenance of the City Water Department. No person may deposit anything in
a stop box or commit any act tending to obstruct or impair the intended use
of any of the above mentioned property without the written permission of the
Utilities Director.



(Prior Code, § 3-122)  Penalty, see § 52.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-246



§ 52.09  POLLUTION OF SOURCE WATER PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to pollute or attempt to pollute
any stream or source of water for the supply of the City Water Department.



(Prior Code, § 3-118)  Penalty, see § 52.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 52.10  REGULATIONS ENFORCED BY POLICE DEPARTMENT.



    It shall be the duty of the municipal police to report to the Water
Department all cases of leakage and waste in the use of water and all
violations of the municipal code relating to the Water Department. They shall
have the additional duty of enforcing the observance of all regulations.



(Prior Code, § 3-121)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-225



§ 52.11  LIMITATION OF CITY LIABILITY.



   The city shall in no manner be liable for any damages caused by the
shutting off of the supply of water from any consumer while the water system
or any part thereof is undergoing repairs, or for damages caused by the
freezing of the water main or the breaking of any pipe or service cock, or by
a shortage of water due to accident, or by circumstances over which the city
has not control or by an act of God.



(Prior Code, § 3-125)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 52.12  RESTRICTIONS ON HYDRANT USE.



   All hydrants for the purpose of extinguishing fires are hereby declared
to be public hydrants, and it shall be unlawful for any person other than
members of the City Fire Department under the orders of the Fire Chief, or
any officer in charge, or members of the Water Department, to open or attempt
to open any of the hydrants and draw water from the same, or in any manner to
interfere with the hydrants.



(Prior Code, § 3-117)  (Ord. 96-2351, passed 6-17-1996; Ord. 2001-2584,
passed 11-19-2001; Ord. 2002-2613, passed 9-2-2008)  Penalty, see § 52.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



CONSTRUCTION



§ 52.25  INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.



   In making excavations in streets, alleys, or sidewalks for the purpose
of installing pipe, or making repairs, the paving, stones, and earth must be
removed and deposited in a manner that will occasion the least inconvenience
to the public and provide for adequate drainage. No person shall leave an
excavation made in the street, alley, or sidewalk open at any time without a
barricade, and during the night, warning lights. After service pipes are
laid, the streets, alleys, and sidewalks shall be restored to good condition.
If the excavation in any street, alley, or sidewalk is left open or
unfinished for a period of 24 hours or more, the Utilities Director shall
have the duty to finish or correct the work, and all expenses so incurred
shall be charged to the consumer. All installations or repairs of pipes
require two inspections by the Utilities Director. The first inspection shall
be made when connections or repairs are completed and before the pipes are
covered. The second inspection shall be made after the dirt work is completed
and the service is restored. It shall be the customer's responsibility to
notify the Utilities Director at the time the work is ready for each
inspection. All installation shall be done under the supervision and strictly
in accordance with the rules, regulations, and specifications prescribed for
the installation by the Utilities Director, provided that the rules,
regulations, and specifications have been reviewed and approved by the
governing body.



(Prior Code, § 3-107)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 52.26  INSTALLATION EXPENSE.



   The city shall supply and pay the cost of the curb stops. The city
shall supply and the customers shall pay the cost of the water meter and
corporation cock. The city shall tap the main, install the meter and install
all fixtures up to and including the curb stop. No person other than the
Utilities Director, or his or her duly authorized agents shall tap the water
main. The customer shall pay a tap fee which shall cover the cost of all
installation done by the city. The customer shall at his or her own expense
bring water service from the curb stop and upon his or her own premise and
shall employ a licensed plumber who shall install water service to the place
of disbursement. The extension of commercial mains into unsupplied territory
with the corporate limits may be made by means of water extension districts.



(Prior Code, § 3-108)  (Ord. 2004-2707, passed 9-20-2004; Ord. 2002-2613,
passed 9-2-2008)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 52.27  REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.



   The municipality shall repair or replace, as the case may be, all
supply pipe between the commercial main and the stop box. The customer at his
or her own expense shall replace and keep in repair all service pipe from the
stop box to the place of disbursement. When leaks occur in service pipes, the
Utilities Director shall shut off water service until the leak is repaired at
the expense of the customer to the satisfaction of the Utilities Director.
All water meters shall be kept in repair by the municipality at the expense
of the municipality. When meters are worn out, they shall be replaced and
reset by the municipality at the expense of the municipality, provided that
if the customer permits or allows a water meter to be damaged, injured or
destroyed through his or her own recklessness, carelessness or neglect so
that the meter must be repaired or replaced, the municipality shall bill and
collect from the customer the cost of the meter repair or replacement in the
same manner as water rent is collected. Permitting a water meter to be
damaged or destroyed by freezing shall always be considered negligence on the
part of the customer. All meters shall be tested at the customer's request at
the expense of the customer any reasonable number of times, provided that if
the test shows the water meter to be running 2% or more fast, the expense of
such test shall be borne by the municipality. The municipality reserves the
right to test any water service meter at any time, and if the meter is found
to be beyond repair the municipality shall always have the right to place a
new meter on the customer's water service fixtures at municipal expense.
Should a customer's meter fail to register properly, the customer shall be
charged for water during the time the meter is out of repair on the basis of
the monthly consumption during the same month of the preceding year, provided
that if no basis for comparison exists, the customer shall be charged an
amount as may be reasonably fixed by the municipality. It shall be unlawful
for any person to tamper with any water meter, or by any means or device to
divert water from the service pipe so that the same shall not pass through
the meter or while passing through the meter, to cause the same to register
inaccurately.



(Prior Code, § 3-109)  (Ord. 2002-2613, passed 9-2-2008)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 52.28  UNSAFE CONNECTION; BACKFLOW HAZARD.



   (A)   No customer or other person shall cause, allow, or create any
physical connection between the municipal water distribution system and any
pipes, pumps, hydrants, tanks, steam condensate returns, engine jackets, heat
exchangers, other water supplies or any other connection whereby potentially
unsafe or contaminating materials may be discharged or drawn into the
municipal water distribution system.



   (B)   At least one time every five years, customers of the municipal
water distribution and supply system shall be required to assess and report
potential backflow and back siphonage hazards to the municipality on a form
supplied by the municipality to the customer. The customer shall take any
steps necessary for protection of public health and safety as determined by
the Utilities Director.



   (C)   The municipality will test or cause to be tested at least one
time per year backflow prevention devices equipped with test parts by a state
Department of Health Grade VI Certified Inspector, and maintain records of
the tests.  Per Title 179 NAC 22-003 Item 7.d, this does not apply to lawn
sprinkling systems, with the exception of those with provision to inject
toxic substances including lawn chemicals.



(Prior Code, § 3-127)  (Ord. 97-2377, passed 3-17-1997; Ord. 2002-2613,
passed 9-2-2008; Ord. 2010- 2835, passed 4-19-2010)



§ 52.29  LICENSED PLUMBER REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any plumber or pipefitter to do any work upon
any of the pipes or appurtenances of the system of water works, or to make
any connection with or extension of the supply pipes of any consumer taking
water from the system until the plumber or pipefitter shall have first
procured a license or permit from the municipality. All plumbing shall be
done in the manner required by the Utilities Director and Building Inspector.
The licensed plumber shall be at all times subject to the inspection and
approval of the Utilities Director and/or Building Inspector and it shall be
further unlawful to cover or conceal willfully any defective or
unsatisfactory plumbing work.



(Prior Code, § 3-123)  Penalty, see § 52.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 52.30  INDUSTRIAL FIRE MAINS; CHARGE.



   If proprietors of lumber yards, manufactories, flouring mills, halls,
stores, elevators, warehouses, hotels, or public buildings, whose
establishments are regular consumers of water from the city waterworks, wish
to lay larger pipe with hydrants and hose couplings, to be used only in case
of fire, they will be permitted to connect the hydrants with street mains at
their own expense, upon application to the Utilities Director, and under his
or her direction, and will be allowed the use of water for fire purposes
only, free of charge.



(Prior Code, § 3-124)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



CHARGES AND BILLING



§ 52.45  FEES AND COLLECTIONS.



   (A)   The governing body has the power and authority to fix the
rates to be paid by the water consumers for the use of water from the Water
Department. All fees shall be on file for public inspection at the office of
the City Clerk and are set forth in Chapter 38, Fee Schedule. No flat rates
for water service shall be quoted or allowed by the governing body. No water
service shall be furnished to any customer at a rate that is different from
other customers of the same class or type. Without respect to schedule of
rates for other customers, the governing body may enter into special
contracts with large consumers of water, but never at a rate less than the
cost of production, provided that the contract shall always provide that the
large consumer shall always pay the minimum rate for other customers and the
contract shall be made on the basis of water consumed in excess of the
minimum. A meter shall always be attached to the water service of such a
contract consumer and read monthly as in the case of other classes of water
consumers.



   (B)   Water service furnished to the other departments of the
municipality and to other governmental subdivisions of the state shall be
measured and billed for at rates as the governing body shall set from time to
time without respect to the schedule of rates on file at the office of the
City Clerk, but never at rates that do not cover the cost of providing water.
Whenever water service is supplied to more than one customer through the same
supply pipe, each customer shall pay the minimum water service charge each
month. In the event that two or more customers are supplied through the same
meter, the owner of the premise shall pay for all water consumed thereon plus
separate minimums. One bill only shall be computed for each meter.



(Ord. 2006-2786, passed 12-18-2006)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 52.46  PAYMENT DUE DATE.



   Water rents shall be due and payable on the date that the water bills
are tendered to the customer. Rents or rates for building and other special
purposes shall be payable upon demand. The owner of rented premises will in
all cases be held primarily responsible for charges for water used on
premises which are owned by the owner, whether the water was consumed by
himself or herself or others, provided that water rents at the premises are
in arrears.



(Prior Code, § 3-112)  (Ord. 2001-2596, passed 1-21-2002)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 52.47  DELINQUENT PAYMENT; CHARGE AS LIEN.



   (A)   On any premises for which water charges have not been paid
within 25 days after they have become due, the Utilities Director shall begin
the discontinuance of service process,  complying with the requirements of
§ 50.02. When the water is turned off by reason of failure to pay, the water
shall not be turned on until the customer has paid all delinquent water
charges, has paid a security deposit as prescribed in § 52.03, and in
addition thereto has paid a reconnection fee set by ordinance of the City
Council. The fee shall be on file at the office of the City Clerk and is set
out in Chapter 38, Fee Schedule.



(Prior Code, § 3-113)



   (B)   In addition to all other remedies, if a customer shall for any
reason remain indebted to the municipality for water services furnished, such
amount due, together with any rents and charges in arrears, shall be
considered a delinquent water rent which is hereby declared to be a lien upon
the real estate for which the same was used. The City Clerk shall report
regularly to the governing body a list of all unpaid accounts due for water,
together with a description of the premise upon which the same was used. Any
delinquent water charges which remain unpaid for a period of three months may
be assessed by resolution against the real estate where supplied as a special
tax assessment.



(Ord. 2001-2597, passed 1-21-2002; Ord. 2001-2598, passed 1-21-2002)



   (C)   The city shall notify in writing nonoccupying owners of
premises or their agents whenever their tenants or lessees are 60 days
delinquent in the payment of water rent.  Thereafter, if the owner of the
real estate or his or her agent within the city shall notify the Council in
writing to discontinue water service to the real estate or the occupants
thereof, it shall be the duty of the officer in charge of the Water
Department promptly to discontinue the service; and rentals for any water
furnished to the occupants of the real estate in violation of the notice
shall not be a lien thereon.



(Neb. RS 16-682)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



§ 52.48  DIVERTING WATER PROHIBITED.



   No consumer shall supply water to other families, or allow them to take
water from his or her premise, nor after water is supplied into a building
shall any person make or employ a plumber or other person to make a tap or
connection with the pipe under the premise for alteration, extension, or
attachment, without the written permission of the Utilities Director. It
shall further be unlawful for any person to tamper with any water meter or by
means of any contrivance or device to divert the water from the service pipe
so that the water will not pass through the meter or while passing through
the meter to cause the meter to register inaccurately.



(Prior Code, § 3-115)  Penalty, see 52.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-681



WATER CONSERVATION; DROUGHT AND EMERGENCY PLAN



§ 52.60  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of §§ 52.60 through 52.66 is to adopt a plan for the
declaration of a water supply watch, warning, or emergency and the
implementation of voluntary and mandatory water conservation measures
throughout the city in the event such a watch, warning, or emergency is
declared. This plan shall be named the City of McCook Water Conservation,
Drought and Emergency Contingency Plan.



(Prior Code, § 3-128)  (Ord. 2004-2689, passed 3-15-2004)



§ 52.61  CLASSES OF WATER USE.



   The following classes of water use are hereby established for users of
water on the city water system.



   CLASS 1.  Water used for outdoor watering: either public or private,
for gardens, lawns, trees, shrubs, plants, parks, golf courses, playing
fields, swimming pools, or other recreational areas; or the washing of motor
vehicles, boats, trailers, or the exterior of any building or structure.



   CLASS 2.  Water used for any commercial or industrial purpose,
including agricultural, except water actually necessary to maintain the
health and personal hygiene of bona fide employees while the employees are
engaged in the performance of their duties at their place of employment.



   CLASS 3.  Domestic usage, other than that which would be included in
either Classes 1 or 2. Water necessary only to sustain human life and the
lives of domestic pets and maintain standards of hygiene and sanitation.



(Prior Code, § 3-128.01)  (Ord. 2004-2689, passed 3-15-2004)



§ 52.62  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONSUMER.  The customer of record using water for any purpose from the
city distribution system and for which either a regular charge is made or, in
the case of coin sales, a cash charge is made at the site of delivery.



   DRAW DOWN.  The distance between the static water level and the
pumping water level.



   PLAN.  City of McCook Water Conservation, Drought and Emergency
Contingency Plan.



   PUMPING WATER LEVEL.  The level of water in a well when the pump is
pumping.



   STATIC WATER LEVEL.  The level of water in a well when the pump is not
pumping.



   TRIGGERS.  Significant events which indicate the implementation of the
different stages of the Plan.



   WASTE OF WATER.  Includes, but is not limited to:



      (1)   Permitting water to escape down a gutter, ditch, or
other surface drain;



      (2)   Failure to repair a controllable leak of water due to
defective plumbing; or



      (3)   As determined by the water system operator.



   WATER.  Water available to the city by virtue of its water rights
introduced by the city into its water distribution system including water
offered for sale at any coin-operated site.



   WATER SYSTEM CAPACITY.  For the purposes of the Plan, water system
capacity is determined by aggregate production of all wells in gallons per
minute times 60 minutes in any hour times 24 hours per day.



   WATER SYSTEM DEMAND.  Water meters on each well must be read daily.
Daily consumption is calculated by subtracting the previous day reading from
the current day and added together for each well.



(Prior Code, § 3-128.02)  (Ord. 2004-2689, passed 3-15-2004)



§ 52.63  WATER PLAN ESTABLISHED.



   In order to assure the continued supply of safe drinking water to the
citizens of the city, the City Council adopts the following plan addressing
conservation, drought and emergency contingencies. The plan is based upon
demand on the system and implements a series of stages depending upon the
severity of the demand.



   (A)   Stage I: Water Watch



      (1)   Triggers. This stage is triggered by any one of the
following conditions: When system capacity reaches four million gallons per
day for five days consecutive.



      (2)   Goals. The goals of this stage are to heighten awareness
of the public regarding water conditions and to maintain the integrity of the
water supply system.



      (3)   Education actions.



         (a)   The city may make occasional news releases to the
local media, as well as posting at City Hall, describing present conditions
and indicating the regulatory action.



         (b)   The triggers necessitating the Stage I: Water
Watch may also be made available to the news media along with an explanation
of terms.



      (4)   Management action.



         (a)   The city will ascertain that each well is
operating at peak efficiency.



         (b)   Leaks detected will be repaired within 72 hours.



         (c)   The city shall reduce Class 1 uses.



      (5)   Regulatory action. The public may be asked to
voluntarily reduce the use of water as defined in Class 1.



      (6)   Declaration of a water watch. Whenever the City Manager
or the Utilities Director finds that conditions exist as described in the
plan under Stage I: Water Watch, Triggers, they shall declare a Stage I:
Water Watch, and implement the steps outlined under this section. The
implementation declaring the existence and end of a Stage I: Water Watch
shall be effective upon issuing of news releases and posting at City Hall.



   (B)   Stage II: Water Warning.



      (1)   Triggers. This stage is triggered by any one of the
following conditions: System capacity reaches four and one-half million
gallons per day for five consecutive days.



      (2)   Goals. The goal of this stage is to reduce demand and
lighten the burden on existing water wells and the Water Treatment Plant.



      (3)   Education actions.



         (a)   The city may make weekly news releases to the
local media and by posting, describing present conditions and projecting the
outlook for the coming week.



         (b)   The triggers necessitating the Stage II: Water
Warning may also be made available to the public through news releases and
posting at City Hall along with an explanation of terms.



         (c)   Water conservation articles may be provided to the
local newspaper and posted at City Hall.



      (4)   Management actions.



         (a)   The city will continue to monitor water supplies
on a daily basis.



         (b)   Leaks shall be repaired within 72 hours or a
violation notice shall be issued.



         (c)   The city may terminate its usage of water
classified in Class 1 and Class 2.



      (5)   Regulation action.



         (a)   Water classified as Class 1 and Class 2 will be
terminated except as follows:



            1.   Outdoor water use, including lawn watering
and car washing will be restricted to before 10:00 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m.



            2.   Waste of water is strictly prohibited.



      (6)   Declaration of a water warning. Whenever the City
Manager or the Utilities Director finds that conditions exist as described in
the plan under Stage II: Water Warning, Triggers, they shall declare a Stage
II: Water Warning, and implement the steps outlined under this section. The
implementation declaring the existence and end of a Stage II; Water Warning
shall be effective upon a news release and posting at City Hall.



   (C)   Stage III: Water Emergency.



      (1)   Triggers. This stage is triggered by any one of the
following conditions:



         (a)   When system capacity has reached five million
gallons per day on two consecutive days.



         (b)   This stage may or can be implemented at anytime
because of the following reasons:



            1.   The loss of a municipal well or booster pump;



            2.   A large main break;



            3.   Loss of power due to unknown reasons;



            4.   Large fire;



            5.   Undetermined reasons specified by water
operator;



      (2)   Goals. The goals of this stage are to reduce the overall
weekly consumption and maintain the integrity of the system.



      (3)   Education actions.



         (a)   The city may make weekly news releases to the
local media and by posting, describing present conditions and projecting the
outlook for the coming week.



         (b)   The triggers necessitating the Stage III: Water
Emergency may also be made available to the public through news releases and
posting at City Hall along with an explanation of terms.



         (c)   Water conservation articles may be provided to the
local newspaper and posted.



         (d)   The city may conduct public meetings to discuss
the emergency, the status of the city water supply, and further actions which
may need to be taken.



      (4)   Management actions.



         (a)   The city water supplies shall be monitored daily.



         (b)   Leaks shall be repaired within 24 hours. This
includes private and city leaks.



         (c)   The city may seek additional emergency supplies
from other sources.



      (5)   Regulation actions.



         (a)   Uses of water in Class 1 and 2 shall be prohibited.



         (b)   Waste of water shall be prohibited.



      (6)   Declaration of a water emergency. Whenever the governing
body of the city finds that conditions exist as described in this plan under
Stage III: Water Emergency, Triggers, it shall be empowered to declare, by
resolution, that a Stage III: Water Emergency exists and implement the steps
outlined under this plan. The resolution declaring the existence of a Stage
III: Water Emergency shall be effective upon news release and/or posting at
City Hall. In the event of a system failure, or natural disaster, the City
Manager or the Utilities Director shall have the authority to declare a Stage
III: Water Emergency. Within 24 hours after the aforementioned Water
Emergency declaration, the City Council shall declare a Stage III: Water
Emergency by resolution. The City Manager or the Utilities Director shall
declare the end of a Stage III: Water Emergency.



(Prior Code, § 3-128.03)  (Ord. 2004-2716, passed 11-1-2004)



§ 52.64  PLAN ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Warning.  The City Council hereby appoints the City Manager
and the Utilities Director or their agent(s) to issue written warnings to any
consumer violating Stage II: Water Warning and Stage III: Water Emergency.
The warning shall advise the consumer that a second violation at the same
premise within a six-month period shall result in the issuance of an
administrative notice of violation.



   (B)   Administrative notice of violation.  The City Council hereby
appoints the City Manager and the Utilities Director or their agent(s) to
issue a written administrative notice of violation to any consumer violating
Stage II: Water Warning and Stage III: Water Emergency for a second time
within a six-month period. The notice shall advise the consumer that his or
her water rate to the premises shall be double for the next two months and
that a subsequent violation at the same premise within a six-month period
shall result in the water rate to the premises to be double for the next six
months. The consumer shall further be notified that he or she has a right to
appeal the issuance of the administrative notice of violation by filing a
notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten days of the issuance of the
notice. The action shall be final if no appeal is filed within the ten-day
period. The City Manager and the Utilities Director shall hear the appeal
within ten days.



(Prior Code, § 3-128.04)  (Ord. 2004-2716, passed 11-1-2004)



§ 52.65  EMERGENCY TERMINATION.



   Nothing in this plan shall limit the ability of the City Manager or the
Utilities Director to terminate the supply of water to any or all customers
upon the determination of the officials that emergency termination of water
service is required to protect the health and safety of the public.



(Prior Code, § 3-128.05)  (Ord. 2004-2716, passed 11-1-2004)



§ 52.66  PERMIT FOR EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Customers may apply for and be granted permits for:



      (1)   New turf sod application for up to three weeks;



      (2)   New grass seed application for up to four weeks.
However, the city strongly discourages new grass seed between July 1 and
August 31; and



      (3)   Landscape in large common or public areas that, because
of irrigation system limitations, cannot be sustained by following mandatory
drought restrictions in §§ 52.60 through 52.66.



   (B)   The above may be canceled by the city in the event a Stage
III: Water Emergency is declared.



(Prior Code, § 3-128.07)  (Ord. 2004-2689, passed 3-15-2004)



§ 52.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with any of
the provisions of §§ 52.60 through 52.66 shall be deemed guilty of an
offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100 for
each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24
hours of the failure to comply. The City Council hereby appoints the police
officers to issue citations for violation of the provisions of §§ 52.60
through 52.66.



(Prior Code, § 3-128.06)  (Ord. 2004-2689, passed 3-15-2004)



CHAPTER 53:  POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS



Section



Fire Department



   53.01   General regulations



Police Department



   53.15   Duties of Department



FIRE DEPARTMENT



§ 53.01  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   A Fire Department is hereby created and shall consist of the Fire Chief
and other personnel positions as the City Council shall determine from time
to time. The compensation of the members of the Fire Department shall be as
may be fixed by the City Council. The Fire Chief and all members of the Fire
Department shall be appointed and removed by the City Manager. The Fire Chief
and members of the Fire Department shall be subject to the control of the
City Manager.



(Prior Code, § 3-301)  (Ord. 96-2350, passed 6-17-1996; Ord. 2001-2585,
passed 11-19-2001)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-222, 16-308, 16-309, 19-618



POLICE DEPARTMENT



§ 53.15  DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police and
a further number of regular police officers as may be duly ordered by
resolution of the Council. The Chief of Police shall, subject to the
direction of the City Manager, have control and management of all matters
relating to the Police Department, its officers and members, and shall have
the custody and control of all property and books belonging to the
department. He or she shall devote his or her whole time to the city affairs,
interests of the city, and to the preservation of peace, order, safety, and
cleanliness thereof.



   (B)   The Department shall execute and enforce all laws. It shall be
the duty of the Department to protect the rights of persons and property.
There shall be a proper police force at all fires. The Department shall take
notice of all nuisances, impediments, obstructions, and defects in the
streets, avenues, alleys, business places, and residences of the city. The
Department shall execute, or cause to be executed, the processes issued and
shall cause all persons arrested to be brought before the proper court for
trial as speedily as possible. The Chief of Police and all regular and
special police officers shall become thoroughly conversant with the laws of
the city, and shall see that the same are strictly enforced and shall make
sworn complaints against any person or persons for violation of the same.



(Prior Code, § 3-401)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-225, 16-323



CHAPTER 54:  CITY PARKS AND PROPERTY



Section



City Parks Department



   54.001   Operation and funding



   54.002   Injury to park property



City Swimming Pool



   54.015   Operation and funding



   54.016   Rules and regulations



City Library



   54.025   Operation and funding



   54.026   Book disposal; records



   54.027   Rules and regulations



   54.028   Issuance of books



   54.029   Damaged and lost books; book removal



   54.030   Permissible fees and costs



   54.031   Duty to turn over monies collected



City Auditorium



   54.045   Ownership



   54.046   Rental of Auditorium and charges



   54.047   Rental agreement



   54.048   Payment of charges and deposit



   54.049   Seating capacity



   54.050   Rehearsals and set up



   54.051   Fire safety



   54.052   Use of tobacco and alcoholic beverages



   54.053   Surrender of reservation



   54.054   Removal of equipment



   54.055   Outside use of water or electrical connections



Public Parks



   54.065   Definition



   54.066   Hours of operation



Cemeteries:  General Provisions



   54.080   Designation of plats



   54.081   Burial permits



   54.082   Lot conveyance certificate



   54.083   Permanent park space



   54.084   Lot and columbarium niche price; no price lots



   54.085   Removal of remains for unpaid lot



   54.086   Gravedigger



   54.087   Price for opening of grave



   54.088   Perpetual care



   54.089   Funeral direction



   54.090   Interment; prerequisites



   54.091   Disinterment



   54.092   Children in cemetery



   54.093   Limitation of city financial responsibility



   54.094   Cemetery traffic regulation



   54.095   Lot improvements



   54.096   Firearms prohibited



   54.097   Entrance only through established gate



   54.098   Disturbance of horticulture prohibited



   54.099   Dogs prohibited



   54.100   No trespassing allowed



   54.101   Injury of property prohibited



Cemeteries :  Monuments and Markers



   54.115   Location; permit; fee



   54.116   Monument firm bond required



   54.117   Installation requirements



   54.118   Permitted materials



   54.119   Corner posts



   54.120   Removal



Cemeteries :  Specific Provisions



   54.130   Riverview Cemetery location and description



   54.131   Memorial Park location and description



   54.132   Memorial Park alley usage



   54.133   Memorial Park permanent park space designation



   54.134   Memorial Park park space lots not for sale



   54.135   Location and description of First Addition to Memorial
Park; plat recording and filing



   54.136   First Addition to Memorial Park plantings, structures and
flower receptacles



   54.137   Markers and monuments: First Addition to Memorial Park



 



   54.999   Penalty



CITY PARKS DEPARTMENT



§ 54.001  OPERATION AND FUNDING.



   The city owns and operates the city parks and other recreational areas.
The Public Works Director, under the direction of the City Manager, shall
have the authority to adopt rules and regulations for the efficient
management of the city parks and other recreational areas of the city.



(Prior Code, § 3-501)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-695 through 16-697.02



§ 54.002  INJURY TO PARK PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or willfully cut
down, injure, or destroy any tree, plant, or shrub. It shall be unlawful for
any person to injure or destroy any sodded or planted area, or injure or
destroy any building, structure, equipment, fence, bench, table, or any other
property of the city parks and recreational areas. No person shall commit any
waste on or litter the city parks or other public grounds.



(Prior Code, § 3-502)  Penalty, see § 35.999



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-248



CITY SWIMMING POOL



§ 54.015  OPERATION AND FUNDING.



   The city owns and manages the City Swimming Pool. The Public Works
Director  shall manage the swimming pool. The Director shall have the power
and authority to hire and supervise the Swimming Pool Manager and any
employees as he or she may deem necessary and shall pass rules and
regulations for the operation of the swimming pool as may be proper for its
efficient operation. All actions by the Director shall be under the
supervision and control of the City Manager.



(Prior Code, § 3-601)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-695 through 16-697.02



§ 54.016  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Public Works Director shall have the power and authority to enact
by-laws, rules, and regulations for the protection of those using the
swimming pool and for the efficient management thereof. They may provide
suitable penalties for the violation of the by-laws, rules, and regulations
subject to the review and approval of the City Manager.



(Prior Code, § 3-602)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-697.01



CITY LIBRARY



§ 54.025  OPERATION AND FUNDING.



   The city owns and manages the city.  The Library Director, under the
direction of the City Manager, shall have the authority to adopt rules and
regulations for the efficient management of the library.



(Prior Code, § 3-701)  (Ord. 2004-2717, passed 1-3-2005)



§ 54.026  BOOK DISPOSAL; RECORDS.



   The City Manager may authorize the Library Director to sell, exchange,
or dispose of any surplus, damaged, defective, obsolete, or duplicate books
in the library. Records shall be kept of any surplus, damages, defective,
obsolete, or duplicate books so disposed of.



(Prior Code, § 3-702)  (Ord. 2004-2717, passed 1-3-2005)



§ 54.027  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The City Council, with the advice of the Library Director and Library
Advisory Board, shall establish rules and regulations for the governing of
the city library for the preservation and efficient management thereof,
including reasonable fees, not to exceed the library's actual cost, for
non-basic services, such as photocopying equipment; telephones, facsimile
equipment, and other telecommunication equipment; media equipment; personal
computers; and video cassette recording and playing equipment. The City
Council shall fix and impose by general rules, penalties and forfeitures for
injury to the library grounds, rooms, books, or other property, or for
failure to return a book. All fees, penalties, and forfeitures may be
collected in civil action in the event of failure, neglect, or refusal to pay
the assessments.



(Prior Code, § 3-703)  (Ord. 2004-2717, passed 1-3-2005)



§ 54.028  ISSUANCE OF BOOKS.



   The Library Director shall keep, or cause to be kept, a register of all
books issued and returned at the time they shall so be issued and returned.
None of the books shall be detained more than one month without being
renewed. No book may be renewed more than two consecutive times by any person
without the special permission of the Librarian or an authorized employee of
the city library.



(Prior Code, § 3-704)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 51-211



§ 54.029  DAMAGED AND LOST BOOKS; BOOK REMOVAL.



   (A)   Any person who injures or fails to return any book taken from
the library shall forfeit and pay to the library not less than the value of
the book in addition to any replacement costs and penalty which the library
may assess.



(Prior Code, § 3-705)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the
regulations set by the City Council to take a book from the library, without
the consent of the Library Director or an authorized employee of the library.
Any person removing a book from the library without properly checking it out
shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 3-706)



(Ord. 2004-2717, passed 1-3-2005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 51-211



§ 54.030  PERMISSIBLE FEES AND COSTS.



   Residents of the city may borrow materials from the library free of
charge, except that reasonable fees, not to exceed the library's actual cost,
may be charged for non-basic services such as photocopying equipment;
telephones, facsimile equipment, and other telecommunication equipment; media
equipment; personal computers; and video cassette recording and playing
equipment. Nonresidents shall be charged an annual fee for the privilege of
borrowing materials from the library as may be set by resolution of the City
Council from time to time, and may be charged reasonable fees, not to exceed
the library's actual cost, for non-basic services. The Library Director may
exclude from the use of the library and reading rooms any person who shall
willfully violate or refuse to comply with the rules and regulations
established for the government thereof.



(Prior Code, § 3-707)  (Ord. 91-1989, passed 4-1-1991; Ord. 91-2019, passed
12-2-1991; Ord. 2004-2717, passed 1-3-2005)



§ 54.031  DUTY TO TURN OVER MONIES COLLECTED.



   Any money collected by the library shall be turned over monthly by the
Library Director to the City Treasurer along with a report of the sources of
the revenue.



(Prior Code, § 3-708)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 51-209



CITY AUDITORIUM



§ 54.045  OWNERSHIP.



   The city owns and manages the City Auditorium through the City Manager
and City Clerk. The City Manager shall have the power to hire and supervise
employees as he or she may deem necessary and shall make such rules and
regulations for the operation of the Auditorium as may be proper for its
efficient management. All actions by the City Manager and City Clerk shall be
under the supervision and control of the governing body.



(Prior Code, § 3-901) (Ord. 201-2836, passed 5-3-2010)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-239, 16-246, 19-1302



§ 54.046  RENTAL OF AUDITORIUM AND CHARGES.



   (A)   The City Auditorium shall be available for rental use to
individuals, groups, organizations, and businesses under the terms and
conditions set forth in this subchapter. The City Auditorium shall further be
available for rental use to the federal and state governments and any
subdivisions thereof and to religious. charitable, scientific, literary,
educational, and service organizations and any other entity that would
qualify under § 501(c) Internal Revenue Code and not organized for profit or
for the benefit of private shareholders.



   (B)   The City Council may, for the purpose of defraying the
expenses involved in maintaining and managing the Auditorium, set by
ordinance, make a reasonable rental charge for the use thereof. The rental
charges shall be on file at the office of the City Clerk and are set out in
Chapter 38, Fee Schedule.



(Prior Code, § 3-902)  (Ord. 1679, passed 4-4-1983; Ord. 1765, passed
12-4-1984; Ord. 91-2018, passed 12-2-1991; Ord. 2010-2836, passed 5-3-2010)



§ 54.047  RENTAL AGREEMENT.



   (A)   All rental agreements for the City Auditorium shall be in
writing and on the form furnished by the city. No such rental agreement shall
be effective until executed and until the fees required herein as advance
payments have been paid. By entering into the agreement, the lessee shall
hereby waive all claims against the city, which may arise out of the use of
the Auditorium, and further agrees to indemnify the city for any damages to
the premises, equipment, or furnishings of the City Auditorium incurred
during the time of the agreement, and further, to save and hold harmless the
city against claims of any and all persons arising out the use of the
premises by the lessee.



(Prior Code, § 3-903) (Ord. 1679, passed 4-4-1983; Ord. 2010-2836, passed
5-3-2010)



§ 54.048  PAYMENT OF CHARGES AND DEPOSIT.



   All rental fees and damage deposits shall be due and payable upon
signing the agreement.



(Prior Code, § 3-904) (Ord. 2010-2836, passed 5-3-2010)



§ 54.049  SEATING CAPACITY.



   No lessee of the Auditorium shall be able to sell tickets, or permit
persons to be present in the Auditorium in excess of the seating capacity of
the same. The Fire Chief shall have authority to determine when the seating
capacity of the Auditorium has been reached or exceeded by any lessee. If the
Fire Chief makes a determination, the lessee shall then stop selling tickets
or refuse admission to any further persons in the Auditorium. In no event
shall the regulations of the State Fire Marshal concerning the number of
persons that can be safely accommodated be violated.



(Prior Code, § 3-905)  (Ord. 1679, passed 4-4-1983; Ord. 96-2350, passed
6-17-1996; Ord. 2001-2585, passed 11-19-2001; Ord. 2010-2836, passed 5-3-2010)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-246



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-233, 16-239, 19-1302



§ 54.050  REHEARSALS AND SET UP.



   The City Manager and the City Clerk shall have the authority to allow
rehearsals by any organization renting the Auditorium. The hours that an
organization may use the Auditorium for a rehearsal may be specified in
writing. One rehearsal shall be included in the rental fee for the
Auditorium. There shall be a charge for additional rehearsals as set by
resolution and set out in Chapter 38, Fee Schedule.



(Prior Code, § 3-906)  (Ord. 1679, passed 4-4-1983; Ord. 91-2018, passed
12-2-1991; Ord. 2010-2836, passed 5-3-2010)



§ 54.051  FIRE SAFETY.



   Combustible materials shall not be used for decorative purposes,
posters, or any other things attached to any part of the building at any time
by any lessee, except under the supervision of the City Manager or Fire
Chief. No vehicle of any kind shall be allowed in the Auditorium unless all
fuel has been drained from the vehicle and the battery has been disconnected
prior to entrance into the Auditorium. No fuel of any kind may be brought
into this Auditorium for any activity, except under the direct supervision of
the Fire Chief.



(Prior Code, § 3-907)  (Ord. 1679, passed 4-4-1983; Ord. 96-2350, passed
6-17-1996; Ord. 2001-2585, passed 11-19-2001; Ord. 2010-2836, passed 5-3-2010)



§ 54.052  USE OF TOBACCO AND ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   Smoking shall be prohibited in the Auditorium. The use or possession of
alcoholic beverages shall be allowed in the premises of the City Auditorium
upon approval of a special designated liquor license by the City Council. The
special designated liquor license holder shall have insurance coverage on the
event or a liquor liability on their policy and add the city as an additional
insured. Certificate of insurance shall be provided to the city prior to the
event. The special designated liquor license holder shall insure that all
liquor laws of the State of Nebraska are enforced.



(Prior Code, § 3-908)  (Ord. 1679, passed 4-4-1983; Ord. 2010-2836, passed
5-3-2010)



§ 54.053  SURRENDER OF RESERVATION.



   The lessee may make written surrender of any reservation made hereunder
by notifying the city at least 12 days in advance of the date reserved. The
advance deposit shall be returned to the lessee if, in the opinion of the
City Manager or City Clerk, no detriment will result to the city by reason of
such surrender.



(Prior Code, § 3-909) (Ord. 2010-2836, passed 5-3-2010)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-239, 16-246, 19-1302



§ 54.054  REMOVAL OF EQUIPMENT.



   The city reserves the right to remove all equipment and effects of any
lessee immediately after the expiration of the lease, and the removal shall
be at the expense of the lessee. No city equipment or property in the
Auditorium shall be removed therefrom nor shall any property be loaned to
anyone except under the direct supervision and authority of the City Manager
or City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 3-910)  (Ord. 1679, passed 4-4-1983; Ord. 2010-2836, passed
5-3-2010)



§ 54.055  OUTSIDE USE OF WATER OR ELECTRICAL CONNECTIONS.



   Any organization renting the Auditorium shall first have the approval
of the City Manager or the City Clerk before any water or electrical
appliances or connections are used on the outside of the Auditorium.



(Prior Code, § 3-912)  (Ord. 1679, passed 4-4-1983; Ord. 2010-2836, passed
5-3-2010)



PUBLIC PARKS



§ 54.065  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PUBLIC PARKS.  Includes, but is not limited to, the following public
parks and trails of the city:



   (A)   Felling Field Park;



   (B)   Elk City Park;



   (C)   Barnett Park;



   (D)   McCook Jaycee Ball Park Complex;



   (E)   Russell Park;



   (F)   Kelley Park;



   (G)   Norris Park;



   (H)   Karrer Park;



   (I)   “A” Street Park; and



   (J)   Walking Trail extending from Kelley Park to Karrer Park.



(Prior Code, § 6-701)  (Ord. 1763, passed 10-1-1984; Ord. 2016-2927, passed
5-2-2016)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-695, 16-696



§ 54.066  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   The public parks of the city shall be open daily to the public during
the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. of any one day. It shall be unlawful for
any person or persons (other than city personnel conducting city business
therein) to occupy or be present in the public parks of the city during any
hours in which the public parks are not open to the public, provided,
however, that the City Manager may extend, by permit, the hours for the use
of public park facilities to groups, associations or organizations desiring
to use the public parks facilities for a particular purpose.



(Prior Code, § 6-702)  (Ord. 1763, passed 10-1-1984)  Penalty, see § 96.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-696



CEMETERIES:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 54.080  DESIGNATION OF PLATS.



   The Public Works Director shall have the authority to designate the
area or areas within the cemetery in which grave spaces or lots shall be
currently sold. When all lots within the area or areas have been sold, the
Public Works Director shall proceed to designate additional areas. The Public
Works Director shall prepare a plat of the cemeteries showing the boundaries
of the area or areas within which lots are currently being sold, and also
showing the individual lots therein.



(Prior Code, § 3-1002)  (Ord. 2001-2589, passed 12-3-2001)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-244, 16-245



§ 54.081  BURIAL PERMITS.



   The City Clerk shall maintain blank burial permits and when
applications for burial are made shall issue a permit for each interment
applied for. Duplicates of all permits issued shall be kept in the Clerk's
office.



(Prior Code, § 3-1003)  (Ord. 2001-2590, passed 12-3-2001)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-245



§ 54.082  LOT CONVEYANCE CERTIFICATE.



   (A)   The city shall convey lots in any city cemetery by the
issuance of a certificate by the City Clerk, signed by the Mayor and
countersigned by the City Clerk under the seal of the city, specifying that
the person to whom the certificate is issued is the owner of the lot or part
of the lot described therein by number as shown on the map or plat of the
respective cemetery for the sole purpose of interment.



   (B)   The certificate described above shall vest in the person to
whom it is issued, his or her heirs and assigns, a right in fee simple to the
lot for the sole purpose of interment under the provisions of this chapter
and other regulations of the City Council.



   (C)   The certificate shall not be issued until the amount for the
specified lot or part of lot has been fully paid.



(Prior Code, § 3-1004)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-242 through 16-245



§ 54.083  PERMANENT PARK SPACE.



   The City Council may, by ordinance, designate and set aside lots and
spaces as permanent park space in any city cemetery. The City Council may, if
they find it desirable to do so, sell any of the cemetery lots or parts
thereof previously designated and set aside as permanent park space at a
price to be fixed by the City Council for burial purposes only, and the lots
or spaces so sold shall remain in the list of lots set aside as permanent
park space.



(Prior Code, § 3-1005)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-245



§ 54.084  LOT AND COLUMBARIUM NICHE PRICE; NO PRICE LOTS.



   (A)   The City Council may by ordinance set the prices to be charged
for lots and columbarium niches within all city cemeteries. The amounts shall
be on file in the office of the City Clerk and are set out in Chapter 38, Fee
Schedule.



(Prior Code, § 3-1006)



   (B)   The City Council may designate certain lots as no price lots,
and shall notify the City Clerk of the designation. The City Clerk shall
issue burial permits in lots designated as no price lots upon evidence being
furnished to him or her that the permits should be issued without cost.



(Prior Code, § 3-1007)



(Ord. 2001-2591, passed 12-3-2001)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-245



§ 54.085  REMOVAL OF REMAINS FOR UNPAID LOTS.



   Where an interment is made in any cemetery on a lot or part of a lot,
which is not fully paid for, the City Council shall have the right at any
time, after the period agreed on for the time of payment, to remove the
remains to a smaller lot equal in amount paid upon the original selection or
to a single grave space.



(Prior Code, § 3-1008)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-245



§ 54.086  GRAVEDIGGER.



   No one except cemetery employees under the supervision of the Public
Works Director shall be allowed to dig or uncover any graves in the city
cemeteries.



(Prior Code, § 3-1009)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-245



§ 54.087  PRICE FOR OPENING OF GRAVE.



   The City Council may by ordinance set the prices to be charged for the
opening of graves within all city cemeteries. The amounts shall be on file in
the office of the City Clerk and are set out in Chapter 38, Fee Schedule.



(Prior Code, § 3-1010)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-245



§ 54.088  PERPETUAL CARE.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      PERPETUAL CARE.  The care and maintenance of cemetery lots and
columbarium in perpetuity. This care and maintenance shall include but not be
limited to:



         (a)   Seeding of turf areas, and the regular cutting,
trimming, and watering thereof;



         (b)   Pruning of shrubs and trimming of edgings and
replacement of same;



         (c)   Tree surgery;



         (d)   Planting and maintenance of grave and lot covers;



         (e)   Removing litter and debris from lots;



         (f)   Care of ground covers other than turf;



         (g)   Maintenance of other appurtenances on lots as is
not herein specifically mentioned;



         (h)   Care and maintenance of the columbarium and its
accompanying appurtenances; and



         (i)   Capital improvements of the cemeteries.



   (B)   The City Council may by ordinance set the fee to be charged
for perpetual care within all city cemeteries. The amounts shall be on file
in the office of the City Clerk and are set out in  Chapter 38, Fee Schedule.



(Prior Code, § 3-1012)



   (C)   All sums paid, either directly or indirectly, for perpetual
care, shall be set aside in a Perpetual Care Fund which shall be invested by
the City Treasurer. The principal of this Fund may be used for capital
improvements of the cemeteries upon the approval of the City Council. The
interest thereof may be transferred to the General Fund to be expended in the
care and upkeep of the cemeteries.



(Prior Code, § 3-1013)  (Ord. 2001-2593, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 2002-2629,
passed 7-1-2002)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-244, 16-245



§ 54.089  FUNERAL DIRECTION.



   All funerals within the cemeteries shall be under the direction of the
Public Works Director or one of his or her assistants. Workers engaged in the
vicinity of a burial shall suspend their work during services at a grave. The
Public Works Director shall reserve the right to remove funeral designs and
floral pieces as soon as they become unsightly.



(Prior Code, § 3-1016)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-245



§ 54.090  INTERMENT; PREREQUISITES.



   (A)   Only one interment in any one grave shall be permitted except
that cremated remains may be placed above another grave. All interments shall
utilize vaults of a nature as to prevent cave-in, or sinking, of the grave
site. The Public Works Director shall not be held responsible for errors in
location of graves on lots arising from improper instructions from lot
owners. Orders from undertakers shall be deemed to be orders from lot owners.
Under no circumstances shall the city assume any responsibility for errors in
opening graves when instructions of the lot owner are received over the
telephone.



(Prior Code, § 3-1017)



   (B)   No interment shall take place until a burial permit has been
obtained from the City Clerk, and all laws, ordinances, and rules and
regulations relative to burials have been complied with. No grave shall be
opened unless the grave space has been paid for or unless the undertaker
assumes the responsibility for paying for the grave space. Undertakers shall
be responsible for funeral arrangements and burial expenses if not paid by
the owner or his or her agent. If the deceased to be interred is not the
owner or is not a member of the lot owner's immediate family, written consent
of the owner or authorized agent must be filed with the Public Works Director
before interment will be permitted.



(Prior Code, § 3-1018)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-245



§ 54.091  DISINTERMENT.



   Disinterments and removal of a body shall not be made without
permission of the Public Works Director, the lot owner, and the next of kin
of the deceased. Graves shall not be opened for inspection except for
official investigation. All disinterments shall be made at a time selected by
the Public Works Director.



(Prior Code, § 3-1019)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-245



§ 54.092  CHILDREN IN CEMETERY.



   No person under 16 years of age shall enter a cemetery unless attended
by an adult responsible for his or her conduct or until permission to enter
has been obtained from the Public Works Director.



(Prior Code, § 3-1021)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-245



§ 54.093  LIMITATION OF CITY FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   The city shall not be financially responsible for any damage to
cemetery lots or structures or projections thereon or for flowers or articles
removed from any lot or grave.



(Prior Code, § 3-1022)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-245



§ 54.094  CEMETERY TRAFFIC REGULATION.



   (A)   All traffic rules of the city that are applicable to
operations of vehicles shall be strictly observed in the cemeteries. A person
driving in a cemetery shall be responsible for any damage done by the
vehicle, or animal drawing the vehicle in a driver's charge.



   (B)   In addition, no person shall:



      (1)   Drive a vehicle in excess of ten miles per hour on a
cemetery road;



      (2)   Drive off an established road unless permission to do so
is given by the Cemetery Sexton;



      (3)   Make a U-turn on a cemetery road; or



      (4)   Use a cemetery road as a public thoroughfare.



(Prior Code, § 3-1023)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-245



§ 54.095  LOT IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   All plantings and other improvements to lots shall be done
under the direction and with the approval of the Public Works Director. No
trees or shrubs shall be planted, removed, or pruned except under the
direction and with the consent of the Public Works Director. The planting of
rose bushes or any spreading shrub is prohibited. No trees shall be planted
without the approval of the City Council.



   (B)   Copings, fences, curbs, and hedges on or around cemetery lots
are prohibited. Those structures or markers established on any lot previous
to the effective date of this section which have, in the judgment of the City
Council, become unsightly by reason of neglect or age shall be removed.



   (C)   Receptacles for cut flowers will be permitted on cemetery lots
if installed flush with the lawn. Winter decorations may be maintained on
graves until March 1 of each year. If the decorations are not removed by
March 1, they will be considered abandoned and will be removed by the Public
Works Director. Aboveground flower receptacles will be permitted on lots and
graves during Memorial Day observance, but shall be removed by the Public
Works Director, or by the lot owner, by the following June 9.



   (D)   Except in the First Addition to Memorial Park, chairs,
settees, benches, and urns shall be permitted, but only if properly installed
and maintained. Failure to properly install or maintain the structures shall
be cause for their removal.



   (F)   No elevated mounds shall be built over graves and no lot shall
be filled above the level established by the city.



(Prior Code, § 3-1024)  Penalty, see § 97.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-244, 16-245



§ 54.096  FIREARMS PROHIBITED.



   No firearms shall be permitted within any of the cemeteries except for
military service.



(Prior Code, § 3-1025)  Penalty, see § 97.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-245



§ 54.097  ENTRANCE ONLY THROUGH ESTABLISHED GATE.



   No person shall enter a cemetery except through an established gate.



(Prior Code, § 3-1026)  Penalty, see § 97.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-245



§ 54.098  DISTURBANCE OF HORTICULTURE PROHIBITED.



   No person shall pick or mutilate any flowers, either wild or domestic
in any city cemetery, or disturb any trees, shrubs, plants, or monuments
therein without permission from the Public Works Director.



(Prior Code, § 3-1028)  Penalty, see § 97.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-245



§ 54.099  DOGS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall permit any dog to enter or remain in any cemetery.



(Prior Code, § 3-1031)  Penalty, see § 97.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-245



§ 54.100  NO TRESPASSING ALLOWED.



   No person shall in any manner trespass upon any cemetery lot and damage
trees or plants thereon.



(Prior Code, § 3-1033)  Penalty, see § 97.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-245



§ 54.101  INJURY OF PROPERTY PROHIBITED.



   No person shall injure any property, either public or private, in any
city cemetery.



(Prior Code, § 3-1034)  Penalty, see § 97.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-245



CEMETERIES:  MONUMENTS AND MARKERS



§ 54.115  LOCATION; PERMIT; FEE.



   (A)   Monuments shall not be installed on grave spaces but shall be
located on solid earth and aligned and located as directed by the Public
Works Director, or his or her designee. Approval of the location of all
monuments must be obtained from the Public Works Director, or his or her
designee, before a monument is set. No monument shall be placed upon a lot
unless it is first approved by the Public Works Director, or his or her
designee, and the lot has been paid for in full. Markers shall be placed at
the head of the grave and shall be located five inches from a lot line.
Foundations for markers and monuments shall be flush with the surface of the
ground and shall extend beyond the base of the monument a distance of five
inches on each side and end, and shall not exceed 24 inches from front to
back.



(Prior Code, § 3-1035)



   (B)   No person shall erect any marker or monument in any city
cemetery without first obtaining a monument permit from the City Clerk. The
fee for the permit shall be set by ordinance of the City Council and is set
out in Chapter 38, Fee Schedule.



(Prior Code, § 3-1036)



(Ord. 2006-2771, passed 7-17-2006)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-244, 16-245



§ 54.116  MONUMENT FIRM BOND REQUIRED.



   All monument firms before erecting any monuments in any of the city
cemeteries shall post a surety bond in the amount of $1,000 to cover any
defects or faulty workmanship. Bonds are to be filed with the City Clerk and
approved by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 3-1037)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-244, 16-245



§ 54.117  INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.



   Those persons engaged in the placing of monuments and markers shall
provide planking adequate to protect turf and shall remove materials,
equipment and rubbish immediately upon completion of the work. The site shall
be left in a clean orderly condition. Ropes or cables shall be attached to
trees or other objects only on the approval of the Public Works Director.



(Prior Code, § 3-1039)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-244, 16-245



§ 54.118  PERMITTED MATERIALS.



   No material except granite, a good grade of white marble, cut stone
from recognized monument quarries, or standard bronze shall be used for
monuments or markers. Bronze may be used for markers extending above the
grade only if attached to a granite or concrete base. No materials except
granite, marble, or standard bronze shall be used for flush markers.



(Prior Code, § 3-1041)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-244, 16-245



§ 54.119  CORNER POSTS.



   Corner posts of any lot or plot of city cemeteries shall be placed
flush with the grade thereof.



(Prior Code, § 3-1043)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-244, 16-245



§ 54.120  REMOVAL.



   No person shall remove or attempt to remove any gravestone, monument,
or marker from any lot in any cemetery without the knowledge and permission
of the Public Works Director.



(Prior Code, § 3-1042)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-244, 16-245



CEMETERIES:  SPECIFIC PROVISIONS



§ 54.130  RIVERVIEW CEMETERY LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION.



   The tract of ground situated on the northwest quarter of section 30,
township three, range 29, platted as a cemetery by H. C. Rider, and acquired
by the city from the Riverview Cemetery Association in 1937, together with
any ground adjoining the tract, that may hereafter be acquired by the city
for cemetery purposes, shall be known and designated as Riverview Cemetery.



(Prior Code, § 3-1048)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-241



§ 54.131  MEMORIAL PARK LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION.



   The tract of land formerly known as Longview Cemetery and since 1927
known as McCook Memorial Park, together with any ground adjoining the tract
that may be acquired by the city for cemetery purposes, except that tract
known as First Addition to Memorial Park, shall be known and designated as
McCook Memorial Park.



(Prior Code, § 3-1049)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-241



§ 54.132  MEMORIAL PARK ALLEY USAGE.



   Where one person has become the owner of two lots adjoining each other
in the same block of Memorial Park Cemetery, he or she shall be permitted to
use the four-foot alley between the lots for interments, thereby making one
compact tract out of the two lots.



(Prior Code, § 3-1050)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-245



§ 54.133  MEMORIAL PARK PERMANENT PARK SPACE DESIGNATION.



   The following described lots in Memorial Park Cemetery are hereby set
aside as permanent park space:



   (A)   Block 1.  Lot 20, east half of lot 25, lots 92, 93, 114, 115,
133, 161, 162, and 167;



   (B)   Block 2.  Lots 1, 3, 4, 5, 12, 23, 52, 76,103, 105, north
half of lot 120, lots 128, 140, 155, 161 and 162;



   (C)   Block 3.  Lots 6, 11, 12, 13, 23, 24, 28, 33, 34, 37, 50, 51,
60, 63, 64, 65, 68, 79, 101, 104,107, 109, 122, 156, 158, 159 and 166;



   (D)   Block 4.  Lots 1, 6, 7, 35, 53, 76, 160 and 161;



   (E)   Block 5.  Lots 1, 4, 5, 13, 24 and 36;



   (F)   Block 6.  Lots 1, 4, 5, 7, 13 and 24;



   (G)   Block 7.  Lots 18, 28, 35 and 36;



   (H)   Block 8.  Lots 1, 13, 24, 32, 33 and 36;



   (I)   Block 9.  Lots 182, 183, 184, 185, the west one-half lot 186,
187, 188, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193 and 194: and



   (J)   Block 10.  Lots 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, the east one-half
lot 187, 188, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193 and 194.



(Prior Code, § 3-1051)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-245



§ 54.134  MEMORIAL PARK PARK SPACE LOTS NOT FOR SALE.



   The lots specified in § 97.58 are dedicated to the public use for the
beautifying of the cemetery and are not intended to be sold; however, such
lots are subject to the provisions of § 97.58.



(Prior Code, § 3-1052)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-245



§ 54.135  LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION OF FIRST ADDITION TO MEMORIAL PARK; PLAT
RECORDING AND FILING.



   (A)   The plat of blocks nine, ten, eleven, and twelve of Memorial
Park Cemetery, prepared by the Board of Cemetery Trustees of the city
cemeteries, located directly north of blocks one and two of the Memorial Park
Cemetery and containing approximately five acres in the southwest quarter of
section 19 of township three, north, range 29 west of the sixth principal
meridian, in Red Willow County, such tract being approximately one-half of
the tract conveyed to the city by Thomas J. Wilkins, is approved by the City
Council, and that tract of land specified by the plat shall be designated as
the First Addition to Memorial Park Cemetery. One copy of the plat shall be
recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of the County, one copy shall
be filed with the City Clerk, and one copy shall be furnished to the Cemetery
Sexton.



   (B)   The plat of blocks 13, 14, 15, and 16 of Memorial Park
Cemetery, prepared by the Board of Cemetery Trustees of the city cemeteries,
located directly north of blocks nine, ten, 11, and 12 of the Memorial Park
Cemetery and containing approximately five acres in the southwest quarter of
section 19 of township three, north, range 29 west of the sixth principal
meridian, in Red Willow County, the tract being approximately one-half of the
tract conveyed to the city by Thomas J. Wolkins, as approved by the City
Council, and that tract of land specified by the plat shall be designated as
the First Addition to Memorial Park Cemetery. One copy of the plat shall be
recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of the County, one copy shall
be filed with the City Clerk, and one copy shall be furnished to the Cemetery
Sexton.



(Prior Code, § 3-1053)  (Ord. 2005-2746, passed 9-6-2005)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-241



§ 54.136  FIRST ADDITION TO MEMORIAL PARK PLANTINGS, STRUCTURES AND FLOWER
RECEPTACLES.



   No plantings shall be made by anyone other than cemetery employees in
the First Addition to Memorial Park Cemetery. No structure that would extend
above the ground level, except as provided by § 97.62 shall be permitted in
the First Addition to Memorial Park Cemetery, except on veterans' graves,
where only United States Government markers are permitted. Cut flower
receptacles of metal or other durable material will be permitted only if
installed flush with the ground level. No wooden boxes or aboveground flower
receptacles of any kind shall be permitted except during Memorial Day
observance.



(Prior Code, § 3-1054)  (Ord. 2005-2746, passed 9-6-2005)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-244, 16-245



§ 54.137  MARKERS AND MONUMENTS: FIRST ADDITION TO MEMORIAL PARK.



   The only marker or monument permitted in blocks nine, 12, and 13 of the
First Addition to Memorial Park Cemetery described in § 97.61 shall be a
standard marker consisting of a marble or granite stone, or any weather
resisting metal tablet upon which the inscription as is desired and
appropriate may be placed. No marker shall be more than six inches above
ground level and all markers shall have a foundation projecting at least five
inches out from each side of the marker. The foundation shall be set at least
one foot into the ground. Markers or monuments extending aboveground shall be
permitted in blocks ten, 11, and 14 of the First Addition to Memorial Park
Cemetery. No marker or monument shall extend more than four feet aboveground
in block 15 of the First Addition to Memorial Park Cemetery.



(Prior Code, § 3-1055)  (Ord. 2005-2746, passed 9-6-2005)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-244, 16-245



§ 54.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions
of §§ 54.001 through 54.054 any section of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor. Unless otherwise specified in the particular section
for which the person stands convicted of violating, the penalty for the
violation shall be in any amount not to exceed $1,000 and/or imprisonment for
any length of time not to exceed three months, in the discretion of the court.



(Prior Code, §§ 1-1201, 2-301, 3-1301)



   (C)   Whenever any section of §§ 54.001 through 54.054 shall
declare a nuisance, a violation of that section shall be penalized by a fine
of not more than $1,000, in which case a new violation shall be deemed to
have been committed every 24 hours of the failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 3-1301)



   (D)    Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in §§ 54.001 through
54.054, the city may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the
same, in the manner provided by law. Whenever, in any action, it is
established that a nuisance exists, the court may, together with the fine or
penalty imposed, enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the
case.



(Prior Code, 3-1302)



   (E)   Any person violating the provision of §§ 54.065 and 54.066
shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $10 nor more
than $100.



(Prior Code, § 6-703)  (Ord. 1763, passed 10-1-1984)



   (F)   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the
enforcement of any of the provisions of §§ 54.080 through 54.135, set forth
at full length herein or incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100
for each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed
every 24 hours of the failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 3-1056)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-245



CHAPTER 55:  SOLID WASTE



Section



   55.01   Definitions



   55.02   Operation and funding



   55.03   State regulation



   55.04   City Manager authority



   55.05   Garbage containers



   55.06   Unlawful accumulation



   55.07   Disposal on streets or other's property prohibited



   55.08   Compliance with chapter



§ 55.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARBAGE.  All putrescible waste, except sewage and body waste,
including vegetable and animal offal and including tin cans. The term shall
not include industrial wastes and by-products.



   TRASH.  All non-putrescible wastes, provided that the term shall not
include earth and wastes from building operations nor large trees or tree
branches.



(Prior Code, § 4-201)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 19-2106



§ 55.02  OPERATION AND FUNDING.



   The city owns and operates the solid waste collection system and the
transfer station. The Public Works Director, under the direction of the City
Manager, shall have the direct management and control of the Solid Waste
Department and shall faithfully carry out the duties of his or her position.
The Director shall have the authority to adopt rules and regulations for the
sanitary and efficient management of the Solid Waste Department. The
governing body shall provide by ordinance for the management and operation of
the solid waste collection system and the transfer station and shall set the
rates to be charged for services rendered by resolution and file the same in
the office of the City Clerk for public inspection at any reasonable time.
The rates are set out in Chapter 38, Fee Schedule.



(Prior Code, § 3-801)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 19-2101 through 19-2106



§ 55.03  STATE REGULATION.



   The city shall apply for a license to operate the transfer station.
Application shall be made to the Department of Environmental Quality on forms
provided by the Department. It shall be the duty of the Public Works Director
to comply with the rules and regulations prescribed by the Department of
Environmental Control for the use and operation of the transfer station.



§ 55.04  CITY MANAGER AUTHORITY.



   The City Manager is hereby given the authority to make rules and
regulations governing the time of collection of garbage and trash, the exact
location of containers therefor, and such other rules and regulations
governing the accumulation and disposal of garbage and trash as he or she may
deem necessary.



(Prior Code, § 4-207)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 19-2106



§ 55.05  GARBAGE CONTAINERS.



   It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of each premise in the
city to dispose of garbage and trash by placing the same in a suitable
container for collection. The container shall meet health requirements and
shall conform to all other requirements which the City Manager may require
for the efficient pickup of garbage and trash.



(Prior Code, § 4-202)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 19-2106



§ 55.06  UNLAWFUL ACCUMULATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep in, on, or about any
dwelling, house, building, or premises in the city any decayed vegetable or
animal substances, garbage, offal, or refuse or any substance that may be
injurious to the public health or offensive to the residents of property in
the nearby vicinity unless kept in refuse containers provided by the city in
the manner provided hereinabove. Bulk refuse securely tied or otherwise
prepared in a manner to avoid litter may be deposited on the rear portion of
his or her property adjacent to an alley for a period not longer than 30 days
so long as the bulk refuse does not create a nuisance. Nothing herein shall
be construed as to allow any person to deposit any garbage, refuse, or bulk
refuse or any other such material on any street, alley, or other public
property or on the private property of another without the specific
permission of the city or the owner respectively.



(Prior Code, § 4-203)  Penalty, § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 19-2106



§ 55.07  DISPOSAL ON STREETS OR OTHER'S PROPERTY PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any garbage, trash, or
other such material on any street, alley, except the transfer station, on the
private property of another, or other public property.



(Prior Code, § 4-206)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 19-2106



§ 55.08  COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER.



   No garbage or trash shall be disposed of in any manner except as
described by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 4-205)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 19-2106



CHAPTER 56:  SENIOR SERVICES



Section



   56.01   Senior center and public transport operation



   56.02   Cost of use



§ 56.01  SENIOR CENTER AND PUBLIC TRANSPORT OPERATION.



   The city owns and manages the Senior Center, and the Public Transit
System. The Senior Services Director, under the direction of the City
Manager, shall manage both operations, has the authority to hire other
employees as the City Council may deem necessary and may set other rules and
regulations for the Senior Center as may be proper for its efficient
operation.



(Prior Code, § 3-1201)  (Ord. 91-2020, passed 12-2-1991)



§ 56.02  COST OF USE.



   The Senior Center shall be available for rental use to individuals,
groups, organizations, and businesses under the terms and conditions set
forth in this chapter. The Senior Center shall further be available for
rental use to the federal and state governments and any subdivisions thereof
and to religious, charitable, scientific, literary, educational and service
organizations and any other entity that would qualify under § 501(c)
Internal Revenue Code and not organized for profit or for the benefit of
private shareholders. The City Council may, for the purpose of defraying the
expenses involved in maintaining and managing the Senior Center, set by
resolution, a reasonable rental charge for the use thereof. The rental
charges shall be on file at the office of the City Clerk and are set out in
Chapter 38, Fee Schedule.



(Prior Code, § 3-1202)  (Ord 91- 2020, passed 12-2-1991)



TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



      Chapter




         70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         71.   TRAFFIC RULES





         72.   PARKING AND STOPPING





         73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES





         74.   PARKING SCHEDULES




CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Signs and signals



Enforcement and Citations



   70.15   Emergency regulation authority



   70.16   Police enforcement



   70.17   Form and record of traffic citation



   70.18   Disposition of traffic citations



   70.19   Illegal cancellation of citation



   70.20   Destruction of summons



 



   70.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   The words and phrases used in this title, pertaining to motor vehicles
and traffic regulations, shall be construed as defined in Neb. RS Chapter 60,
as now existing or hereafter amended, unless a different definition is
provided specifically within a section, then it shall govern to the extent
allowed by state law. Words and phrases not defined in the designated statute
shall have their common meaning.



(Prior Code, § 5-101)



§ 70.02  SIGNS AND SIGNALS.



   The governing body may, by resolution, provide for the placing of stop
signs, or other signs, signals, standards, or mechanical devices in any
street or alley under the city's jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating,
or prohibiting, traffic thereon. The resolution shall describe the portion of
the street or alley wherein traffic is to be regulated or prohibited, the
regulation or prohibition, the location where the sign, signal, standard, or
mechanical device shall be placed, and the hours when the regulation or
prohibition shall be effective. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail,
neglect, or refuse to comply with the regulation or prohibition.



(Neb. RS 60-680, 60-6,119 - 60,6,121)  (Prior Code, § 5-213)  Penalty, see
§ 70.99



ENFORCEMENT AND CITATIONS



§ 70.15  EMERGENCY REGULATION AUTHORITY.



   The Chief of Police is hereby empowered to make and enforce temporary
traffic regulations to cover emergencies.



(Prior Code, § 5-401)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 60-435



§ 70.16  POLICE ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The city police are hereby authorized, empowered, and ordered
to exercise all powers, and duties, with relation to the management of street
traffic and to direct, control, stop, restrict, regulate, and, when
necessary, temporarily divert, or exclude, in the interest of public safety,
health, and convenience, the movement of pedestrian, animal, and vehicular
traffic of every kind in streets, parks, and on bridges. The driver of any
vehicle shall stop upon the signal of any police officer.



(Neb. RS 60-683)  (Prior Code, § 5-402)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, or fail to
comply with, any lawful order, signal, or direction of a police officer.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-403)



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.17  FORM AND RECORD OF TRAFFIC CITATION.



   The Chief of Police shall provide, in appropriate form, traffic
citations containing notices to appear. The Chief of Police shall be
responsible for the issuance of the books, and shall maintain a record of
every book, and each citation number therein issued to the city police. The
Chief of Police shall require the return of all copies of every traffic
citation which has been spoiled, or upon which any entry has been made, and
not issued to an alleged violator.



(Prior Code, § 5-404)



§ 70.18  DISPOSITION OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS.



   (A)   The city police, upon issuing a traffic citation to an alleged
violator of any provision of this chapter, shall deposit a copy of the
traffic citation with the Prosecuting Attorney, unless the citation is just a
warning.



   (B)   Upon the deposit of the traffic citation with the Attorney,
the citation may be disposed of only by trial in court, or other official
action, including a forfeiture of bail, or by the deposit of sufficient bail
with, or payment of a fine to, the court by the person to whom the traffic
citation has been issued.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the city police to dispose of a
traffic citation, or copies thereof, or of the record of the issuance of the
same in a manner other than as required herein.



(Prior Code, § 5-405)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 29-422, 29-424



§ 70.19  ILLEGAL CANCELLATION OF CITATION.



   Any person who cancels, or solicits the cancellation of any traffic
citation in any manner other than as provided herein, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-406)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.20  DESTRUCTION OF SUMMONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to tear up, or destroy, a parking
tag placed upon any vehicle by the city police, and fail to appear in court
as directed by the tag.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-407)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions
of any section of this title shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Unless
otherwise specified in the particular section for which the person stands
convicted of violating, the penalty for the violation shall be in any amount
not less than $10 nor to exceed $1,000 and/or imprisonment for any length of
time not to exceed three months, in the discretion of the court, provided
whenever any section of this title shall declare a nuisance, a violation of
that section shall be penalized by a fine of not more than $1,000, in which
case a new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of
the failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 5-1101)



   (B)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this title, the city
may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the same, in the manner
provided by law. Whenever, in any action, it is established that a nuisance
exists, the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an
order of abatement as part of the judgment in the case.



(Prior Code, § 5-1102)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1720, 18-1722



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC RULES



Section



Speed Limits



   71.01   General rule



   71.02   School zones



Bicycles and Other Recreational Vehicles



   71.15   Lost or abandoned bicycles



   71.16   Skateboards



 



   71.99   Penalty



SPEED LIMITS



§ 71.01  GENERAL RULE.



   No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street, alley, or other
place at a rate of speed greater than 25 mph within the residential district,
and 20 mph within the business district, unless a different rate of speed is
specifically permitted by ordinance. In no instance shall a person drive a
vehicle on a highway at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under
the conditions. Where a different maximum speed is set by ordinance,
appropriate signs shall be posted.



(Neb. RS 60-6,186, 60-6,190)  (Prior Code, § 5-306)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.02  SCHOOL ZONES.



   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, when passing
premises on which school buildings are located as set forth in Chapter 73 of
this code of ordinances and which are used for school purposes, during school
recess, or while children are going to or leaving school between the hours of
7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., to drive the vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of
20 mph past the premises, and the driver shall stop at all stop signs located
at, or near, the school premises, and it shall be unlawful for the driver to
make a U-turn at any intersection where stop signs are located at, or near,
the school premise.



(Neb. RS 60-6,190)  (Prior Code, § 5-307)  (Ord. 1877, passed 9-5-1989) 
Penalty, see § 71.99



BICYCLES AND OTHER RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



§ 71.15  LOST OR ABANDONED BICYCLES.



   The Chief of Police will make every effort to identify bicycles found
to be lost or abandoned and return them to the rightful owner. In those cases
where the owner cannot be identified the bicycle shall be held for a period
of 90 days and will then be disposed of at public auction.



(Prior Code, § 5-606)



§ 71.16  SKATEBOARDS.



   No person shall skate or use or ride upon any skateboard or similar
device upon or over the public sidewalks or streets on Norris Avenue, First
Street East or First Street West between "A" Street and "E" Street in the
city.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-331)



§ 71.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 70.99.



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING AND STOPPING



Section



General Provisions



   72.01   General regulations



   72.02   Unattended vehicles



   72.03   Parking and no parking areas



   72.04   Restricted areas



   72.05   Snow emergency



   72.06   Time limit



   72.07   Prima facie proof of responsibility



   72.08   Emergency vehicles



   72.09   Inoperative or unlicensed vehicles



Handicapped Parking



   72.15   Definitions



   72.16   On-street parking



   72.17   Off-street parking



   72.18   Permit issuance



   72.19   Transport permit



   72.20   Permit contents



   72.21   Permit period; renewal fee



   72.22   Permit nontransferable



   72.23   Citation issuance



   72.24   Unauthorized vehicle removal



   72.25   Handicapped parking infraction



Loading and Stopping



   72.35   Loading of vehicles



   72.36   Contractor and repairperson permits



   72.37   Trucks and other specified vehicles



Enforcement



   72.50   Removal of illegally parked vehicles



   72.51   Parking violations



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 72.01  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   No person shall park any vehicle, or approach the curb with a vehicle,
except when headed in the direction of the traffic. Vehicles, when parked,
shall stand parallel with and adjacent to the curb or edge of the roadway, in
such manner as to have both right wheels within 12 inches of the curb or edge
of the roadway, and so as to leave at least four feet between the vehicle so
parked and any other parked vehicles, except where the governing body
designates that vehicles shall be parked at an angle so as to have the front
right wheel at the curb or edge of the roadway. Where stalls are designated
either on the curb or pavement, vehicles shall be parked within the stalls.



(Neb. RS 60-680, 60-6,167)  (Prior Code, § 5-1002)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.02  UNATTENDED VEHICLES.



   No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall allow the
vehicle to stand unattended without first effectively setting the brakes
thereon and, when standing upon any grade, without turning the front wheels
of the vehicle to the curb or side of the street. The driver of a motor
vehicle, when traveling upon a down grade upon any street, shall not coast
with the gears of the vehicle in neutral.



(Neb. RS 60-6,168)  (Prior Code, § 5-1001)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.03  PARKING AND NO PARKING AREAS.



   (A)   The governing body may, by resolution, designate any street,
or portion thereof, where vehicles shall be parked parallel with and adjacent
to the curb or at an angle so as to have the right front wheel at the curb.



(Neb. RS 60-6,167)  (Prior Code, § 5-1003)



   (B)   The governing body may, by resolution, set aside any street,
alley, public way, or portion thereof where the parking of a particular kind
or class of vehicle shall be prohibited, or where the parking of any vehicle
shall be prohibited. No vehicle prohibited from parking thereon shall stand
or be parked adjacent to the curb of the street, alley, public way, or
portion thereof, longer than a period of time necessary to load and unload
freight or passengers.



(Prior Code, § 5-1004)



(Neb. RS 60-680)



§ 72.04  RESTRICTED AREAS.



   (A)   No vehicle, while parked, shall have any portion thereof
projecting into any alley entrance.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-1005)



   (B)   No vehicle shall be parked in any alley, except for the
purpose of loading or unloading during the time necessary to load or unload,
which shall not exceed the maximum limit of one-half hour. Every vehicle
while loading or unloading in any alley shall be parked in such manner as
will cause the least obstruction possible to traffic in the alley.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-1006)



   (C)   No vehicle shall be parked within 15 feet in either direction
of any fire hydrant nor within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station.



(Neb. RS 60-6,166)  (Prior Code, § 5-1007)



   (D)   The governing body may, by resolution, prohibit the parking or
stopping except for loading or unloading of passengers or freight, of
vehicles at the curb on streets directly in front of any entrance to a school
house, school building, theater, or other building, and the curbs adjacent to
the entrance of the school house, school building, theater, or other building
shall be painted yellow to indicate the prohibition.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-1008)



   (E)   Except in compliance with traffic control devices, no vehicle
shall be parked or left standing for any purpose, except momentarily to load
or discharge passengers, within 25 feet of the intersection of curb lines, or
if none, then within 15 feet of the intersection of property lines, nor where
any curb lines are painted red or yellow to indicate a prohibition against
parking.



(Neb. RS 60-6,166)  (Prior Code, § 5-1009)



   (F)   No person shall, except in case of an accident or emergency,
stop any vehicle in any location where the stopping will obstruct any street,
intersection, or entrance to an alley or public or private drive.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-1010)



   (G)   No vehicle shall park on any street with its left side to the
curb, unless the street has been designated to be a "one-way" street by the
governing body. Vehicles must not be parked at any curb in  a position as to
prevent another vehicle already parked at the curb from moving away.



(Neb. RS 60-6,167)  (Prior Code, § 5-1011)



   (H)   No person shall adjust or repair any automobile or motorcycle,
or race the motor of same, while standing on the public streets or alleys of
this city, excepting in case of breakdown or other emergency requiring same.
No person or employee connected with a garage or repair shop shall use
sidewalks, streets, or alleys in the vicinity of a garage or shop for the
purpose of working on automobiles or vehicles of any description.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-1012)



   (I)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle over or upon any
sidewalk or sidewalk space within the city. The tires, wheels, or any other
portion of the vehicle supporting any portion of its weight, standing,
resting, or placed upon or over any sidewalk, curb, or sidewalk space shall
be deemed a violation of this section. The definition contained herein shall
be cumulative with other definitions of parking in this code and shall not be
construed to be limiting in character.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-1024)



(Ord. 92-2085, passed 7-6-1992; Ord. 95-2340, passed 11-6-1995)  Penalty,
see § 70.99



§ 72.05  SNOW EMERGENCY.



   (A)   Whenever it is determined by the City Manager, upon the best
information available to him or her that a snow storm in which the
anticipated snow fall is greater than two inches is imminent, he or she may
call a general snow emergency within the city, during which certain parking
provisions as are hereinafter provided shall be strictly observed and
complied with. Upon termination of the period for compliance with the parking
regulations, as hereinafter provided or whenever it is deemed advisable by
the City Manager, he or she may terminate the snow emergency and rescind the
concomitant parking regulations. Upon the calling of a snow emergency by the
City Manager, the City Manager shall endeavor to notify the public according
to the best and most immediate means available to him or her. He or she shall
likewise notify the public at the termination of the snow emergency.



   (B)   In the event that a snow emergency is called, parking on
either side of the arterial and collector streets designated in Chapter 74,
Schedule II of this code of ordinances, shall be prohibited for a period of
24 hours from and after the time when the snow emergency is called.



   (C)   The leaving of any vehicle remaining on the described public
streets during the period of 24 hours from and after the designation of a
snow emergency shall constitute a misdemeanor. The Police Department is
hereby authorized to have any vehicle towed by the city or a representative
authorized by the Police Department. The Police Department is further
authorized to issue citations for violation of this section and the minimum
fine for violation is hereby set at $25 each violation. The owner or party in
possession of the vehicle may have the vehicle returned to him or her upon
payment of the towing charges and recover the vehicle at the holding area
designated by the city.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-1023)  (Ord. 1687, passed 5-2-1983;
Ord. 1730, passed 5-7-1984;  Ord. 1831, passed 11-2-1987; Ord. 1882, passed
11-20-1989)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.06  TIME LIMIT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be parked on the
streets of the city, except where designated otherwise, for a period longer
than 72 hours without the vehicle being moved.



(Prior Code, § 5-1014)



   (B)   The governing body may, by resolution, entirely prohibit, or
fix a time limit for, the parking and stopping of vehicles on any street,
streets, or district designated by such resolution, and the parking, or
stopping, of any vehicle in any such street, streets, or district, for a
period of time longer than fixed in the resolution shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-1018)



(Ord. 1633, passed 1-4-1982)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.07  PRIMA FACIE PROOF OF RESPONSIBILITY.



   The fact that a vehicle, which is parked in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, is registered in the name of a person shall be
prima facie proof that that person was in control of the automobile at the
time of the parking.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-1029)



§ 72.08  EMERGENCY VEHICLES.



   The provisions of this chapter regulating the movement, parking, and
standing of vehicles shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles, as
defined in this chapter, while the driver of the vehicle is operating the
same in an emergency in the necessary performance of public duties.



(Neb. RS 60-6,114)  (Prior Code, § 5-1028)



§ 72.09  INOPERATIVE OR UNLICENSED VEHICLES.



   No motor vehicle which is not in running condition or which is not
fully equipped and licensed for lawful operation on the streets of the city
or which is not supplied with fuel and lubrication for immediate operation
shall be parked or left standing in any highway, street, or alley of the
city. In case of emergency, a motor vehicle not in such condition, not so
equipped or not so supplied may be parked for such time not to exceed one
hour as may be required for its removal.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-1019)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 60-323



HANDICAPPED PARKING



§ 72.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSON.  Any individual with a severe visual
or physical impairment which limits personal mobility and results in an
inability to travel unassisted more than 200 feet without the use of a
wheelchair, crutch, walker, or prosthetic, orthotic, or other assistant
device, any individual whose personal mobility is limited as a result of
respiratory problems, any individual who has a cardiac condition to the
extent that his or her functional limitations are classified in severity as
being Class III or Class IV, according to standards set by the American Heart
Association, and any individual who has permanently lost all or substantially
all the use of one or more limbs.



   HANDICAPPED PARKING INFRACTION.  The violation of any section of this
chapter regulating the use of parking spaces designated for use by
handicapped or disabled persons.



   TEMPORARILY HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSON.  Any handicapped or
disabled person whose personal mobility is expected to be limited in that
manner for no longer than one year.



(Neb. RS 18-1738, 18-1741.01)  (Prior Code, § 5-1013.02)  (Ord. 98-2478,
passed 1-18-1999)



§ 72.16  ON-STREET PARKING.



   (A)   (1)   The governing body may designate parking spaces for
the exclusive use of:



         (a)   Handicapped or disabled persons whose motor
vehicles display the distinguishing license plates issued to handicapped or
disabled persons pursuant to Neb. RS 60-3113;



         (b)   Handicapped or disabled persons whose motor
vehicles display a distinguishing license plate issued to a handicapped or
disabled person by another state;



         (c)   Other handicapped or disabled persons or
temporarily handicapped or disabled persons, as certified by the city, whose
motor vehicles display the permit specified in Neb. RS 18-1739; and



         (d)   Other motor vehicles, as certified by the city,
which display the permit.



      (2)   All  permits shall be displayed by attaching the permit
to the motor vehicle's rearview mirror so as to be clearly visible through
the front windshield. When there is no rearview mirror, the permit shall be
displayed on the dashboard.



   (B)   If the governing body so designates a parking space, it shall
be indicated by posting aboveground and immediately adjacent to and visible
from each space a sign which is in conformance with the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices. In addition to the sign, the space may also be
indicated by blue paint on the curb or edge of the paved portion of the
street adjacent to the space.



(Neb. RS 18-1736, 18-1737)  (Prior Code, § 5-1013)  (Ord. 1758, passed
10-1-1984; Ord. 1906, passed 4-16-1990; Ord. 98-2476, passed 1-18-1999)



§ 72.17  OFF-STREET PARKING.



   (A)   The governing body and any person in lawful possession of any
off-street parking facility may designate stalls or spaces in the facility
for the exclusive use of:



      (1)   Handicapped or disabled persons whose motor vehicles
display the distinguishing license plates issued to such individuals pursuant
to Neb. RS 60-3,113;



      (2)   Other handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily
handicapped or disabled persons, as certified by the city, whose vehicles
display the permit specified in Neb. RS 18-1739; and



      (3)   Other motor vehicles, as certified by the city, which
display the permit.



   (B)   The designation shall be made by posting aboveground and
immediately adjacent to and visible from each stall or space a sign which is
in conformance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.



(Neb. RS 18-1737)  (Prior Code, § 5-1013.01)  (Ord. 98-2477, passed
1-18-1999)



§ 72.18  PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall take an application from a handicapped or
disabled person or temporarily handicapped or disabled person or his or her
parent, legal guardian, or foster parent for a permit which will entitle the
holder thereof or a person driving a motor vehicle for the purpose of
transporting the holder to park in those spaces provided for by this chapter
when the holder of the permit will enter or exit the motor vehicle while it
is parked in the spaces. For purposes of this section, the handicapped or
disabled person or temporarily handicapped or disabled person shall be
considered the holder of the permit.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall not accept the application for a permit
of any person making application contrary to the provisions of Neb. RS
18-1738.02.



   (C)   A person applying for a permit or for the renewal of a permit
shall complete an application, shall provide proof of identity, and shall
submit a completed medical form containing the statutory criteria for
qualification and signed by a physician, physician assistant, or nurse
practitioner certifying that the person who will be the holder meets the
definition of handicapped or disabled person or temporarily handicapped or
disabled person. In the case of a temporarily handicapped or disabled person,
the certifying physician, physician assistant, or nurse practitioner shall
indicate the estimated date of recovery or that the temporary handicap or
disability will continue for a period of six months, whichever is less.



   (D)   A person may hold only one permit under this section and may
hold either a permit under this section or a permit under § 72.19, but not
both.



   (E)   The City Clerk shall submit to the Department of Motor
Vehicles the name, address, and license number of all persons applying for a
permit pursuant to this section.



(Neb. RS 18-1738, 18-1738.02)  (Prior Code, § 5-1013.03)  (Ord. 98-2479,
passed 1-18-1999)



§ 72.19  TRANSPORT PERMIT.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall take an application from any person for a
motor vehicle permit which will entitle the holder thereof or a person
driving the motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting handicapped or
disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons to park in
those spaces provided for by this chapter if the motor vehicle is used
primarily for the transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or
temporarily handicapped or disabled persons. The parking permit shall be used
only when the motor vehicle for which it was issued is being used for the
transportation of a handicapped or disabled person or temporarily handicapped
or disabled person and the person will enter or exit the motor vehicle while
it is parked in the designated spaces.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall not accept the application for a permit
of any person making application contrary to Neb. RS 18-1738.02.



   (C)   A person applying for a permit or for the renewal of a permit
pursuant to this section shall apply for a permit for each motor vehicle used
for the transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily
handicapped or disabled persons, shall complete forms as are provided to the
City Clerk by the Department of Motor Vehicles, and shall demonstrate to the
City Clerk that each motor vehicle is used primarily for the transportation
of handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled
persons. A copy of the completed application form shall be given to each
applicant.



   (D)   No more than one permit shall be issued for each motor
vehicle. A person may hold either a permit under this section or a permit
under § 72.18, but not both.



   (E)   The City Clerk shall submit to the Department of Motor
Vehicles the name, address, and license number of all persons applying for a
permit pursuant to this section.



(Neb. RS 18-1738.01, 18-1738.02)  (Prior Code, § 5-1013.04)  (Ord.
98-2480, passed 1-18-1999)



§ 72.20  PERMIT CONTENTS.



   (A)   The permit issued for handicapped or disabled parking shall be
constructed of a durable plastic designed to resist normal wear or fading for
the term of the permit's issuance and printed so as to minimize the
possibility of alteration following issuance. The permit shall be of a
design, size, configuration, color, and construction and contain such
information as specified in the rules and regulations adopted and promulgated
by the United States Department of Transportation in the Uniform System for
Handicapped Parking, 23 C.F.R. part 1235.



   (B)   In addition to the requirements of division (A) of this
section, the permit shall show the expiration date and such identifying
information with regard to the handicapped or disabled person or temporarily
handicapped or disabled person to whom it is issued as is necessary to the
enforcement of this chapter.



   (C)   No permit shall be issued to any person or for any motor
vehicle if any parking permit has been issued to the person or for the motor
vehicle and the permit has been suspended pursuant to § 72.22. At the
expiration of the suspension, a permit may be renewed upon the payment of the
permit fee.



   (D)   A duplicate permit may be provided without cost if the
original permit is destroyed, lost, or stolen. The duplicate permit shall be
issued in the same manner as the original permit, except that a newly
completed medical form need not be provided if a completed medical form
submitted at the time of the most recent application for a permit or its
renewal is on file with the City Clerk or the Department of Motor Vehicles. A
duplicate permit shall be valid for the remainder of the period for which the
original permit was issued.



(Neb. RS 18-1739)  (Prior Code, § 5-1013.05)  (Ord. 98-2481, passed
1-18-1999)



§ 72.21  PERMIT PERIOD; RENEWAL FEE.



   (A)   All permanently issued permits authorized under this chapter
for handicapped or disabled parking prior to August 1, 2005, shall be valid
for a period ending on September 30 of the third year following the date of
issuance. All permanently issued permits after August 1, 2005, shall be valid
for a period ending on the last day of the month of the applicant's birthday
in the third year after issuance and shall expire on that day.



   (B)   All permits authorized under this chapter for temporarily
handicapped or disabled parking shall be issued for a period ending not more
than six months after the date of issuance but may be renewed for a one-time
period not to exceed six months. For the renewal period, there shall be
submitted an additional application with proof of a handicap or disability.



(Neb. RS 18-1740)  (Prior Code, § 5-1013.06)  (Ord. 98-2482, passed
1-18-1999; Ord. 2006-2762, passed 3-24-2006)



§ 72.22  PERMIT NONTRANSFERABLE.



   Permits issued under this chapter shall not be transferable and shall
be used only by the party to whom issued or for the motor vehicle for which
issued and only for the purpose for which it is issued. No person shall alter
or reproduce in any manner a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. No
person shall knowingly hold more than one permit or knowingly provide false
information on an application for a permit. Any violation of this section
shall be cause for suspension of the permit for a period of six months. In
addition, the trial court shall impose a fine of not more than $250 which may
be waived by the court if, at the time of sentencing, all handicapped parking
permits issued to or in the possession of the offender are returned to the
court. At the expiration of the six-month period, a suspended permit may be
renewed upon payment of the permit fee.



(Neb. RS 18-1741)  (Prior Code, § 5-1013.07)  (Ord. 98-2483, passed
1-18-1999)



§ 72.23  CITATION ISSUANCE.



   (A)   For any offense classified as a handicapped parking
infraction, a handicapped parking citation may be issued by any peace officer
or by any person designated by ordinance by the governing body to exercise
the authority to issue a citation for any handicapped parking infraction.



   (B)   When a handicapped parking citation is issued for a
handicapped parking infraction, the person issuing the handicapped parking
citation shall enter thereon all required information, including the name and
address of the cited person or, if not known, the license number and
description of the offending motor vehicle, the offense charged, and the time
and place the person cited is to appear in court. Unless the person cited
requests an earlier date, the time of appearance shall be at least three days
after the issuance of the handicapped parking citation. One copy of the
handicapped parking citation shall be delivered to the person cited or
attached to the offending motor vehicle.



   (C)   At least 24 hours before the time set for the appearance of
the cited person, either the City Attorney or other person authorized by law
to issue a complaint for the particular offense shall issue and file a
complaint charging the person with a handicapped parking infraction or the
person shall be released from the obligation to appear as specified.



   (D)   The trial of any person for a handicapped parking infraction
shall be by the court without a jury. A person cited for a handicapped
parking violation may waive his or her right to trial.



   (E)   For any handicapped parking citation issued for a handicapped
parking infraction by reason of the failure of a vehicle to display a
handicapped parking permit issued pursuant to Neb. RS 18-1738 or 18-1738.01,
the complaint shall be dismissed if, within seven business days after the
date of issuance of the citation, the person cited files with the court the
affidavit included on the citation, signed by a peace officer certifying that
the recipient is the lawful possessor in his or her own right of a
handicapped parking permit issued under Neb. RS 18-1738 or 18-1738.01 and
that the peace officer has personally viewed the permit.



(Neb. RS 18-1741.01, 18-1741.04, 18-1741.06)  (Prior Code, § 5-1013.08) 
(Ord. 98-2484, passed  1-18-1999)



§ 72.24  UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE REMOVAL.



   (A)   The owner or person in lawful possession of an off-street
parking facility, after notifying the Police or Sheriff's Department, and the
city providing on-street parking or owning, operating, or providing an
off-street parking facility, may cause the removal, from a stall or space
designated exclusively for handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily
handicapped or disabled persons or motor vehicles for the transportation of
such persons, of any vehicle not displaying the proper permit or the
distinguishing license plates specified in this chapter, if there is posted
immediately adjacent to and visible from the stall or space a sign which
clearly and conspicuously states the area so designated as a tow-in zone.



   (B)   Anyone parking in any on-street parking space which has been
designated exclusively for handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily
handicapped or disabled persons or motor vehicles for the transportation of
the persons, or in any so exclusively designated parking space in any
off-street parking facility, without properly displaying the proper permit or
when the handicapped or disabled person to whom or for whom the license plate
or permit is issued will not enter or exit the vehicle while it is parked in
the designated space shall be guilty of a handicapped parking infraction as
defined in § 72.15, and shall be subject to the procedures as set forth in
§ 72.23 and the penalty provided for in this chapter. The display on a motor
vehicle of a distinguishing license plate or permit issued to a handicapped
or disabled person by and under the duly constituted authority of another
state shall constitute a full and complete defense in any action for a
handicapped parking infraction. If the identity of the person who parked the
vehicle in violation of this section cannot be readily determined, the owner
or person in whose name the vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie
responsible for the violation and shall be guilty and subject to the penalty
provided for in this chapter.



   (C)   In the case of a privately owned off-street parking facility,
the owner or person in lawful possession of the facility shall not be
required to inform the city of a violation of this section prior to the city
issuing the violator a handicapped parking infraction citation.



(Neb. RS 18-1737)  (Prior Code, § 5-1013.09)  (Ord. 98-2485, passed
1-18-1999)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.25  HANDICAPPED PARKING INFRACTION.



   Any person found guilty of a handicapped parking infraction shall be
fined not more than $150 for the first offense, not more than $300 for a
second offense within a one-year period, and not more than $500 for a third
or subsequent offense within a one-year period.



(Neb. RS 18-1741.02)



LOADING AND STOPPING



§ 72.35  LOADING OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   (1)   The City Council may designate, by resolution or
motion, freight loading zones and passenger loading zones at its discretion.
The zones shall be properly marked.



      (2)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in a
freight loading zone for any purpose or length of time other than for the
expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in the
zones during the hours when the provision applicable to the zones are in
effect. No person shall stop or park any vehicle, for any purpose, in any
freight loading zone in excess of 20 minutes. The driver of a passenger
vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight loading zone for
the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading
passengers when the stopping does not interfere with any motor vehicle used
for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or about to
enter the zone. In no case shall any passenger vehicle stop in a freight
loading zone for more than five minutes and in no case shall any passenger
vehicle be left in any freight loading zone without a driver in attendance.



      (3)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle in a
passenger loading zone for any purpose or length of time other than for the
expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. No person shall stop or park
any vehicle, for any purpose, in any passenger loading zone in excess of ten
minutes.



(Prior Code, § 5-1020)



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall
stop, stand, or park a vehicle on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or
parked at the edge or curb of the street or in any traffic lane, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or
the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-1021)



   (C)   No vehicle shall remain backed up to any curb except while it
is actually loading or unloading and in no case longer than the actual
loading or unloading requires.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-1022)



(Ord. 1871, passed 1-15-1989)



§ 72.36  CONTRACTOR AND REPAIRPERSON PERMITS.



   (A)   The City Manager shall be empowered to issue parking permits
to contractors and repairpersons for the parking of their business vehicles
in the course of their business in the city's limited time parking zones for
a period of three weeks.



   (B)   The permits and applications for permits shall appear on forms
approved by the City Manager.



   (C)   Each permit shall be applicable for only one vehicle and for
the use of one parking stall.



   (D)   The dates for which the permit is valid shall be reflected on
the permit and the permit shall be prominently displayed on the rear window
of each vehicle.



   (E)   Contractors and repairpersons shall mean any person employed
in either trade.



   (F)   The City Council is empowered to promulgate rules and
regulations as are necessary for the implementation and operation of the
permit system hereunder by resolution.



(Prior Code, § 5-1033)  (Ord. 1685, passed 3-21-1983; Ord. 2011-2858,
passed 6-6-2011)



§ 72.37  TRUCKS AND OTHER SPECIFIED VEHICLES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or leave
standing, on any street, alley, public right-of-way, or private premises in
any area of the city zoned Residential, any vehicle containing garbage, or
dead or rotting animal matter. Any vehicle parked in violation of this
section is declared to be a nuisance.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-1025)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing
on any street, alley, public right-of-way, or private premises in any area of
the city zoned Residential, any petroleum or petroleum distillate transport
vehicle. Nor shall any person park or leave standing on any street, alley,
public right-of-way, or private premises in any area of the city zoned
Residential, any anhydrous ammonia transport vehicle or any vehicle used to
store or transport anhydrous ammonia or other farm or industrial chemicals.
Any vehicle parked in violation of this section is declared to be a nuisance.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-1026)



   (C)   Except under authority of a valid permit issued as set out
herein:



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any truck, truck-tractor, or
trailer, except for trucks with a rated carrying capacity of less than one
and one-half tons (3,000 pounds), to be parking or stored, on any street,
alley, or public right-of-way where parking is permitted in any part of the
city which is zoned as Residential-Low Density, Residential-Medium Density,
Residential-Medium Density Mobile Home, or Residential-High Density of the
city; and moving vans may be exempted up to 24 hours for loading and
unloading.



   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      TRAILER.  Any vehicle, with or without motive power, designed
for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.



      TRUCK.  Any motor vehicle not designed, used or maintained
primarily for the transportation of persons as a passenger vehicle. The
definition of TRUCK shall include all common carriers, all motor vehicles
designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property or
equipment, and shall include all vehicles which constitute commercial
vehicles under Neb. RS 60-301 to 60-335 inclusive.



      TRUCK-TRACTOR.  Any motor vehicle designed and primarily used
for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other
than a part of the weight of the load so drawn.



   (E)   The fact that a truck, truck-tractor, or trailer, which is
legally parked, is registered in the name of a person shall be considered
prima facie proof that the person was in control of the truck, truck-tractor,
or trailer at the time of the parking.



   (F)   The City Manager shall be empowered to issue permits for the
parking of trucks, truck-tractors, or trailers in the residential areas of
the city as required by this section.



      (1)   The permits and applications for permits shall appear on
forms approved by the City Manager.



      (2)   The permits shall be for a period not to exceed 72 hours
and the period shall be displayed prominently on the permit.



      (3)   Any alteration of a permit issued hereunder shall
constitute a violation of this section.



      (4)   The permit shall be issued upon a showing by the
applicant of a reasonable necessity for purposes of loading or unloading only
to exceed the limits set by this section. However, no permit shall be issued
for a vehicle when the parking of the vehicle would constitute a nuisance
under city ordinances or state law, nor for any other purpose than loading or
unloading.



      (5)   Any misrepresentation or false statements in an
application for a permit shall constitute a violation of this section.



      (6)   The City Council is empowered to promulgate such further
rules and regulations as are necessary for the implementation and operation
of the permit system hereunder by resolution.



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Prior Code, § 5-1027) (Ord. 2011-2858, passed 6-6-2011)



Penalty, see § 70.99



ENFORCEMENT



§ 72.50  REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES.



   (A)   Whenever any police officer shall find a vehicle standing upon
a street or alley in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the
individual may remove or have the vehicle removed, or require the driver or
other person in charge of the vehicle to move the vehicle, to a position off
the roadway of the street or alley or from the street or alley.



   (B)   The owner or other person lawfully entitled to the possession
of the vehicle may be charged with the reasonable cost for the removal and
storage, payable before the vehicle is released. Any towing or storage fee
shall become a security interest in the vehicle prior to all other claims.
This fee shall be in addition to any other fees or penalties owed the city
for the vehicle.



(Neb. RS 60-680, 60-6,165)  (Prior Code, § 5-1034)  (Ord. 1759, passed
10-1-1984)



§ 72.51  PARKING VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Violations of city parking regulations may be given notice in
the form of an official Police tag attached to the motor vehicle of the
violator, which notice may require the violator to appear forthwith at the
Police Department. If the violator may fail to appear in response to the
notice, within a period of 15 days and pay the penalty in full, a complaint
may be filed and a summons to appear in court shall be issued to the violator
for the violation.



(Prior Code, § 5-1031)



   (B)   Any violator of any city parking regulations appearing as
required by division (A) and desiring to plead guilty and waive court
appearance shall sign a guilty plea and waiver of court appearance within 15
days of issuance, and shall pay to the city the sum set by resolution of the
City Council and set out in Chapter 38, Fee Schedule, as penalty for the
violation.



(Prior Code, § 5-1032)  (Ord. 95-2311, passed 4-3-1995)



(Neb. RS 60-680)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-253



CHAPTER 73:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Speed limits



SCHEDULE I.  SPEED LIMITS.



 

Speed Zone
 
Speed Limit




"B" Street from East Sixth Street to the east corporate limit line
 
35 mph


"B" Street from East Sixth Street to Federal Avenue
 
25 mph


"B" Street from Federal Avenue to West Eleventh Street
 
30 mph


West Highways 6 and 34 from 11th Street West to 400 feet west of the junction
of Highways 6, 34, and 83
 
30 mph


West Highways 6 and 34 from 400 feet west junction with US-83 and a point
1,000 feet west of Wedgewood Drive
 
45 mph


North Highway 83 from 11th Street West to a point 1,200 feet north of the
north junction line of Highways 6, 34, and 83
 
30 mph


North Highway 83 from 1,200 feet north of the north junction line of Highways
6, 34, and 83 to 1,000 feet north of West "Q" Street
 
45 mph


North Highway 83 from 1,000 feet north of West "Q" Street to the north
corporate limit line
 
50 mph


Sixth Street East from "B" Street to the south corporate limit line
 
35 mph


East "G" Street from Third Street East to Fourth Street East
 
20 mph School Speed Zone


East "F" Street from Third Street East to Fourth Street East
 
20 mph School Speed Zone


Third Street East from East "F" Street to East "G" Street
 
20 mph School Speed Zone


Fourth Street East from East "F" Street to East "G" Street
 
20 mph School Speed Zone


West "F" Street from First Street West to Second Street West
 
20 mph School Speed Zone


West "G" Street from First Street West to Second Street West
 
20 mph School Speed Zone


First Street West from West "F" Street to West "G" Street
 
20 mph School Speed Zone


Second Street West from West "F" Street to West "G" Street
 
20 mph School Speed Zone


Seventh Street West from West "E" Street to Sunset Road
 
20 mph School Speed Zone


Sunset Road from Seventh Street West to Tenth Street West
 
20 mph School Speed Zone


West "O" Street from West Circle Drive to Third Street West
 
20 mph School Speed Zone


Third Street West from West "O" Street to West "Q" Street
 
20 mph School Speed Zone


"H" Street from Eleventh Street east to Airport Road
 
35 mph


Eleventh Street East from East "C" Street north to the corporate limits
 
35 mph


Third Street West from West "T" Street north to the corporate limits
 
35 mph




 



(Ord. 2006-2770, passed 4-17-2006; Ord. 2009-2825, passed 8-3-2009; Ord.
2012-2884, passed 9-17-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Speed limits, see Neb. RS 60-6,190



CHAPTER 74:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Restricted areas



   II.   Snow emergency parking



SCHEDULE I.  RESTRICTED AREAS.



 

No Parking Zone


Either side of "B" Street of the city


The south side of East "H" Street of the city


Either side of West "J" Street from Norris Avenue to Westridge Parkway



 



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Ord. 1888, passed 1-2-1990)



SCHEDULE II.  SNOW EMERGENCY PARKING.



 

No Parking For 24 Hours During Snow Emergency




Airport Road from "B" Street North to Airport Terminal


East 15th Street from East "H" Street to East "J" Street


East 14th Street from East "C" Street to East "H" Street


Apollo Street from East 14th Street to East "F" Street


East 11th Street from East "B" Street to north city limits


East 6th Street from East "B" Street to East "H" Street


East 7th Street from East "H" Street to Country Club Drive


Country Club Drive from East 7th Street to East 5th Street


East 5th Street from East "H" Street to Parkview


East 4th Street from East "F" Street to East "G" Street


East 3rd Street from East "B" Street to East "H" Street


East 3rd Street from East "L" Street to East "M" Street


East 2nd Street from East "A" Street to East "B" Street


East 1st Street from East "A" Street to East "M" Street


Norris Avenue from East "A" Street to north city limits


East "F" Street from East 3rd Street to East 6th Street


East "F" Street from East 11th Street to Apollo Street


East "G" Street from East 3rd Street to East 4th Street


East "H" Street from Norris Avenue to Airport Road


East "L" Street from Norris Avenue to East 5th Street


East "M" Street from Norris Avenue to East 5th Street


East "O" Street from Norris Avenue thru Kelley Park Drive then thru Park View
to Seminole Drive


East "J" Street from East 11th Street to East 15th Street


Seminole Drive from Parkview to Park Avenue


Park Avenue from Kelley Park Drive to Norris Avenue


North Cherokee from Seminole Drive to Norris Avenue


All state highways within the city limits


West 1st Street from West "A" Street to West "O" Street




 



 

No Parking For 24 Hours During Snow Emergency




West 2nd Street from West "A" Street to West "E" Street


West 3rd Street from West "A" Street to north city limits


West Circle Drive from West "O" Street to West "Q" Street


West 5th Street from Public Safety Center to West "Q" Street


West 7th Street from West "B" Street to West "J" Street


West 8th Street from West "B" Street to West 7th Street


West 9th Street from West "B" Street to West "E" Street


West 10th Street from West "B" Street to West "Q" Street


West 14th Street from West "J" Street to West "O" Street


"A" Street from West 1st Street to East 2nd Street


"C" Street from West 5th Street to East 1st Street


"D" Street from West 7th Street to East 1st Street


"E" Street from West 7th Street to East 1st Street


West "J" Street from Spoon Drive to Norris Avenue


West "M" Street from Norris Avenue to West 14th Street


West "O" Street from Norris Avenue to West 5th Street; West 14th Street to N.
Hwy 83


West "P" Street from West 3rd Street thru West 1st Street; thru Marsh Avenue
to Norris Avenue


West "Q" Street from West 3rd Street to N. Hwy 83


West "F" Street from West 7th Street to West 5th Street


West "G" Street from West 7th Street to Westridge


West "H" Street from West 7th Street to Westridge; West 10th Street to N.
Hwy. 83


Sunset Road from Westridge to West 10th Street


Federal Avenue from "B" Street to South Street


South Street from Federal Avenue to South Hwy 83


All streets on the golf course




 



(Neb. RS 60-680)  (Ord. 1687, passed 5-2-1983; Ord. 1730, passed 5-7-1984;
Ord. 1831, passed 11-2-1987; Ord. 1882, passed 11-20-1989)



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         90.   ANIMALS





         91.   FIRE PREVENTION; FIREWORKS; POISONOUS OR FLAMMABLE
GAS; EXPLOSIVES





         92.   FAIR HOUSING





         93.   UNLICENSED VEHICLES





         94.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS





         95.   NUISANCE; HEALTH AND SANITATION





         96.   TREES AND SHRUBS




CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS



Section



General Provisions



   90.01   Running at large prohibited



   90.02   Certain animals banned from city



   90.03   Animal cruelty prohibited; defined



   90.04   Vicious or dangerous animal; killing not cruelty



   90.05   Maintenance of animal enclosures



   90.06   Enforcement right of entry



   90.07   Violation citation



Dogs; Cats; Hybrid Animals



   90.20   Definitions



   90.21   Running at large declared a public nuisance



   90.22   Number of dogs and hybrid dogs per residence



   90.23   Running at large prohibited



   90.24   Dangerous/vicious dogs and hybrid dogs



   90.25   Capture impossible



   90.26   Interference with police



   90.27   Killing and poisoning



   90.28   Barking and offensive dogs and hybrid dogs



   90.29   Fighting of dogs and hybrid animals



   90.30   Impounding



   90.31   Feeding of feral animal



   90.32   Owner's responsibility to pick up waste



Rabies Immunization



   90.40   Required of animals subject to rabies; certificate and tag



   90.41   Type of vaccine to be used; reimmunization



   90.42   Age when required



   90.43   Animals found running at large without immunization tag
attached to collar or harness declared public nuisance



   90.44   Confinement of animals to premises when public safety
endangered by rabid animals



   90.45   Impoundment of animals without immunization tags;
disposition of impounded animals



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 90.01  RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper, or harborer of any animal,
or any person having the charge, custody, or control thereof, to permit a
horse, mule, cow, sheep, goat, swine, or other animal to be driven or run at
large on any of the public ways and property, or upon the property of
another, or to be tethered or staked out in a manner so as to allow the
animal to reach or pass into any public way.



(Prior Code, § 6-301)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-235



§ 90.02  CERTAIN ANIMALS BANNED FROM CITY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain within the
corporate limits any horses, mules, cattle, sheep, goats, hogs, or similar
animals or any chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, guineas, or other fowl.



(Prior Code, § 6-302)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-240



§ 90.03  ANIMAL CRUELTY PROHIBITED; DEFINED.



   (A)   Cruelty to animals shall be prohibited within the city limits.
CRUELTY shall be defined as follows:



      (1)   Physical abuse.  It is unlawful for any person or
persons to willfully or maliciously kill, maim, disfigure, torture, beat with
a stick, chain, club or other object, mutilate, burn, or scald with any
substance, or otherwise cruelly set upon any animal, except that reasonable
force may be employed to drive off vicious or trespassing animals.



      (2)   Care and maintenance.  It is unlawful for any person or
persons to fail, refuse, or neglect to provide any animal in his or her
charge or custody, as owner or otherwise, with proper food, drink, shade,
shelter, or veterinary care as may be necessary for diseased or injured
animals. Any animal habitually kept outside shall be provided with a
structurally sound, moisture-proof and windproof shelter large enough to
accommodate and keep the animal reasonably clean, dry and comfortable.



      (3)   Leaving animals unattended in a vehicle.  It is
unlawful for any person or persons to place or confine or allow an animal to
be confined in a manner that it must remain in a motor vehicle or trailer
under conditions or for periods of time as may endanger the health or
well-being of the animal due to heat, lack of food or water, or any
circumstances which might cause suffering, disability or death.



      (4)   Abandonment of animals.  It is unlawful for any person
or persons to abandon or dump any animal within the city. All animals which
are abandoned shall be considered surrendered to the Animal Control Officer
for impoundment or disposal.



      (5)   Owner's cost.  Any person or persons violating this
section shall bear full cost and expenses incurred by the city in the care,
medical treatment, impoundment cost, and disposal of animals, including
removal from a vehicle.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to animals confined prior to
slaughter.



(Prior Code, § 6-304)  (Ord. 1769, passed 2-4-1985)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.04  VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS ANIMAL; KILLING NOT CRUELTY.



   No person shall kill or injure any animal by the use of firearms,
stones, clubs, poisons, or any other manner unless the animal is vicious or
dangerous and cannot be captured without danger to the persons attempting to
effect a capture of the animal.



(Prior Code, § 6-305)



§ 90.05  MAINTENANCE OF ANIMAL ENCLOSURES.



   All pens, cages, sheds, yards, or any other area or enclosure for the
confinement of animals and fowls not specifically barred within the corporate
limits shall be kept in a clean and orderly manner so as not to become a
menace or nuisance to the neighborhood in which the enclosure is located.



(Prior Code, § 6-306)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-206



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-240



§ 90.06  ENFORCEMENT RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   (A)   In the interest of public health, safety, and the general
welfare in regulating or prohibiting the keeping or running at large of any
animal and preventing violations of this chapter, any person keeping any
animal in the city by so doing does thereby authorize the Animal Control
Officer or city police to enter, without warrant, upon any private property
(but not within the residential structure) he or she owns or controls where
the animal is to be found for the purpose of enforcement of this chapter and
to seize the animal from the private property to abate ordinance violations.
Prior to entering upon the private property, the Animal Control Officer or
city police officer must first determine that there is probable cause to
enter upon the premises and the violation must be in plain view of the
officer. Any animal seized pursuant to this section shall immediately be
transported to and confined at the city Pound for disposition under the terms
of this chapter.



   (B)   Whenever any Animal Control Officer or police officer shall
observe a violation of this section and seize an animal pursuant to this
section, he or she shall immediately issue an animal control citation to the
owner of the animal requiring the owner to appear before the County Court on
or before the date specified on the citation for hearing on the matter.



(Prior Code, § 6-307)  (Ord. 1769, passed 2-4-1985)



§ 90.07  VIOLATION CITATION.



   (A)   Whenever a police officer of the city shall observe any
violation of this chapter, it shall be his or her duty to immediately issue
an animal control citation to the appropriate person.



   (B)   At the time of the commission of the alleged violation, the
accused may be served with a printed notice requiring him or her to make an
appearance on or before the date specified thereon and advising whether
execution of a waiver of appearance and plea of guilty has been made
available by the Court for the violation. The notice shall further apprise
the accused that upon direct refusal or failure to so appear, a warrant shall
be issued for his or her arrest, that he or she must appear at the Court
during the hours fixed by the judges of the City Court as shown on the notice.



(Prior Code, § 6-308)  (Ord. 1769, passed 2-4-1985)



DOGS; CATS; HYBRID ANIMALS



§ 90.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DOG. All dogs, male and female, of all ages.



   CAT. All cats, male and female, of all ages.



   HYBRID ANIMAL. Any animal that results from cross breeding between an
exotic animal and a domestic animal.



   OWNER, POSSESSOR. Any person who shall harbor or permit any dog, cat,
and/or hybrid animal to be for ten days or more in or about his or her house,
store, or enclosure, or remain to be fed, shall be deemed the owner and
possessor of such dog, cat, and/or hybrid animal and shall be deemed to be
liable for all penalties herein prescribed.



(Prior Code, § 6-101)  (Ord. 2009-2826, passed 8-17-2009)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 54-606, 77-4401



§ 90.21  RUNNING AT LARGE DECLARED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   All dogs, cats, and/or hybrid animals found running at large upon the
streets and public grounds of the city are hereby declared a public nuisance.
Dogs, cats, and/or hybrid animals found running at large may be destroyed or
impounded in the Municipal Dog Shelter by the Police Department.



(Ord. 2009-2826, passed 8-17-2009)



§ 90.22  NUMBER OF DOGS AND HYBRID DOGS PER RESIDENCE.



   No owner shall be allowed to own or harbor more than three dogs and/or
hybrid dogs in their household within the limits of the city. This section
does not include dogs, and/or hybrid dogs that are younger than 12 weeks of
age.



(Ord. 2009-2826, passed 8-17-2009)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.23  RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog, cat, and/or hybrid
animal to allow such dog, cat, and/or hybrid animal to run at large at any
time within the corporate limits of the city. It shall be the duty of the
Municipal Police or other officer designated by the City Manager to cause any
dog, cat, and/or hybrid animal found to be running at large within the
municipality to be taken up and impounded. "Running at large" shall mean any
dog, cat, and/or hybrid animal found off the premises of the owner, and not
under control of the owner or a responsible person, either by leash, cord,
chain, wire, rope, cage or other suitable means of physical restraint.



(Prior Code, § 6-104)  (Ord. 2009-2826, passed 8-17-2009)  Penalty, see §
90.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-235



§ 90.24  DANGEROUS/VICIOUS DOGS AND HYBRID ANIMALS.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or
harbor any dog and/or hybrid dog of a dangerous or ferocious disposition
that, according to the records of the Police Department, has killed a human
being; has inflicted injury on a human being that requires medical treatment;
has killed a domestic animal without provocation; or has been previously
determined to be a potentially dangerous dog and/or hybrid dog by the Police
Department, the owner has received notice of such determination, and the dog
and/or hybrid dog inflicts an injury on a human being that does not require
medical treatment, injures a domestic animal, or threatens the safety of
humans or domestic animals; absent an order from a court of competent
jurisdiction, that the owner may retain possession of the dangerous, vicious
dog and/or hybrid dog.



      (2)   A dog and/or hybrid dog shall not be defined as a
dangerous dog and/or hybrid dog if the individual was tormenting, abusing, or
assaulting the dog at the time of the injury or has been observed or reported
to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog and/or hybrid dog.



      (3)   A dog and/or hybrid dog shall not be defined as a
dangerous dog and/or hybrid dog if the injury, damage, or threat was
sustained by an individual who, at the time, was committing a willful
trespass, was committing any other tort upon the property of the owner of the
dog and/or hybrid dog, was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog and/or
hybrid dog, or there is evidence that in the past the individual has been
observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog and/or
hybrid dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime.



      (4)   No owner of a dangerous, vicious dog and/or hybrid dog
shall be allowed to sell or transfer ownership of the dog to another
individual.



(Prior Code, § 6-105)



   (B)   Potentially dangerous; vicious. It shall be unlawful for any
person to own, keep, or harbor any dog and/or hybrid dog that when
unprovoked: inflicts an injury on a human being that does not require medical
treatment, injures a domestic animal, or chases or approaches a person upon
streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent
attitude of attack or any specific dog and/or hybrid dog with a known
propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack when unprovoked, to cause
injury, or to threaten the safety of humans or domestic animals; absent an
order from a court of competent jurisdiction, that the owner may retain
possession of the potentially dangerous, vicious dog and/or hybrid dog. No
owner of a potentially dangerous, vicious dog and/or hybrid dog shall be
allowed to sell or transfer ownership of the dog and/or hybrid dog to another
individual.



   (C)   Liability insurance. It is hereby required that the owner of a
dangerous, vicious dog and/or hybrid dog or potentially dangerous, vicious
dog and/or hybrid dog obtain liability insurance for each and every dog
and/or hybrid dog they own that has been declared to be a dangerous, vicious
dog and/or hybrid dog or potentially dangerous, vicious dog and/or hybrid dog
with the minimum policy amount being $150,000 per dog or hybrid dog.



   (D)   Shelter requirements.



      (1)   No person shall own, keep, or harbor or allow to be in
or on any premises occupied by him, her, or it, or under his, her, or its
charge or control any dangerous dog or hybrid dog without such dog or hybrid
dog being confined so as to protect the public from injury.



      (2)   While unattended on the owner's property, a dangerous
dog or hybrid dog shall be securely confined, in a humane manner, indoors or
in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure suitably designed to
prevent the entry of young children and to prevent the dog or hybrid dog from
escaping. The pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top. If
the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides shall be
embedded into the ground at a depth of at least one foot. The pen or
structure shall also protect the dog or hybrid dog from the elements. The pen
or structure shall be at least ten feet from any property line of the owner.
The owner of a dangerous dog or hybrid dog shall post warning signs on the
property where the dog or hybrid dog is kept that are clearly visible from
all areas of public access and that inform persons that a dangerous dog or
hybrid dog is on the property. Each warning sign shall be no less than ten
inches by 12 inches and shall contain the words warning and dangerous animal
in high-contrast lettering at least three inches high on a black background.



      (3)   Any person found guilty of divisions (A) and (B) of this
section must allow their premises to be inspected by the Police Department to
verify that the premises complies with the mandated animal housing
restrictions prior to the release of the dangerous, vicious dog and/or hybrid
dog or potentially dangerous, vicious dog and/or hybrid dog from the animal
shelter.



(Neb. RS 54-619)



   (E)   Reporting requirements. It is required that all medical health
care providers, including hospitals and clinics, physicians, vets, vet
clinics, and ambulances or rescue agencies, which provide treatment or
emergency care for an injury to a human being or domestic animal when the
injury appears to have been inflicted by a dog or hybrid dog bite, to report
such injury to the Police Department within 24 hours.



   (F)   Effect of dangerous, vicious dog conviction. Any person
convicted of violating division (A) of this section shall not own a dog or
hybrid dog within ten years after such conviction.



(Ord. 2009-2826, passed 8-17-2009)  Penalty, see § 90.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-206



§ 90.25  CAPTURE IMPOSSIBLE.



   The Police Department or other officer designated by the City Manager
shall have the authority to kill any animals presenting vicious behavior that
presents an eminent threat to the officer, showing vicious tendencies, or
characteristics of rabies, or impossible to capture, and presents a threat to
the public.



(Neb. RS 1-605)  (Ord. 2009-2826, passed 8-17-2009) 



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-206



§ 90.26  INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, delay, interfere with
any police officer or other officer designated by the City Manager who is
performing any duty enjoined upon him/or her by the provisions of this
subchapter, or to break open, or in any manner directly or indirectly aid,
counsel, or advise the breaking open of the animal shelter, any ambulance
wagon, or other vehicle used for the collecting or conveying of dogs and/or
cats to the shelter.



(Neb. RS 28-906)  (Prior Code, § 6-107)  (Ord. 2009-2826, passed
8-17-2009)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.27  KILLING AND POISONING.



   It shall be unlawful to kill, to administer, or cause to be
administered, poison of any sort to a dog, cat, and/or hybrid animal, or in
any manner to injure, maim, or destroy, or in any manner attempt to injure,
maim, or destroy any dog, cat, and/or hybrid animal that is the property of
another person, or to lace any poison, or poisoned food where the same is
accessible to a dog, cat, and/or hybrid animal; provided, that this section
shall not apply to Municipal Police or other officers designated by the City
Manager acting within their power and duty.



(Prior Code, § 6-108)  (Ord. 2009-2826, passed 8-17-2009)  Penalty, see §
90.99



§ 90.28  BARKING AND OFFENSIVE DOGS AND HYBRID DOGS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any dog and/or
hybrid dog which habitually barks, howls, or yelps to the great discomfort of
the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.



(Prior Code, § 6-109)  (Ord. 1676, passed 2-7-1983; Ord. 2009-2826, passed
8-17-2009)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-206



§ 90.29  FIGHTING OF DOGS AND HYBRID ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, by agreement or otherwise, to set
dogs and/or hybrid animals to fighting, or by any gesture or word to
encourage the same to fight, or to train a dog and/or hybrid animal to fight.



(Prior Code, § 6-110)  (Ord. 2009-2826, passed 8-17-2009)  Penalty, see §
90.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-206



§ 90.30  IMPOUNDING.



   It shall be the duty of the Police Department or other officer
designated by the City Manager to capture, secure, and remove in a humane
manner to the Municipal Animal Shelter any dog, cat, and/or hybrid animal
violating any of the provisions of this subchapter. The dog, cat, and/or
hybrid animal so impounded shall be treated in a humane manner and shall be
provided with a sufficient supply of food and fresh water each day. Each
impounded dog, cat, and/or hybrid animal shall be kept and maintained at the
pound for a period of 120 hours. Notice of impoundment of all animals,
including any significant marks or identifications, shall be posted on the
bulletin board of the police station within 24 hours after impoundment as
public notification of such impoundment. Any dog, cat, and/or hybrid animal
may be reclaimed by its owner during the period of impoundment by payment of
daily board fee and general impoundment fee set by resolution of the
Governing Body. Such fees are set out in Ch. 38, Fee Schedule. The owner of
an impounded dog, cat, and/or hybrid animal shall then be required to comply
with the rabies vaccination requirements within 120 hours after release. If
the dog, cat, and/or hybrid animal is not claimed at the end of required
waiting period after public notice has been given the municipal police or
other officer designated by the City Manager may dispose of the dog, cat,
and/or hybrid animal in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations
pertaining to the same; provided, that if, in the judgment of the municipal
police or other officer designated by the City Manager, a suitable home can
be found for any such dog, cat, and/or hybrid animal within the city, the
dog, cat, and/or hybrid animal shall be turned over to that person and the
new owner shall then be required to pay all fees and meet all vaccination
requirements provided in this subchapter. The city shall acquire legal title
to any dog, cat, and/or hybrid animal impounded in the animal shelter for a
period longer than the required waiting period after receiving notice. Any
such dog, cat, and/or hybrid animal shall be destroyed and buried in a humane
manner.



(Neb. RS 16-236)  (Prior Code, § 6-111)  (Ord. 2009-2826, passed
8-17-2009) 



§  90.31  FEEDING OF FERAL ANIMAL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to feed or maintain any dog, cat,
and/or hybrid animal that is a feral/wild animal.



(Ord. 2009-2826, passed 8-17-2009)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.32  OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY TO PICK UP WASTE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow their dog, cat, and/or
hybrid animal to defecate on public property without cleaning the feces from
the area. Public property includes city sidewalks, streets, parks, and all
other public ways, grounds, or any other parcel of property owned by the city.



(Ord. 2009-2826, passed 8-17-2009)  Penalty, see § 90.99



RABIES IMMUNIZATION



§ 90.40  REQUIRED OF ANIMALS SUBJECT TO RABIES; CERTIFICATE AND TAG.



   Every person, owning, keeping or harboring a dog, cat, and/or hybrid
animal over the age of four months shall immunize the same against rabies;
retain the immunization certificate; and affix upon the collar of the animal
an immunization tag.



(Ord. 1768, passed 2-4-1985; Ord. 2009-2830, passed 10-5-2009)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 71-4401 through 71-4412



§ 90.41  TYPE OF VACCINE TO BE USED; REIMMUNIZATION.



   Dogs, cats, and/or hybrid animals shall be immunized with an approved
rabies vaccine and shall be reimmunized each three years.



(Ord. 2009-2830, passed 10-5-2009)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 71-4401 through 71-4412



§ 90.42  AGE WHEN REQUIRED.



   Upon reaching the age of four months, all animals subject to rabies
shall be immunized by a licensed veterinarian.



(Ord. 2009-2830, passed 10-5-2009)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 71-4401 through 71-4412



§ 90.43  ANIMALS FOUND RUNNING AT LARGE WITHOUT IMMUNIZATION TAG ATTACHED
TO COLLAR OR HARNESS DECLARED PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   All animals found running at large without a collar or harness having
the metal immunization tag affixed thereto are hereby declared a public
nuisance and may be destroyed as such according to the provisions of this
subchapter.



(Ord. 2009-2830, passed 10-5-2009)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 71-4401 through 71-4412



§ 90.44  CONFINEMENT OF ANIMALS TO PREMISES WHEN PUBLIC SAFETY ENDANGERED
BY RABID ANIMALS.



   Whenever, in the opinion of the City Manager, there is imminent danger
to the public safety from rabid animals, it shall be his or her duty to issue
a proclamation directing all persons owning, keeping or harboring any animal
subject to rabies to confine it to his or her premises or, while not so
confined, to have the animal on leash until the danger has abated.



(Ord. 2009-2830, passed 10-5-2009)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 71-4401 through 71-4412



§ 90.45  IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS WITHOUT IMMUNIZATION TAGS ; DISPOSITION OF
IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the City Manager or his or her
authorized representative, in a humane manner, to capture and remove to the
animal shelter, any animal so owned, kept or harbored, from running at large
without the immunization tag provided for in § 90.40 affixed to its collar
or harness.



   (B)   No animal so taken shall be killed until after five days after
public notice have elapsed after its impounding or until such office, after
consulting the registration records, concludes that the animal has not been
immunized or that immunization has become ineffective by lapse of time and
until such officer has notified the person owning, keeping or harboring such
animal, if his or her identity is known to him or her, to have the animal
immunized forthwith. Any person owning, keeping or harboring such animal may
reclaim such animal within the five-day period of impoundment. All animals
unclaimed after such five-day impoundment, shall be destroyed and buried.



(Ord. 2009-2830, passed 10-5-2009)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 71-4401 through 71-4412



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person who violates § 90.23 and the dog, cat, and/or
hybrid animal has been determined to be dangerous, vicious, shall be deemed
to be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty for such violation shall be in the
amount of $500. A person who violates § 90.23 and the dog, cat, and/or
hybrid animal has been determined to be a potentially dangerous, vicious
animal, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty for such
violation shall be in the amount of $250.



   (C)   Any person who violates § 90.23 and the dog, cat and/or
animal has not been determined to be dangerous and vicious or potentially
dangerous and potentially vicious shall be deemed to be guilty of
misdemeanor.  The penalty for such violation shall be in an amount of $50
for the first, second, and third offenses; and $100 for a fourth and all
subsequent offenses.



   (D)   Any person who violates § 90.24(A) shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor. The penalty for such violation shall be in an amount not less
than $500 nor more than $1,000 and/or imprisonment for any length of time not
to exceed three months, at the discretion of the court; provided that where
licenses are due the city, the court shall order such license secured and
sums paid in addition to the fine fixed by the court. Any person who violates
§ 90.24(B) shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty for such
violation shall be in an amount not less than $250 nor more than $500 and/or
imprisonment for any length of time not to exceed three months, at the
discretion of the court; provided that where licenses are due the city, the
court shall order such license secured and sums paid in addition to the fine
fixed by the court. Any person who violates § 90.24(F) shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor.  The penalty for such violation shall be in the
amount of $1,000 and/or imprisonment for any length of time up to three
months at the discretion of the court.



   (E)   Any person who violates § 90.31 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. The penalty for such violation shall be $20 for the first
offense and $50 for each subsequent offense.



(Neb. RS 16-236)  (Ord. 2009-2826, passed 8-17-2009)



CHAPTER 91:  FIRE PREVENTION; FIREWORKS; POISONOUS OR FLAMMABLE GAS;
EXPLOSIVES



Section



Fire Prevention



   91.01   Life Safety Code adopted by reference



   91.02   Duty to enforce



   91.03   Right of entry for inspections



   91.04   Inspections



   91.05   Order for remedy of unsatisfactory conditions; appeal;
failure to comply



   91.06   Procedure for service of order



   91.07   Prohibited fires



   91.08   Permitted fires



   91.09   Open burning ban; waiver



   91.10   Investigation of fire; report



   91.11   Authority to order removal of property



   91.12   Interference with duties



   91.13   Interference with equipment



   91.14   Disorderly spectator; refusal to assist



   91.15   Obstruction of fire hydrant prohibited



   91.16   Driving over hose prohibited



   91.17   Traffic, pedestrian control during fire alarm



   91.18   False alarm prohibited



   91.19   Records



   91.20   Fires outside city limits



   91.21   Fire drills



   91.22   Fire Department right-of-way



   91.23   Interference with the Fire Department by electrical wires
prohibited



   91.24   Outdoor fireplaces



Fireworks



   91.35   Definition



   91.36   Permit required for retail sale



   91.37   Prerequisites and qualifications for issuance of sales permit



   91.38   Term of sales permit; transfer; days and hours of sale



   91.39   Public displays



   91.40   Person in charge of stand



   91.41   Permitted fireworks; prohibited fireworks; temporary ban



   91.42   Throwing firecrackers



   91.43   Discharge of fireworks generally



Poisonous or Flammable Gas; Explosives



   91.55   Storage registration



   91.56   Blasting permits for explosives



 



   91.99   Penalty



FIRE PREVENTION



§ 91.01  LIFE SAFETY CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The city uses the same code as the State Fire Marshal's office, which
is the Life Safety Code, most current edition, and all subsequent
amendments. 



(Ord. 1805, passed 5-10-1986)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 18-132



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 81-502



§ 91.02  DUTY TO ENFORCE.



   It shall be the duty of all city officials to enforce the incorporated
Fire Code provisions, and all infractions shall be immediately brought to the
attention of the Fire Chief.



(Prior Code, § 7-203)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-222



§ 91.03  RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTIONS.



   It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, or occupant of any building
or structure, except the interiors of private dwellings, to allow the Fire
Chief to inspect, or cause to be inspected, as often as necessary the
structure for the purpose of ascertaining and enumerating all conditions
therein that are likely to cause fire, or any other violations of the
provisions of the city ordinances affecting the hazard of fire.



(Ord. 96-2350, passed 6-17-1996; Ord. 2001-2585, passed 11-19-2001)



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 81-512



§ 91.04  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The Fire Chief shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, all
new buildings that may be erected, before the buildings are plastered. The
owner of every new building shall report to the Fire Chief when the building
shall be ready for inspection; provided, however, that by resolution of the
City Council, this duty may be assigned to the City Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 7-206)



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief, or the City Inspector,
when directed to do so by the City Council, to inspect or cause to be
inspected by the Fire Department officers, members or some officer of the
city chosen by the Council, as often as may be necessary, but not less than
once a year in outlying districts and two times a year in the closely built
portions of the city, all buildings, premises and public thoroughfares,
except the interiors of private dwellings, for the purpose of ascertaining
and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire, or any
violations of the provisions of this code or the provisions or intent of any
other ordinance affecting the fire hazard.



(Prior Code, § 7-207)



(Ord. 96-2350, passed 6-17-1996; Ord. 2001-2585, passed 11-19-2001)



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 81-512



§ 91.05  ORDER FOR REMEDY OF UNSATISFACTORY CONDITIONS; APPEAL; FAILURE TO
COMPLY.



   Whenever any officer or member shall find in any building, or upon any
premises or other place, combustible or explosive matter or dangerous
accumulation of rubbish, or unnecessary accumulations of wastepaper, boxes,
shavings, or any other highly inflammable materials especially liable to
cause fire, and which is so situated as to endanger property, or shall find
obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows,
liable to interfere with the operations of the Fire Department, or egress of
occupants, in case of fire, he or she shall order the same to be removed or
remedied, and the order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or
occupant of the premises or buildings, subject to appeal within 24 hours to
the City Manager, who shall within ten days review the order and file his or
her decision thereon, and unless the order is revoked or modified it shall
remain in full force and be obeyed by the owner or occupant. Any owner or
occupant failing to comply with the order within ten days after the appeal
shall have been determined, or, if no appeal is taken, then within ten days
after the service of the order, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 7-208)  Penalty, see § 91.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 81-512



§ 91.06  PROCEDURE FOR SERVICE OF ORDER.



   The service of any order pursuant to § 91.05 shall be made upon the
occupant of the premises to whom it is directed by either delivering a true
copy of the order to the occupant personally or by delivering the same to and
leaving it with any person in charge of the premises, or in case no person is
found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on
the door to the entrance of the premises. Whenever it may be necessary to
serve an order upon the owner of premises, the order may be served either by
delivering to the person a true copy of the order, or, if the owner is absent
from the jurisdiction of the officer making the order, by mailing a copy to
the owner's last known post office address.



(Prior Code, § 7-209)



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 81-512



§ 91.07  PROHIBITED FIRES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to set out a fire on the pavement,
or near any curb, now built or hereafter to be built, within the city.



(Prior Code, § 7-211)  Penalty, see § 91.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-226



§ 91.08  PERMITTED FIRES.



   (A)   It shall be lawful to build or set fires within the city,
provided that the fires may be set in an incinerator built in compliance with
National Fire Code, Volume 7, Chapter 82, and further provided that the
incinerator has been inspected and approved for use by the Fire Chief or his
or her designated representative.



   (B)   Burning of straw, leaves, or brush in the open air will be
permitted only after a permit has been obtained from the Fire Chief or
representative. Persons seeking a permit may apply at the Public Safety
Center from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. Open burning should
be attended at all times by the person setting the fire. No fire shall be
allowed any closer than ten feet from any building and the person setting and
overseeing the fire shall at all times keep the fire under control and have a
means of extinguishment close at hand.



(Prior Code, § 7-212)  (Ord. 1774, passed 6-3-1985; Ord. 96-2350, passed
6-17-1996; Ord. 2001-2585, passed 11-19-2001)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-227



§ 91.09  OPEN BURNING BAN; WAIVER.



   The State Fire Marshal may prohibit bonfires, outdoor rubbish fires,
and fires for the purpose of clearing land, by issuing an open burning ban on
a statewide or regional basis when atmospheric conditions or local
circumstances make the fires hazardous. The Fire Chief of the city Fire
Department may waive an open burning ban issued under this section for an
area under his or her jurisdiction by issuing an open burning permit to a
person requesting permission to conduct open burning. The permit issued by
the Fire Chief shall be in writing, signed by the Fire Chief, and on a form
provided by the State Fire Marshal.



(Prior Code, § 7-213)  (Ord. 96-2350, passed 6-17-1996; Ord. 2001-2585,
passed 11-19-2001)



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 81-520.01



§ 91.10  INVESTIGATION OF FIRE; REPORT.



   The Fire Chief, or other person as he or she may designate, shall
investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring in
the city. The investigation shall be begun within two days after the
occurrence of any fire. The officer making the investigations shall forthwith
notify the State Fire Marshal, and shall within one week of the occurrence of
the fire furnish to the State Fire Marshal a written report of all facts
relating to the cause and origin of the fire and other information as may be
called for by the form provided by the State Fire Marshal.



(Prior Code, § 7-210)  (Ord. 96-2350, passed 6-17-1996; Ord. 2001-2585,
passed 11-19-2001)



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 81-512



§ 91.11  AUTHORITY TO ORDER REMOVAL OF PROPERTY.



   The Fire Chief, or any officer in charge at the time, shall have the
authority and power to cause the removal of property whenever it shall become
necessary for the preservation of more valuable property, the protection of
human life, or to prevent the spreading of fire to adjoining property. The
Fire Chief, or any officer in charge, may direct the city firefighters to
remove any building, structure, or fence for the purpose of checking the
progress of any fire. The Fire Chief, or any officer in charge, shall have
the authority to blow up, or cause to be blown up, with explosives, any
building or structure during the progress of a fire for the purpose of
checking the progress of the same.



(Prior Code, § 7-101)  (Ord. 96-2351, passed 6-17-1996; Ord. 2001-2584,
passed 11-19-2001)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-222, 16-246



§ 91.12  INTERFERENCE WITH DUTIES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to hinder or obstruct
the Fire Chief, or any officer in charge, or the members of the Fire
Department in the performance of their duty.



(Neb. RS 28-908)  (Prior Code, § 7-104)  (Ord. 96-2351, passed 6-17-1996;
Ord. 2001-2584, passed 11-19-2001)



§ 91.13  INTERFERENCE WITH EQUIPMENT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, destroy, handle, or in
any other way to interfere with the use and storage of any of the fire trucks
and other apparatus belonging to the city.



(Prior Code, § 7-103)



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 28-519



§ 91.14  DISORDERLY SPECTATOR; REFUSAL TO ASSIST.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person during the time of a fire
and for a period of 36 hours after its extinguishment to hinder, resist, or
refuse to obey the Fire Chief, or any officer in charge, or to act in a noisy
or disorderly manner. The Fire Chief, or any officer in charge, shall have
the power and authority during this time to arrest or command any person to
assist them in the performance of their official duties.



(Prior Code, § 7-102)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, after the
command of the Fire Chief, or any officer in charge, to aid in extinguishing
a fire or to assist in the removal and protection of property.



(Prior Code, § 7-106)



(Neb. RS 28-908)  (Ord. 96-2351, passed 6-17-1996; Ord. 2001-2584, passed
11-19-2001)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.15  OBSTRUCTION OF FIRE HYDRANT PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the use of a fire
hydrant, or have or place any obstruction within six feet of, or to park any
vehicle within 15 feet of, the hydrant. Any vehicle or obstruction may be
immediately removed by the Fire Chief, or any other officer in charge, or any
member of the Fire Department, at the risk, cost, and expense of the owner or
claimant.



(Neb. RS 60-6,166)  (Prior Code, § 7-105)  (Ord. 96-2351, passed
6-17-1996; Ord. 2001-2584, passed 11-19-2001)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.16  DRIVING OVER HOSE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the Fire
Chief, or any officer in charge, to drive any vehicle over unprotected hose
of the Fire Department.



(Neb. RS 60-6,184)  (Prior Code, § 7-107)  (Ord. 96-2351, passed
6-17-1996; Ord. 2001-2584, passed 11-19-2001)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.17  TRAFFIC, PEDESTRIAN CONTROL DURING FIRE ALARM.



   (A)   Every vehicle already stationary when the fire alarm shall
have been sounded must remain so for a period of five minutes after the
sounding of the fire alarm. No vehicle, except by the specific direction of
the Fire Chief or any officer in charge, shall follow, approach or park
closer than 500 feet to any fire vehicle, or to any fire hydrant to which a
hose is connected. Nothing herein shall be construed to apply to vehicles
carrying doctors, members of the Fire Department, or emergency vehicle.



(Neb. RS 60-6,183)  (Prior Code, § 7-108)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to enter or remain in
any street after a fire alarm shall have sounded until the fire trucks shall
have completely passed.



(Neb. RS 28-908)  (Prior Code, § 7-110)



(Ord. 96-2351, passed 6-17-1996; Ord. 2001-2584, passed 11-19-2001) 
Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.18  FALSE ALARM PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally and without good
and reasonable cause raise any false alarm of fire.



(Neb. RS 28-907)  (Prior Code, § 7-109)  Penalty, see § 91.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 35-520



§ 91.19  RECORDS.



   (A)   The Fire Chief shall keep a list of all members of the
Volunteer Fire Department, showing the date each joined the Department, and
other data as the City Manager may require.



   (B)   The Fire Chief shall also maintain a record of all fires and
fire alarms, or their location, of the class of building or structure so
damaged or destroyed, of the purpose for which it was used, of the cause of
the fire, the amount of the loss, the amount of insurance and other
information as to him or her or the City Manager seems important. He or she
shall include in the report a record of any injury that may have been
sustained by any person on account of the fire or fire alarm.



   (C)   The records maintained pursuant to this section shall at all
times be available for the inspection of the City Manager and City Council.



(Prior Code, § 7-111)  (Ord. 96-2350, passed 6-17-1996; Ord. 2001-2585,
passed 11-19-2001)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-222



§ 91.20  FIRES OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.



   The Fire Department shall not go to any fire beyond the city limits
with the city fire apparatus without the consent of the City Manager, unless
previously approved by the City Manager and City Council under a mutual aid
or other agreement.



(Prior Code, § 7-112)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-222



§ 91.21  FIRE DRILLS.



   The Fire Department shall hold a fire drill at least six times per year
at such times as the Fire Chief shall designate.



(Prior Code, § 7-113)  (Ord. 96-2350, passed 6-17-1996; Ord. 2001-2585,
passed 11-19-2001)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-222



§ 91.22  FIRE DEPARTMENT RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   Personnel of the Fire Department shall have the right-of-way upon any
street, alley or highway when going to or returning from fires, drill, or
ambulance calls had under the direction or by order of the Fire Chief or any
officer in charge.



(Prior Code, § 7-114)  (Ord. 96-2351, passed 6-17-1996; Ord. 2001-2584,
passed 11-19-2001)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-222



§ 91.23  INTERFERENCE WITH THE FIRE DEPARTMENT BY ELECTRICAL WIRES
PROHIBITED.



   No wire shall be installed, operated, or maintained over any street,
alley, sidewalk, or building in the city which shall be liable to seriously
interfere with the work of the Fire Department in the use of ladders or other
apparatus, or which shall obstruct or render hazardous the use of fire
escapes, and on complaint of the Chief of the Fire Department such
obstructing, interfering, or hazardous wire shall be removed or properly
rearranged.



(Prior Code, § 9-411)  (Ord. 2016-2930, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 91.24  OUTDOOR FIREPLACES.



   The term OUTDOOR FIREPLACES shall include fire pits and portable fire
pits.  These residential outdoor fireplaces use wood as a fuel and are used
for contained recreational fires located at a private residence for the
purpose of outdoor cooking and personal enjoyment.  Fire pits are usually
constructed of steel, concrete and/or stones and constructed above or below
ground with a heavy steel screen cover.  Portable fire pits are defined as
being commercially designed and intended to confine and control outdoor wood
fires.  Outdoor fireplaces do not include barbeque grills that use propane,
charcoal or any other fuel used primarily for outdoor cooking.  Outdoor
fireplaces also do not include Chimineas.  Chimineas are defined as an
outdoor patio fireplace, usually made from clay, intended to confine and
control outdoor wood fires.  All outdoor fireplaces shall meet the following
requirements:



   (A)   Clearances.  A minimum ten foot clearance shall be maintained
between the outdoor fireplace and combustible walls, roofs, fences, decks,
and other combustible material.  Permanent fire pits being constructed prior
to adoption of this section are removed from this requirement.



   (B)   Construction.  Outdoor fireplaces shall be constructed of
concrete or approved non-combustible materials.  The fire fuel area and
openings shall be completely enclosed by a steel screening (spark guard) or
an approved non-combustible screening material with openings no greater than
one-half inch square.  Not permitted are barrels, half-barrels, drums or
similarly constructed devices.



   (C)   Size.  The fuel area for a fire pit shall not be larger than
four feet in diameter and a height of more than three feet.



   (D)   Location.  Outdoor fireplaces shall not be located on
combustible balconies or decks and shall not be located under any combustible
balcony or any overhanging portion of a structure.



   (E)   Type of materials being burnt.  Materials allowed by this
section shall be limited to untreated wood or approved fireplace starter
logs. Petroleum products,  rubbish,  grass,  leaves,  cardboard, 
plastics,  rubber  or any material  that  may  flow  out  of the
containment or cause excessive heat, smoke, or offensive smell shall not be
permitted.



   (F)   Amount of material being burnt.  Users must:



      (1)   Limit the amount of material being burnt to ensure the
flames are confined inside the fuel area of the outdoor fireplace and the
flames do not extend above the pit; and



      (2)   Follow the manufacturer's recommendation on the maximum
amount of fuel to be used at one time with spark guard in place.



   (G)   Supervision.  Outdoor fireplaces shall be under supervision
by at least one responsible person of age 16 or older from the ignition of
the fire until the fire is completely extinguished and embers are cooled so
as to prohibit the fire from rekindling.



   (H)   Provisions for protection. A garden hose connected to a water
supply or other approved fire extinguishing equipment, such as a bucket of
water, shall be readily available for use.



   (I)   Wind and weather conditions.  Outdoor fireplaces shall not be
operated when winds are blowing over 20 miles per hours and wind direction
will cause smoke, embers, or other burning materials to be carried by the
wind toward any building or other combustible materials.  Outdoor fireplaces
shall not be operating when weather conditions are extremely dry.



   (J)   Maintenance.  The owner is responsible to ensure proper
maintenance and care is accomplished in accordance with manufacturer's
instructions.



   (K)   Discontinuance.  Smoke from any outdoor fireplace shall not
create a nuisance for neighboring property owners.  The Fire Chief and/or
his designee is authorized to require outdoor fireplace use to be immediately
discontinued if the use of the outdoor fireplace is determined by the chief
to constitute a hazardous condition to the occupants of surrounding property.



   (L)   Permit.  A site plan showing the location of any above or
below ground fire pit on the property and a detailed drawing of the
construction of the fire pit, including measurements, shall be submitted to
the Building Inspector for review.  Upon approval, a permit will be
issued.  Utility locations must be obtained and accounted for prior to
approval of any fire pit construction.  No fire pit or similar above or
below ground structure shall be permitted which may interfere with any
utility.  A permit will not be required for portable fire pits provided they
are commercially designed and have been approved by an independent testing
laboratory.



(Ord. 2017-2948, passed 5-1-2017)



FIREWORKS



§ 91.35  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FIREWORKS.  Any composition or device designed for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration or
detonation, and which meets the definition of common or special fireworks set
forth by the United States Department of Transportation in Title 49, Code of
Federal Regulations.



(Prior Code, § 7-401)  (Ord. 2002-2636, passed 11-4-2002; Ord. 2007-2801,
passed 11-5-2007; Ord. 2010-2846, passed 12-6-2010)



§ 91.36  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR RETAIL SALE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, hold for sale, or
offer for sale as a distributor, jobber, or retailer any fireworks without
first obtaining a license from the State Fire Marshal for that calendar year.
Licensed vendors shall only sell fireworks which have been approved by the
State Fire Marshal and such permissible fireworks may be sold at retail June
28 through July 4 during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. and December 28
through December 31 during the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell
at retail within the city any fireworks, as defined and permitted under the
statutes of the state, without having first secured a permit from the City
Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 7-402)  (Ord. 2002-2636, passed 11-4-2002; Ord. 2007-2801,
passed 11-5-2007; Ord. 2010-2846, passed 12-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.37  PREREQUISITES AND QUALIFICATIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF SALES  PERMIT.



   (A)   Any person making application for a permit required by §
91.36 shall:



      (1)   Pay to the city the sum of $75 for each selling period
per § 91.36(A) which sum shall be retained by the city as an occupation tax;



      (2)   File with the Fire Chief a written statement giving the
location of the retail outlets;



      (3)   File with the Fire Chief all applications for permits by
June 20 of the year for which the applicant wishes the permit to sell in June
and July and by December 20 of the year for which the applicant wishes the
permit to sell in December and January; and



      (4)   Provide to the Fire Chief the manner of storage for
their fireworks and the location of the storage place.



   (B)   No person under the age of 19 years shall be granted a permit.



   (C)   A past record of violations may result in the denial of a
permit. This determination is to be made by the Fire Chief or his or her
designee.



   (D)   All firework stands must be provided with at least one fire
extinguisher which is approved by the Fire Chief or his or her designee.



(Prior Code, § 7-403)  (Ord. 2002-2636, passed 11-4-2002; Ord. 2007-2801,
passed 11-5-2007; Ord. 2010-2846, passed 12-6-2010)



§ 91.38  TERM OF SALES PERMIT; TRANSFER; DAYS AND HOURS OF SALE.



   (A)   The permit required by § 91.36, when issued by the Fire
Chief, shall be valid beginning June 28 at 8:00 a.m. and ending July 4 at
10:00 p.m. of the year of issue, and shall not be transferable.  A second
permit will be required for the sale of fireworks during the second period of
December 28 through December 31. This permit shall be valid beginning
December 28 at 8:00 a.m. and ending December 31 at 10:00 p.m. of each year of
issue, and shall not be transferable.



   (B)   Fireworks may be sold June 28 through July 4 during the hours
of 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.  and December 28 through December 31 during the
hours of 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.



(Prior Code, § 7-404)  (Ord. 2002-2636, passed 11-4-2002; Ord. 2007-2801,
passed 11-5-2007; Ord. 2010-2846, passed 12-6-2010)



§ 91.39  PUBLIC DISPLAYS.



   Public exhibitions or displays of discharging fireworks may be
conducted without a sales permit, but shall be conducted according to rules
and regulations prescribed by the State Fire Marshal in cooperation with the
City Fire Chief. Where supervisors are required, the sponsor of the
exhibition or display shall hire or engage the services of supervisors, who
shall be approved by the City Fire Chief.



(Prior Code, § 7-405)  (Ord. 2002-2636, passed 11-4-2002; Ord. 2007-2801,
passed 11-5-2007; Ord. 2010-2846, passed 12-6-2010)



§ 91.40  PERSON IN CHARGE OF STAND.



   Any licensed fireworks stand or firm engaged in the sale of fireworks
shall have a person age 16 years or older in charge of the sale of fireworks
and on the stand premises at all times.



(Prior Code, § 7-406)  (Ord. 2002-2636, passed 11-4-2002; Ord. 2007-2801,
passed 11-5-2007; Ord. 2010-2846, passed 12-6-2010)



§ 91.41  PERMITTED FIREWORKS; PROHIBITED FIREWORKS; TEMPORARY BAN.



   (A)   Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite or
cause to be exploded fireworks or firecrackers of any description whatsoever,
except as defined and permitted under the statutes of the state.



   (B)   Exceptions.  The provisions of this section shall not apply
to any fireworks to be used for the purpose of public exhibitions or display
under the authorization of the governing body, or to fireworks furnished for
agricultural purposes pursuant to written authorization from the State Fire
Marshal.



   (C)   Temporary ban prohibiting the use of permissible fireworks. If
the use of permissible fireworks within the city during the current and
forecasted weather conditions creates a very high risk of fire danger within
the city and areas surrounding the city that represents an unacceptable risk
to the public's health, safety and welfare, the McCook City Council may issue
a temporary ban that prohibits the discharge of all fireworks. This decision
will be based on current and forecasted weather conditions and Red Flag
Warnings after consultation with the Fire Chief and/or his or her
representative.



      (1)   This temporary ban shall not however, apply to the
possession, storage or sale of permissible fireworks, which activities shall
continue to be legal as currently authorized in accordance with the
applicable provisions of this Fire Code.



      (2)   Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit an annual
Fourth of July professional fireworks display by the City of McCook or duly
authorized agent/organization/or individual.



   (D)   Penalty. Violations of this section shall be enforced, cited,
prosecuted and punished as misdemeanor offenses in accordance with §
91.99(A). In addition, the remaining and undischarged permissible fireworks
in possession of a person cited for a violation under this section may be
seized, subject to any Fourth Amendment requirements, by the City Police
Department as evidence and, if the person cited is convicted of the
violation, the Court may order the seized permissible fireworks to be
destroyed as contraband by the McCook Police Department.



(Prior Code, § 7-407)  (Ord. 2002-2636, passed 11-4-2002; Ord. 2007-2801,
passed 11-5-2007; Ord. 2012-2886, passed 11-19-2012)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.42  THROWING FIRECRACKERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any firecracker, or any
object which explodes upon contact with another object, from or into a motor
vehicle, onto any street, highway, or sidewalk, at or near any person, into
any building, or into or at any group of persons. It shall further be
unlawful to discharge fireworks within 100 feet of a fireworks stand.



(Prior Code, § 7-408)  (Ord. 2002-2636, passed 11-4-2002; Ord. 2007-2801,
passed 11-5-2007; Ord. 2010-2846, passed 12-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.43  DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS GENERALLY.



   Permitted days and hours. Fireworks maybe discharged only during the
period of time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on June 23
through and including July 3, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:59 p.m.
on July 4, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. July 5, between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on December 28 through and including
December 30, and between the hours of 8:00 a.m. December 31 and 1:00 a.m.
January 1. A person may discharge fireworks at times other than those times
designated in this division upon obtaining a permit to do so, which permit
shall be issued by the Fire Chief of the Fire Department. A person commits
the offense of discharging fireworks if he/she discharges fireworks except
during the periods and times as specified above.



(Ord. 2007-2801, passed 11-5-2007; Ord. 2009-2833, passed 11-2-2009; Ord.
2010-2846, passed 12-6-2010)  Penalty, see § 91.99



POISONOUS OR FLAMMABLE GAS; EXPLOSIVES



§ 91.55  STORAGE REGISTRATION.



   Any person, firm, or corporation storing or keeping for any period of
time, dynamite, gunpowder, nitroglycerine, or other high explosives, or any
form of poisonous or flammable gases or liquefied petroleum gases within the
city shall register the information with the City Clerk prior to bringing the
gases or explosives in the city. The Clerk shall provide the information to
the City Fire Chief who shall grant or deny permission to bring the materials
into the city. Transfer of gases or explosives to another individual within
the city shall require the individual receiving the gases or explosives to
register and receive permission to transfer the gases or explosives. This
section shall not apply to the storage of five gallons or less of gasoline.



(Prior Code, § 7-301)  (Ord. 96-2350, passed 6-17-1996; Ord. 2001-2585,
passed 11-19-2001)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-227



§ 91.56  BLASTING PERMITS FOR EXPLOSIVES.



   Any person wishing to discharge high explosives within the city must
secure a permit from the governing body and shall discharge the explosives in
conformance with its direction and under its supervision, and in no case
shall any person perform blasting operations unless operating under the
direct supervision of a person in possession of a valid user's permit issued
by the State Patrol.



(Neb. RS 28-1229)  (Prior Code, § 7-302)  (Ord. 1897, passed 4-2-1990)



§ 91.99  PENALTY



   (A)   Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions
of any section of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Unless otherwise specified in the particular section for which the person
stands convicted of violating, the penalty for the violation shall be in any
amount not to exceed $1,000 and/or imprisonment for any length of time not to
exceed three months, in the discretion of the court, provided whenever any
section of this chapter shall declare a nuisance, a violation of that section
shall be penalized by a fine of not more than $1,000, in which case a new
violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of the
failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 7-501)



   (B)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this chapter, the
city may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the same, in the
manner provided by law. Whenever, in any action. it is established that a
nuisance exists, the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed,
enter an order of abatement as part of the judgment in the case.



(Prior Code, § 7-502)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 18-1720, 18-1722



CHAPTER 92:  FAIR HOUSING



Section



   92.01   Purpose



   92.02   Definitions



   92.03   Unlawful acts



   92.04   Discrimination against handicapped person prohibited;
construction standards



   92.05   Discrimination prohibited in residential real estate
transactions



   92.06   Discrimination prohibited in real estate listing and broker
services



   92.07   Use restrictions not prohibited



   92.08   Information supplied for free



§ 92.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the general welfare of the
residents of the city by endorsing the provisions of the state Fair Housing
Act, Neb. RS 20-301 through 20-344, to the effect that there shall be no
discrimination in the city in the acquisition, ownership, possession, or
enjoyment of housing in accordance with Article I, § 25 of the state
constitution.



(Prior Code, § 9-610)  (Ord. 2004-2704, passed 8-16-2004)



§ 92.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGGRIEVED PERSON.  Any person who:



      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing
practice; or



      (2)   Believes that he or she will be injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.



   COMMISSION.  The Nebraska Equal Opportunity Commission.



   DWELLING.  Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is
occupied as or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence for one or
more families and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion
thereof.



   FAMILIAL STATUS.  One or more minors being domiciled with:



      (1)   A parent or another person having legal custody of the
individual; or



      (2)   The designee of a parent or other person having legal
custody, with written permission of the parent or other person.



   HANDICAP.  With respect to a person:



      (1)   A physical or mental impairment, excluding the current
illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in Neb. RS
28-401, which substantially limits one or more major life activities;



      (2)   A record of having such an impairment; or



      (3)   Being regarded as having such an impairment.



   PERSON.  One or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees,
trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries.



   RENT.  Lease, sublease, let, and otherwise grant for consideration the
right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.



   RESTRICTIVE COVENANT.  Any specifications limiting the transfer,
rental, or lease of any housing because of race, creed, religion, color,
national origin, sex, handicap, familial status, or ancestry.



(Prior Code, § 9-611)  (Ord. 2004-2704, passed 8-16-2004)



§ 92.03  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   (A)   Except as exempted by § 92.07, it shall be unlawful to:



      (1)   Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide
offer, refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of or otherwise make
unavailable or deny, refuse to show, or refuse to receive and transmit an
offer for a dwelling, to any person because of race, color, religion,
national origin, familial status, or sex;



      (2)   Discriminate against any person in the terms,
conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision
of services or facilities in connection therewith because of race, color,
religion, national origin, familial status, or sex;



      (3)   Make, print, publish, or cause to be made, printed, or
published any notice, statement, or advertisement with respect to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, national origin, handicap,
familial status, or sex or an intention to make any preference, limitation,
or discrimination;



      (4)   Represent to any person because of race, color,
religion, national origin, handicap, familial status, or sex that any
dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when the dwelling
is in fact so available;



      (5)   Cause to be made any written or oral inquiry or record
concerning the race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial
status, or sex of a person seeking to purchase, rent, or lease any housing;



      (6)   Include in any transfer, sale, rental, or lease of
housing any restrictive covenants or honor or exercise or attempt to honor or
exercise any restrictive covenant pertaining to housing;



      (7)   Discharge or demote an employee or agent or discriminate
in the compensation of the employee or agent because of the employee's
compliance with this chapter or the state Fair Housing Act; and



      (8)   Induce or attempt to induce, for profit, any person to
sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or
prospective entry into the neighborhood or a person or persons of a
particular race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status,
or sex.



   (B)   The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis
of familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the
process of securing legal custody of any minor.



(Prior Code, § 9-612)  (Ord. 2004-2704, passed 8-16-2004)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 92.04  DISCRIMINATION AGAINST HANDICAPPED PERSON PROHIBITED; CONSTRUCTION
STANDARDS.



   (A)   Except as exempted by § 92.07, it shall be unlawful to
discriminate in the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable or deny a
dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap of:



      (1)   The buyer or renter;



      (2)   Any person associated with the buyer or renter; or



      (3)   Any person residing in or intending to reside in the
dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made available.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, discrimination shall include:



      (1)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped
person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be
occupied by the person, if the modifications may be necessary to afford the
person full enjoyment of the premises, except that in the case of rental, the
landlord may, when it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a
modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises
to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and
tear excepted;



      (2)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules,
policies, practices, or services when the accommodations may be necessary to
afford the handicapped person equal opportunity to use or enjoy a dwelling;
and



      (3)   In connection with the design and construction of
covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after January 1, 1995, a
failure to design and construct the dwellings in a manner that:



         (a)   The public use and common use portions of the
dwelling are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;



         (b)   All the doors designed to allow passage into and
within all premises within the dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow
passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and



         (c)   All premises within the dwellings contain the
following features of adaptive design:



            1.   An accessible route into and through the
dwelling;



            2.   Light switches, electrical outlets,
thermostats, and other environmental controls in accessible locations;



            3.   Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow
later installation of grab bars; and



            4.   Kitchens and bathrooms so that a handicapped
person in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.



   (C)   Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American
National Standards Institute standard for buildings and facilities providing
accessibility and usability for physically handicapped people, ANSI A117.1,
shall satisfy the requirements of division (B)(3)(c) of this section.



   (D)   For purposes of this section, COVERED MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS
shall mean:



      (1)   Buildings consisting of four or more units if the
buildings have one or more elevators; and



      (2)   Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four
or more units.



   (E)   Nothing in this section shall require that a dwelling be made
available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to
the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in
substantial physical damage to the property of others.



(Prior Code, § 9-613)  (Ord. 2004-2704, passed 8-16-2004)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 92.05  DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED IN RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose
business includes engaging in transactions related to residential real estate
to discriminate against any person in making available a transaction because
of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, TRANSACTION RELATED TO
RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE shall mean any of the following:



      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other
financial assistance:



         (a)   For purchasing, constructing, improving,
repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or



         (b)   Secured by residential real estate.



      (2)   The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential
real property.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person engaged in the
business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into
consideration factors other than race, color, religion, national origin,
handicap, familial status, or sex.



(Prior Code, § 9-614)  (Ord. 2004-2704, passed 8-16-2004)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 92.06  DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED IN REAL ESTATE LISTING AND BROKER
SERVICES.



   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to, or membership or
participation in, any multiple listing service, real estate brokers
organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against any
person in the terms or conditions of access, membership, or participation on
account of race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status,
or sex.



(Prior Code, § 9-615)  (Ord. 2004-2704, passed 8-16-2004)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 92.07  USE RESTRICTIONS NOT PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious
organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or
organization operated, supervised, or controlled by, or in conjunction with,
a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale,
rental, or occupancy of a dwelling which it owns or operates for other than
commercial purposes to persons of the same religion, or from giving
preferences to persons unless membership in the religion is restricted on
account of race, color, national origin, handicap, familial status, or sex.



   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a private club not in
fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or
purposes provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than commercial
purposes, from limiting the rental or occupancy of the lodging to its members
or from giving preference to its members.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit or limit the right of
any person or his or her authorized representative to refuse to rent a room
or rooms in his or her own home for any reason or for no reason or to change
tenants in his or her own home as often as desired, except that this
exception shall not apply to any person who makes available for rental or
occupancy more than four sleeping rooms to a person or family within his or
her home.



   (D)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status shall apply
with respect to housing for older persons. For purposes of this subsection,
housing for older persons shall mean housing:



      (1)   Provided under any state program that the Commission
determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons or
defined in the program;



      (2)   Intended for and solely occupied by persons 62 years of
age or older; or



      (3)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one
person 55 years of age or older per unit.



(Prior Code, § 9-616)  (Ord. 2004-2704, passed 8-16-2004)



§ 92.08  INFORMATION SUPPLIED FOR FREE.



   The City Clerk, upon request, shall make available to an aggrieved
person, or any other person, information regarding the state Fair Housing Act
and the state Equal Opportunity Commission without cost to the individual.



(Prior Code, § 9-617)  (Ord. 2004-2704, passed 8-16-2004)



CHAPTER 93:  UNLICENSED VEHICLES



Section



   93.01   Outdoor storage of unlicensed vehicles, bodies, parts deemed
nuisance



   93.02   Outdoor storage of unlicensed vehicles, bodies, parts
prohibited; exceptions



   93.03   Concealment of vehicles by dealers and repair shops



§ 93.01  OUTDOOR STORAGE OF UNLICENSED VEHICLES, BODIES, PARTS DEEMED
NUISANCE.



   It is hereby expressly found and determined that the practice of
permitting unlicensed motor vehicles, motor vehicle bodies, and motor vehicle
chassis or parts therefrom to be stored or accumulated on private premises is
unsightly, unhealthy, and constitutes a nuisance to the citizens and
residents of this city; provided, however, that the storage or accumulation
of motor vehicles, motor vehicle bodies, and motor vehicle chassis or parts
therefrom in completely enclosed buildings does not, and shall not, under the
terms of this chapter, constitute a nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 6-501)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 18-1720



§ 93.02  OUTDOOR STORAGE OF UNLICENSED VEHICLES, BODIES, PARTS 
PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.



   No person shall store, retain, or keep on, or permit to be stored,
retained, or kept on, any private premises owned or occupied by the person,
any motor vehicle that has been unlicensed for a period in excess of four
months under the laws of the state, or any motor vehicle body or motor
vehicle chassis or parts therefrom; provided, however, that this chapter
shall not apply to a motor vehicle, motor vehicle body, or motor vehicle
chassis or parts therefrom where the same are kept in a completely enclosed
building.



(Prior Code, § 6-502)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 18-1720



§ 93.03  CONCEALMENT OF VEHICLES BY DEALERS AND REPAIR SHOPS.



   The requirement that unlicensed motor vehicles, motor vehicle bodies,
and motor vehicle chassis, or parts therefrom, be stored in a completely
enclosed building shall not apply to the business premises of junk dealers,
motor vehicle dealers, farm implement dealers, or motor vehicle
repairpersons; provided, however, that no junk dealer, motor vehicle dealer,
farm implement dealer, or motor vehicle repairperson shall store, retain or
keep on, or permit to be stored, retained or kept on his or her business
premises, any wrecked motor vehicles, motor vehicle bodies, chassis, or parts
therefrom, unless the wrecked motor vehicle, motor vehicle bodies, chassis,
or parts therefrom, are concealed behind a fence.



(Prior Code, § 6-503)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 18-1720



CHAPTER 94:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



Sidewalks



   94.01   Snow removal from sidewalks required



   94.02   Notice



   94.03   Sidewalk maintenance and repair



   94.04   Construction of sidewalk by owner



   94.05   Sidewalk width and location



   94.06   Sidewalk construction specifications



   94.07   Nonconforming construction



   94.08   Removal of sidewalk for building purpose



   94.09   Sidewalk construction by city; bid procedure



   94.10   Duty of Clerk to maintain sidewalk records



   94.11   Duties of City Manager



   94.12   Cost of construction of sidewalks



   94.13   Construction of crossings and crosswalks



Streets



   94.25   Street names and numbers



   94.26   Street crossings



   94.27   Authority to widen or open streets



   94.28   Driving stake or peg into public pavement prohibited



   94.29   Mixing concrete directly on pavement prohibited



   94.30   Placing or permitting solvent liquid on pavement prohibited



   94.31   Heavy equipment routes



   94.32   Depositing snow on pavement prohibited



   94.33   Hauling or dropping of unsecured material prohibited



   94.34   Excavations; permit; surety bond



   94.35   Barriers to protect pavement



   94.36   Location of public utility service company wires and pipes



   94.37   Petition for creation of improvement district



   94.38   Deferral from special assessment



   94.39   Driveway approaches



   94.40   Cutting curb or gutter



 



   94.99   Penalty



SIDEWALKS



§ 94.01  SNOW REMOVAL FROM SIDEWALKS REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any lot or the owner of any
vacant lot within the city to permit snow, sleet, mud, ice, or any other
substance to accumulate on the sidewalk contiguous thereto, or to permit any
hard-trodden snow, ice or mud to remain upon such sidewalk. The owner or
occupant of any property within the city zoned residentially shall be
required to clean the sidewalk within 24 hours after the cessation of any
snow or sleet storm. The owner or occupant with any property within the city
zoned commercially shall be required to clean sidewalks adjacent to the
property by 10:00 a.m. of the morning immediately following the cessation of
any snow or sleet storm.



(Prior Code, § 8-201)  Penalty, see § 94.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-663



§ 94.02  NOTICE.



   Notice to remove snow, sleet, mud, ice, or other substance from the
sidewalk adjacent to any lot shall be served on the owner, agent, or occupant
of the premises when the substances are not removed pursuant to § 94.01. The
notice shall demand the removal of the substance forthwith. If the person
owning the premises is unknown or cannot be found, or if reasonable service
cannot be made upon any owner, agent, or occupant within the city, then
service of the notice shall be made by posting a typewritten copy thereof in
some conspicuous place on the premises. In case the owner, agent, or occupant
fails to remove the ice, snow, mud, or other substance, then the Public Works
Director or his or her authorized agent may remove the substance, and the
expense thereof shall be charged against the property and the owner thereof,
and may be recovered by proper action in the name of the city or charged
against the property as a special assessment for improvements.



(Prior Code, § 8-202)  (Ord. 2016-2924, passed 5-2-2016)



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-663



§ 94.03  SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.



   (A)   Every owner of any lot, lots, or piece of land within the
corporate limits shall at all times keep and maintain the sidewalk along and
contiguous to the lot, lots, or pieces of land, as the case may be, in good
and proper repair, and in a condition reasonably safe for travel for all
travelers thereon. In the event that the owner or owners of any lot, lots, or
lands, abutting on any street, avenue, or part thereof shall fail to
construct or repair any sidewalk in front of his, her, or their lot, lots, or
lands, within the time and in the manner as directed and required herein
after having received due notice to do so, they shall be liable for all
damages or injury occasioned by reason of the defective or dangerous
condition of any sidewalk, and the governing body shall have power to cause
any sidewalks to be constructed or repaired and assess the costs thereof
against the property. In the event the property owner is a non-resident of
the county in which the property lies, the city shall, before levying any
special assessment against that property, send a copy of any notice required
by law to be published by means of certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the last known address of the non-resident property owner. The last known
address shall be that address listed on the current tax rolls at the time the
required notice was first published.



(Prior Code, § 8-203)



   (B)   The Public Works Director may require sidewalks of the city to
be repaired. Notice to the owners of property upon which the sidewalks in
disrepair are located shall require within 48 hours from issuance of notice
the owners to make arrangements to have the sidewalk repaired. The repairs
shall be completed within 21 days after issuance of the notice. No special
assessment shall be levied against the property unless the owner shall
neglect or refuse to repair within the time prescribed and in the event that
the owner fails to repair, the city shall cause the repairs to be made and
assess the property owner the expense of the repairs. In the event the
property owner is a non-resident of the county in which the property lies,
the city shall, before levying any special assessment against that property,
send a copy of any notice required by law to be published by means of
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the
non-resident property owner. The last known address shall be that address
listed on the current tax rolls at the time the required notice was first
published.



(Prior Code, § 8-204)



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-662



§ 94.04  CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALK BY OWNER.



   (A)   Any person desiring to construct, or cause to be constructed,
any sidewalk shall do so only as herein provided. It shall be unlawful for
any person to construct any sidewalk without first having obtained a permit.



   (B)   The owner shall make application in writing for a permit and
file the application in the office of the Public Works Director. The permit
shall give a description of the lot or piece of land along which the sidewalk
is to be constructed. The Public Works Director shall issue the desired
permit unless good cause shall appear why the permit should be denied;
provided, if it is desired to construct the sidewalk at any other than the
regularly prescribed location, grade, or elevation, the Public Works Director
shall submit the application to the governing body who shall determine
whether the permit should be granted or denied. It shall be unlawful for any
person to construct, or cause to be constructed, a sidewalk at any other
location, grade, or elevation than designated by the city. All sidewalks
shall be built and constructed on the established grade, or elevation, and if
there is no established grade, then on the grade or elevation indicated by
the Public Works Director.



(Prior Code, § 8-205)  Penalty, see § 94.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-661



§ 94.05  SIDEWALK WIDTH AND LOCATION.



   All sidewalks, except as provided to the contrary by resolution of the
Mayor and Council, shall be five feet in width. Whenever possible, they shall
correspond in width to sidewalks already built, to which they are adjacent or
adjoined. Unless otherwise specified, all new sidewalks shall be built upon
the terrace, separated by a minimum of five feet from the curb located along
the street.



(Prior Code, § 8-206)



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-661



§ 94.06  SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   All concrete sidewalks shall be laid upon a four-inch bed or
foundation of well compacted gravel, coal, cinders, or well-tamped dirt,
having a covering of at least one inch of sand and having an inclination
toward the gutter of one inch to each five feet in width. All sidewalks shall
conform to the specifications adopted by the city as to the quality of work
and materials. The whole work of grading and laying any sidewalk, whether
done by the city, or by the owner of the respective lot, lots, or parcels of
land abutting upon the same, shall be done under the supervision of the City
Manager or the Public Works Director and subject to their approval. All
sidewalks shall conform to the grade, where established, and on streets where
no grade is established, then on a grade established by the Public Works
Director with relation to the particular points between which the sidewalk is
to be built. The Director shall establish grades on streets where the same
have not yet been run. Sidewalks shall be built on a grade or level as near
as possible to the grade or level of the surface of the ground. When ordered
by the Council, any property owner shall rebuild or reconstruct his or her
sidewalk to conform to the grade thus established.



   (B)   All sidewalks which shall be constructed, reconstructed or
replaced after the effective date of this chapter shall be made of concrete.
Whenever any person shall desire to repair any now existing sidewalk
constructed with any other material than is prescribed, he or she shall
secure a permit to do so from the City Manager before the work shall be
undertaken. In no case shall a permit be granted where the amount of repairs
in the aggregate exceeds one-third of the running feet in the walk.



(Prior Code, § 8-207)



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-661



§ 94.07  NONCONFORMING CONSTRUCTION.



   In case any owner of a lot or piece of land within the city, under
notice given or otherwise, shall construct a sidewalk in violation of this
chapter, the Public Works Director may stop the work of the construction and
order the same to be constructed in accordance with this chapter and the work
already done to be changed, and on the failure of the owner to change any
work, the Public Works Director shall forthwith change the work and the
expense of the change shall be assessed and taxed to the lot and collected as
provided by law.



(Prior Code, § 8-208)



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-661, 16-662



§ 94.08  REMOVAL OF SIDEWALK FOR BUILDING PURPOSE.



   Any owner, tenant, or lessee of any lot or any contractor or builder of
any owner, tenant, or lessee, who shall take up or remove any sidewalk,
crossing, flagging, or other material used as a sidewalk or crossing, for the
purposes of building upon or improving any lot or property adjacent thereto,
shall relay and replace the sidewalk, crossing, or flagging, within ten days
after the wall of the first story of the building is constructed.



(Prior Code, § 8-209)



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-661, 16-662



§ 94.09  SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION BY CITY; BID PROCEDURE.



   (A)   (1)   The governing body may, by resolution, order the
construction of a sidewalk on any lot or piece of ground within the city.
Notice of the governing body's intention to construct the sidewalk shall be
given by the City Clerk by publication of notice one time in a legal
newspaper of general circulation in the city.



      (2)   A copy of the notice shall be personally served upon the
occupant in possession of the property, or, when personal service is not
possible, the notice shall be posted upon the premise ten days prior to the
commencement of construction. The notice required in this section shall be
prepared by the City Attorney in accordance with the provisions of this
section. The service shall include a form of return evidencing personal
service or posting as herein required.



      (3)   The notice shall notify the owner of the premise of the
passage of the resolution ordering him or her to construct or cause to be
constructed a sidewalk within 30 days after the date of publication and
further that if he or she fails to construct the sidewalk or cause the same
to be done within the time allowed, the city will cause the sidewalk to be
constructed and the cost thereof shall be levied and assessed as a special
tax against the premise, provided the notice shall contain the official
estimate of the cost of the construction and no special assessment in excess
of this estimate shall be assessed against the property. In the event the
property owner is a non-resident of the county in which the property lies,
the city shall, before levying any special assessment against that property,
send a copy of any notice required by law to be published by means of
certified mail, return receipt requested to the last known address of the
non-resident property owner. The last known address shall be that address
listed on the current tax rolls at the time the required notice was first
published.



(Prior Code, § 8-210)



   (B)   Whenever the city shall construct, widen, replace, or
reconstruct any sidewalk, notice prepared by the City Attorney, specifying
the work to be done and calling for bids for doing the work and supplying the
necessary materials and labor, shall be published in at least one issue of a
legal newspaper of general circulation in the city, provided bids so invited
shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk within ten days after the date
of publication. Bids shall be opened at the next regular or special meeting
of the governing body, and the governing body shall then award the work to
the lowest responsible bidder. Upon approval of the work, the governing body
may require the contractor to accept payment in certificates issued to him or
her by the City Clerk entitling him or her to all assessments or special
taxes against the real estate whenever the assessments or special taxes shall
be collected, together with the interest or penalty collected thereon. Each
certificate shall give the legal description of the lot, lots, or parcel of
ground against which the assessments or special taxes are assessed. The
certificate or certificates may be assigned and transferred, entitling the
holder to the same rights as if held by the original contractor. The County
Treasurer shall pay over to the contractor or other holder of the certificate
or certificates all assessments or special taxes against the real estate,
together with the interest and penalty thereon, at any time upon presentation
of the certificate or certificates after the assessments or special taxes
against the real estate, together with interest or penalty thereon, shall
have been collected.



(Prior Code, § 8-211)



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-321, 16-664, 16-666



§ 94.10  DUTY OF CLERK TO MAINTAIN SIDEWALK RECORDS.



   The City Clerk shall keep a record of sidewalks built, rebuilt, or
widened by the city, which shall contain the date the same was ordered, the
time in which the walk is to be built, widened, or rebuilt, the width of the
walk, upon what street and in front of what lot or parcel of land, with the
distance from the lot line that the walk is required to be laid, the name of
the contractor, the date of the contract, the date of inspection and
acceptance of the work, with a proper space or column for the number of feet,
rate per foot, charges for advertising and inspection, and with a space or
column for summary or total of all costs and expenses made against any lot or
piece of ground and other details as may be deemed necessary by the City
Council.



(Prior Code, § 8-212)



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-317



§ 94.11  DUTIES OF CITY MANAGER.



   The City Manager shall certify to the Council as to all sidewalks laid,
widened, or rebuilt, and the cost of same to be levied against each adjacent
lot or piece of ground, and as to other facts as may be necessary to enable
it to make the proper levy. He or she shall also certify as to when the walks
have been accepted, or what action he or she has taken thereon.



(Prior Code, § 8-213)



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 19-646



§ 94.12  COST OF CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   The cost of construction, widening, or rebuilding of any
sidewalk shall be levied upon the lot or lots or parcel of ground fronting
and adjoining which the sidewalks are laid, widened, or rebuilt, by
resolution, which shall specify the street upon which the sidewalk has been
so constructed, widened, or rebuilt, the length and width of each sidewalk
constructed, widened, or rebuilt, fronting on any lot or piece of ground.



(Prior Code, § 8-214)



   (B)   Corner lots shall be charged with the cost of the sidewalk as
was required to be laid for the intersection of the walks abutting the
frontage of the lots to the curb line.



(Prior Code, § 8-215)



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-661, 16-662



§ 94.13  CONSTRUCTION OF CROSSINGS AND CROSSWALKS.



   The city shall construct all crossing and crosswalks from curb line to
curb line in all streets.



(Prior Code, § 8-216)



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-661



STREETS



§ 94.25  STREET NAMES AND NUMBERS.



   The governing body may at any time, by ordinance, rename any street or
provide a name for any new street. Buildings used for residence or business
purposes and located along the streets shall retain  numbers as the
governing body may require. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk, upon the
erection of any new building or buildings, to assign the proper numbers to
the building or buildings and give notice to the owner or owners and occupant
or occupants of the same.



(Prior Code, § 8-301)



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-614



§ 94.26  STREET CROSSINGS.



   The governing body may order and cause to be constructed, under the
supervision of the Public Works Director, street, avenue, and alley crossings
as the governing body shall deem necessary. When a petition for the
construction of any crossings is filed by an interested resident in the
office of the City Clerk, the City Clerk shall refer the application to the
Public Works Director who shall investigate and make his or her
recommendation to the governing body. Action by the governing body on the
application, whether the application is approved or rejected, shall be
considered final.



(Prior Code, § 8-302)



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-617



§ 94.27  AUTHORITY TO WIDEN OR OPEN STREETS.



   The governing body shall have the power to open or widen any street,
alley, or lane within the limits of the city, and to create, open, and
improve any new street, alley, or lane, provided all damages sustained shall
be ascertained in a manner as shall be provided by ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 8-303)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-609



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-645



§ 94.28  DRIVING STAKE OR PEG INTO PUBLIC PAVEMENT PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any peg or stake of any
kind into the pavement in any street or alley without first procuring the
written consent of the Public Works Director.



(Prior Code, § 8-304)  Penalty, see § 94.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-207, 16-210, 16-609



§ 94.29  MIXING CONCRETE DIRECTLY ON PAVEMENT PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to mix any concrete or plastering
material directly on the street pavement for any reason whatsoever.



(Prior Code, § 8-305)  Penalty, see § 94.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-207, 16-210, 16-609



§ 94.30  PLACING OR PERMITTING SOLVENT LIQUID ON PAVEMENT PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to leak in the
gutter of any street, waste gasoline, kerosene, or high lubricating oils,
which damage or act as a solvent upon the streets.



(Prior Code, § 8-306)  Penalty, see § 94.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-207, 16-210, 16-609



§ 94.31  HEAVY EQUIPMENT ROUTES.



   (A)   It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person or persons to
move or operate heavy equipment across any curb, gutter, bridge, culvert,
sidewalk, crosswalk, or crossing on any unpaved street without first having
protected the curb, gutter, bridge, culvert, sidewalks, crosswalk, or
crossing with heavy plank sufficient in strength to warrant against the
breaking or damaging of the curb, gutter, bridge, culvert, sidewalk,
crosswalk, or crossing. Hereafter, it shall be unlawful to run, drive, move,
operate, or convey over or across any paved street a vehicle, machine, or
implement with sharp discs or sharp wheels that bear upon the pavement, with
wheels having cutting edges, with wheels having lugs, any protruding parts,
or bolts thereon that extend beyond a plain tire so as to cut, mark, mar,
indent, or otherwise injure or damage any pavement, gutter, or curb;
provided, where heavy vehicles, structures, and machines move along paved or
unpaved streets, the Public Works Director is hereby authorized and empowered
to choose the route over which the moving of the vehicles, structures, or
machines will be permitted and allowed.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to
pneumatic tires with metal or metal-type studs not exceeding five-sixteenths
of an inch in diameter,  inclusive of the stud-casting with an average
protrusion beyond the tread surface of not more than seven sixty-fourths of
an inch between October 1 and April 15, provided that school buses and
emergency vehicles shall be permitted to use metal or metal-type studs all
year. It shall be permissible to use farm machinery with tires having
protuberances which will not injure the streets. It shall be permissible to
use a rubber-tired crane with a fixed load when the vehicle will be
transported on a state highway or on any road within the corporate limits of
the city, the city in which the crane is intended to be transported has
authorized a one-day permit for the transportation of the crane and specified
the route to be used and the hours during which the crane can be transported,
the vehicle is escorted by another vehicle or vehicles assigned by the city,
and the vehicle's gross weight does not exceed the limits set out in Neb. RS
60-6,294 and it shall be permissible to use tire chains of reasonable
proportions upon any vehicle when required for safety because of snow, ice,
or other condition tending to cause a vehicle to slide or skid.



(Neb. RS 60-6,250)  (Prior Code, § 8-307)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-209



§ 94.32  DEPOSITING SNOW ON PAVEMENT PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or other party
to remove snow from any public, semi-public or private parking lot or
driveways and place it upon any street or sidewalk within the city. Also, it
shall be unlawful for snow to be placed within 150 feet of the intersecting
center lines of two streets at height above which the snow would become a
traffic hazard by inhibiting proper site distance at intersections herein
determined to be a height of two feet.



(Prior Code, § 8-308)  Penalty, see § 94.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-207, 16-210



§ 94.33  HAULING OR DROPPING OF UNSECURED MATERIAL PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to haul and move any sand,
gravel, dirt, trash, garbage, or debris of any kind or character over or
along any of the streets or alleys of the city in any vehicle which does not
have a tight bed or box.



   (B)   It shall further be unlawful for any person hauling and moving
sand, gravel, dirt, trash, garbage, or debris of any kind or character to
permit any of the sand, gravel, dirt, trash, garbage, or debris to fall or
drop from the vehicle in which it is being moved, upon any of the streets of
the city.



(Prior Code, § 8-309)  Penalty, see § 94.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-207, 16-209, 16-210, 16-230



§ 94.34  EXCAVATIONS; PERMIT; SURETY BOND.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall dig or make any excavation in any
street or alley in the city for any purpose without first obtaining a permit
from the Public Works Director to do so.



      (2)   An excavation permit shall be issued only upon the
written application of the party desiring the permit, which application shall
be filed in an orderly manner and duly preserved. The person shall be
required to maintain good and sufficient barricades, guards, lights, and
signals as will protect the public from injury or loss. The applicant shall
deposit with the City Clerk a sum sufficient to cover the cost of replacing
any paving so removed and it is hereby made the duty of the Public Works
Director to cause the pavement to be replaced, and after paying the expense
thereof, the balance of the money, if any, shall be returned to the applicant.



      (3)   In case of any damage to any cables, wires, or other
fixtures of the telephone company, electric light company or the city,
resulting from any street excavation, the property owner for whom the
excavation was being done shall pay the amount of the damage to the owner of
the cables, wires or other fixtures damaged.



(Prior Code, § 8-310)



   (B)   Any person desiring to make any excavation in any street or
alley in the city or upon any city-owned property may be required by the City
Manager to post a cash bond to ensure the proper and timely repair of the
streets or alleys following excavation as permitted under § 94.33 above. The
cash bond shall be in an amount of $2,500. The bond shall ensure the
workmanship of the street repair for a period of one year and may be made
applicable to more than one excavation repair made by a company, person, or
firm provided that the total estimated cost of the repair does not exceed
$2,500.



(Prior Code, § 8-311)  Penalty, see § 94.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-232



§ 94.35  BARRIERS TO PROTECT PAVEMENT.



   No person shall remove, destroy or tear down any barricade, fence,
railing or other device erected or constructed for the purpose of protecting
paving or any other work while the work is in the course of construction or
after it has been constructed, on any of the streets, alleys, or public
grounds of the city. No person shall drive over or upon or go upon any paving
or other public work in any of the streets, alleys, or public grounds of the
city while the same is protected by any barrier, fence, or railing or until
the barrier, fence,  or railing has been removed by the contractors having
the work in charge, or by the duly authorized officials of the city.



(Prior Code, § 8-312)  Penalty, see § 94.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-207, 16-210, 16-609



§ 94.36  LOCATION OF PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICE COMPANY WIRES AND PIPES.



   Poles, wires, gas mains, pipelines, and other appurtenances of public
service companies shall be located, or erected over, upon, or under the
streets, alleys, and common grounds of the city. Application for location of
the above shall be made to the governing body in writing. Approval by that
body shall be issued in writing. Any public service company granted a
right-of-way for the erection and maintenance of poles, conduits, gas mains,
pipe lines, and wires shall at all times erect and locate its poles, wires,
gas mains, pipe lines, and other appurtenances at places and in the manner as
shall be designated by the governing body. The poles, wires, gas mains, pipe
lines, and other appurtenances shall be removed or relocated by the companies
at their own expense when requested to do so by the governing body. Any such
relocation shall be ordered by resolution of the governing body and the City
Clerk shall notify any and all companies affected. The companies shall,
within 24 hours after receiving notice, at their own expense, cause the
poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines, or other appurtenances to be removed.
The governing body shall designate another location as closely as possible
where the poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines, or other appurtenances may be
reset or placed. All poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines, or other
appurtenances shall be reset, placed, or erected in a manner that they will
not interfere with the water system, sewerage system, poles, wires, and mains
of any public utility, adjacent buildings, or with travel on the public ways
and property. Whenever possible, all pole lines, wires, gas mains, pipe
lines, or appurtenances shall be confined to the alleys of the city.



(Prior Code, § 8-313)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-210, 16-232



§ 94.37  PETITION FOR CREATION OF IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT.



   Owners of lots or lands abutting upon any street, avenue, or alley
within the city representing three-fourths of the front footage thereon may
petition the governing body to create an improvement district, so that a
district when created will make up one continuous or extended thoroughfare or
more without cost to the city. The governing body shall assess the entire
cost of any improvements in any street, avenue, or alley, including
intersections of streets or avenues and spaces opposite alleys, against the
private property within the improvement district, or districts. It shall be
the duty of the governing body to create the proper improvement district or
districts, which shall be consecutively numbered, and to improve the same and
to proceed in the same manner and form as hereinbefore provided for in other
paving and improvement districts. The governing body shall have power to levy
the entire cost of the improvements of any street, avenue, or alley,
including intersections of streets or avenues and spaces opposite alleys,
against the private property within the district, and to issue street
improvement bonds to pay for the improvements. The bonds shall be issued to
cover the entire cost of so improving the streets or avenues, intersections
of the same, and spaces opposite alleys. If the assessments hereinbefore
provided for, or any part thereof, shall fail, or for any reason shall be
invalid, the governing body may make other and further assessments upon the
lots or lands as may be required to collect from the same the cost of any
improvements properly chargeable thereto, as herein provided. The governing
body shall have the discretion to deny the formation of the proposed district
when the area to be improved has not previously been improved with a water
system, sewer system, and grading of streets. If the governing body should
deny a requested improvement district formation, it shall state its grounds
for denial in a written letter to interested parties.



(Prior Code, § 8-314)  (Ord. 1712, passed 10-3-1983)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-624



§ 94.38  DEFERRAL FROM SPECIAL ASSESSMENT.



   (A)   Whenever the governing body of a city creates a paving
district which includes land adjacent to the city which is within an
agricultural use zone and is used exclusively for agricultural use, the
owners of record title of the adjacent land may apply for a deferral from
special assessments. For purposes of this section, the terms AGRICULTURAL USE
and AGRICULTURAL USE ZONE shall have the meaning specified in Neb. RS 77-1343.



   (B)   Any owner of record title eligible for the deferral granted by
this section shall, to secure the assessment, make application to the
governing body of the city within 90 days after creation of the paving
district. Any owner of record title who makes application for the deferral
provided by this section shall notify the County Register of Deeds of the
application in writing prior to approval by the governing body. The governing
body shall approve the application of any owner of record title upon
determination that the property:



      (1)   Is within an agricultural use zone and is used
exclusively for agricultural use; and



      (2)   The owner has met the requirements of this section.



   (C)   The deferral provided for in this section shall be terminated
upon any of the following events:



      (1)   Notification by the owner of record title to the
governing body to remove the deferral;



      (2)   Sale or transfer to a new owner who does not make a new
application within 60 days of the sale or transfer, except as provided in
division (C)(3) below;



      (3)   Transfer by reason of death of a former owner to a new
owner who does not make application within 125 days of the transfer;



      (4)   The land is no longer being used as agricultural land; or



      (5)   Change of zoning to other than an agricultural zone.



   (D)   Whenever property which has received a deferral pursuant to
this section becomes disqualified for the deferral, the owner of record title
of the property shall pay to the city an amount equal to:



      (1)   The total amount of special assessments which would have
been assessed against the property, to the extent of special benefits, had
the deferral not been granted; and



      (2)   Interest upon the special assessments not paid each year
at the rate of 6% from the dates at which the assessments would have been
payable if no deferral had been granted.



   (E)   In cases where the deferral provided by this section is
terminated as a result of a sale or transfer described in division (C)(2) or
(3) of this section, the lien for assessments and interest shall attach as of
the day preceding the sale or transfer.



(Prior Code, § 8-315)  (Ord. 1713, passed 10-3-1983)



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 19-2428 through 19-2431



§ 94.39  DRIVEWAY APPROACHES.



   (A)   The Public Works Director may require the owner of property
served by a driveway approach constructed or maintained upon the street
right-of-way to repair or replace any driveway approach which is cracked,
broken, or otherwise deteriorated to the extent that it is causing or is
likely to cause damage to or interfere with any street structure including
pavement or sidewalks.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall give the property owner notice by
registered letter or certified mail, directed to the last-known address of
the owner or the agent of the owner, directing the repair or replacement of
the driveway approach. If within 30 days of mailing the notice the property
owner fails or neglects to cause the repairs or replacements to be made, the
Public Works Director may cause the work to be done and assess the cost upon
the property served by the approach.



(Prior Code, § 8-316)  (Ord. 1760, passed 10-1-1984)



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1748



§ 94.40  CUTTING CURB OR GUTTER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut into any paving, curb, or
sidewalk for the purpose of constructing a driveway or any other purpose
whatsoever without first having obtained a written permit from the Public
Works Director therefor. Before any person shall obtain a permit, he or she
shall inform the Director of the place where the cutting is to be done, and
it shall be the duty of the Director or his or her authorized agent to
inspect the place of entry into the paving, sidewalk, or curb, before the
same is cut. When cutting into any paving, it shall be the duty of the party
to cut the paving under the rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the
governing body or the Public Works Director. When the applicant is ready to
close the opening made, he or she shall inform the Public Works Director or
his or her authorized agent, who shall supervise and inspect the materials
used and the work done in closing the opening.



(Prior Code, § 8-401)  Penalty, see § 94.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-609



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions
of any section of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Unless otherwise specified in the particular section for which the person
stands convicted of violating, the penalty for the violation shall be in any
amount not to exceed $1,000 and/or imprisonment for any length of time not to
exceed three months, in the discretion of the court; provided, whenever any
section of this chapter shall declare a nuisance, a violation of that section
shall be penalized by a fine of not more than $1,000, in which case a new
violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of the
failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 8-501)



   (C)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this chapter, the
city may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the same, in the
manner provided by law. Whenever, in any action, it is established that a
nuisance exists, the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed,
enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.



(Neb. RS 18-1720, 18-1722)  (Prior Code, § 8-502)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 18-1720, 18-1722



CHAPTER 95:  NUISANCE; HEALTH AND SANITATION



Section



General Provisions



   95.01   Defined



   95.02   Specific nuisances



   95.03   Abatement procedure



   95.04   Jurisdiction



   95.05   Intervention of adjoining land owner



Noise



   95.20   Definitions



   95.21   Prohibited noises



   95.22   Maximum permissible sound levels



   95.23   Permit for relief from noise level designation required



   95.24   Exceptions for emergency vehicles; temporary licensed or
permitted activities



Noxious Weeds; Litter; Stagnant Water



   95.35   Control of weeds, litter, stagnant water



 



   95.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 95.01  DEFINED.



   A NUISANCE consists in doing any unlawful act, or omitting to perform a
duty, or suffering or permitting any condition, or thing to be or exist,
which act, omission, condition, or thing either:



   (A)   Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, or safety of
others;



   (B)   Offends decency;



   (C)   Is offensive to the senses;



   (D)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, tends to obstruct, or
renders dangerous for passage any stream, public park, parkway, square,
street, or highway in the city;



   (E)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use
of property; or



   (F)   Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life
and property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others.



(Prior Code, § 4-301)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 18-1720



§ 95.02  SPECIFIC NUISANCES.



   The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving, or permitting of
any of the following specific acts, omissions, places, conditions, and things
are hereby declared to be nuisances:



   (A)   Any odorous, putrid, unsound or unwholesome grain, meat,
hides, skins, feathers, vegetable matter, or the whole or any part of any
dead animal, fish, or fowl;



   (B)   Privies, vaults, cesspools, dumps, pits or like places which
are not securely protected from flies or rats, or which are foul or
malodorous;



   (C)   Filthy, littered or trash-covered cellars, house-yards,
barnyards, stable-yards, factory-yards, mill yards, vacant areas in rear of
stores, granaries, vacant lots, houses, buildings, or premises;



   (D)   Animal manure in any quantity which is not securely protected
from flies and the elements, or which is kept or handled in violation of any
ordinance of the city;



   (E)   Liquid household waste, human excreta, garbage, butcher's
trimmings and offal, parts of fish or any waste vegetable or animal matter in
any quantity, provided nothing herein contained shall prevent the temporary
retention of waste in receptacles in a manner provided by the Health Officer
of the city, nor the dumping of non-putrifying waste in a place and manner
approved by the Health Officer;



   (F)   Tin cans, bottles, glass, cans, ashes, small pieces of scrap
iron, wire metal articles, bric-a-brac, broken stone or cement, broken
crockery, broken glass, broken plaster, and all trash or abandoned material,
unless the same be kept in covered bins or galvanized iron receptacles;



   (G)   Trash, litter, rags, accumulations of barrels, boxes, crates,
packing crates, mattresses, bedding, excelsior, packing hay, straw or other
packing material, lumber not neatly piled, scrap iron, tin or other metal not
neatly piled, old automobiles or parts thereof, or any other waste materials
when any of the articles or materials create a condition in which flies or
rats may breed or multiply, or which may be a fire danger or which are so
unsightly as to depreciate property values in the vicinity thereof;



   (H)   Any unsightly building, billboard, or other structure, or any
old, abandoned or partially destroyed building or structure or any building
or structure commenced and left unfinished, which  buildings, billboards or
other structures are either a fire hazard, a menace to the public health or
safety, or are so unsightly as to depreciate the value of property in the
vicinity thereof;



   (I)   All places used or maintained as junk yards, or dumping
grounds, or for the wrecking and dissembling of automobiles, trucks,
tractors, or machinery of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of
worn-out, wrecked, or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery
of any kind, or of any of the parts thereof, or for the storing or leaving of
any machinery or equipment used by contractors or builders or by other
persons, which places are kept or maintained so as to essentially interfere
with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by others, or which are so
unsightly as to tend to depreciate property values in the vicinity thereof;



   (J)   Stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of
ground;



   (K)   Stockyards, granaries, mills, pig pens, cattle pens, chicken
pens, or any other place, building or enclosure, in which animals or fowls of
any kind are confined or on which are stored tankage or any other animal or
vegetable matter, or on which any animal or vegetable matter including grain
is being processed, when the places in which the animals are confined, or the
premises on which the vegetable or animal matter is located, are maintained
and kept in a manner that foul and noxious odors are permitted to emanate
therefrom, to the annoyance of inhabitants of the city, or are maintained and
kept in a manner as to be injurious to the public health; and



   (L)   All other things specifically designated as nuisances
elsewhere in this code.



(Prior Code, § 4-302)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 18-1720



§ 95.03  ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.



   It shall be the duty of every owner, occupant, lessee, or mortgagee of
real estate in the city to keep such real estate free of public nuisances.
The Board of Health shall inspect the property as shall come to its attention
as being in violation of these requirements. Should the owner of any property
prohibit the Board of Health from entering upon the property to make
inspection, the Board shall apply to the County or District Court for an
order authorizing inspection of the property. Upon determination by the Board
of Health that the owner, occupant, lessee, or mortgagee has failed to keep
the real estate free of public nuisances, the Health Board shall thereupon
cause notice to be served upon the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee or
agent thereof. The notice shall describe the condition as found by the Board
of Health and state that the condition has been declared a public nuisance,
and that the condition must be remedied at once. If the person receiving the
notice has not complied therewith or filed an appeal from the determination
of the Health Board to be reviewed by the City Council within five days after
receipt of the notice, the Board of Health shall proceed to cause the
abatement of the described public nuisance. Upon completion of the work by
the city, a statement of the cost of the work shall be transmitted to the
City Council, which is authorized to bill the property owner or occupant, or
levy the cost as a special assessment against the land. The special
assessment shall be a lien on the real estate and shall be collected in the
manner provided for special assessments.



(Prior Code, § 4-303)  (Ord. 1701, passed 9-19-1983)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 18-1720



§ 95.04  JURISDICTION.



   The City Manager and Chief of Police of the city are directed to
enforce this city code against all nuisances. The jurisdiction of the Mayor,
Chief of Police, and court shall extend to, and the territorial application
of this chapter shall include, all territory adjacent to the limits of the
city within two miles thereof and all territory within the corporate limits.



(Prior Code, § 4-304)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-901, 18-1720



§ 95.05  INTERVENTION OF ADJOINING LAND OWNER.



   In cases of appeal from an action of the governing body condemning real
property as a nuisance or as dangerous under the police powers of the city,
the owners of the adjoining property may intervene in the action at any time
before trial.



(Prior Code, § 4-305)  (Ord. 1791, passed 4-21-1986)



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 19-710



NOISE



§ 95.20  DEFINITIONS.



   All terminology used in this subchapter shall be consistent with
applicable American National Standards Institute Publications, such as S1.1
1960 (R-1971) or S1.13 1971, or those from its successor publications or
bodies. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   A WEIGHTED SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL.  The sound pressure level as measured
with a sound level meter using the A weighting network. The standard notation
is dB(A).



   DECIBEL.  A dimensionless measure of level when the base of the
logarithm is the tenth root of ten.



   DEVICE.  Any mechanism which is intended to produce or which actually
produces audible sound when operated or handled.



   NOISE.  Any sound which is unwanted or which causes or tends to cause
an adverse psychological or physiological effect on human beings.



   PLAINLY AUDIBLE NOISE.  Any noise for which the information content of
that noise is unambiguously transferred to the listener, such as, but not
limited to, understanding of spoken speech, comprehension of whether a voice
is raised or normal, or comprehension of musical rhythms.



   PROPERTY BOUNDARY.  An imaginary line at the ground surface which
separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another
person and its vertical extension.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, alley,
premise, or public conveyance which is owned or controlled by a public
governmental entity.



   SOUND LEVEL METER.  An instrument, including a microphone, amplifier,
output meter, and weighting networks, for the measurement of sound pressure.
The output meter reads sound pressure level when properly calibrated and the
instrument is of Type 2 or better as specified in American National Standards
Institute Publication S1.4-1971.



   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL.  It is 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of
the ratio of the effective sound pressure to the reference pressure which is
20 x 10-6 Newtons/meter2. It is expressed in decibels (dB).



   STEADY SOUND.  The sound pressure level of a steady sound remains
essentially consistent during the period of observation, i.e., it does not
vary more than six dB(A) when measured with the "slow" meter characteristic
of a sound level meter.



(Prior Code, § 4-601)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-227, 16-228



§ 95.21  PROHIBITED NOISES.



   (A)   The making and creating of any excessive or unusually loud
noise (or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others) within the city as heard
without measurement or heard and measured in the manner prescribed herein is
hereby declared to be unlawful, except when made under and in compliance with
a permit issued as hereinafter provided.



   (B)   These noises include but are not limited to:



      (1)   (a)   Sounding of any horn or signaling device on any
truck, automobile, motorcycle, emergency vehicle, or other vehicle on any
street or public place of the city except as a danger warning signal;



         (b)   The creation of, by means of any signaling device,
a sound in excess of 90 dB(A) at 50 feet from the front of the vehicle; or



         (c)   The sounding of any signaling device for any
unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.



      (2)   (a)   Using, operating or permitting the use or
operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, television,
phonograph, drum, or other machine or device for the production or
reproduction of sound, except as provided in division (B)(3) below, in a
manner as to cause noise disturbance; and/or



         (b)   The operating of any device between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and the following 7:00 a.m., in a manner as to be plainly audible
at the property boundary of the source or plainly audible through party walls
within a building or plainly audible at 50 feet from the device when operated
within a vehicle parked on a public right-of-way.



      (3)   Using or operating a loudspeaker or sound amplifying
vehicle for the purpose of commercial advertising, giving instructions,
directions, talks, addresses, lectures, or transmitting music to any persons
or assemblages of persons in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park,
place, or public property without first obtaining a permit;



      (4)   Operating or causing to be used or operated any
equipment used in construction, repair, alteration or demolition work on
buildings, structures, streets, alleys, or appurtenances thereto, such as,
but not limited to, pile drivers, power shovels, hammer derricks, bulldozers,
crawler-tractors, rotary drills, augers, and pneumatic power equipment or
other mechanical apparatus powered by internal combustion engines or
electricity which cause noise disturbances without first obtaining a permit;



      (5)   Repairing, rebuilding, modifying, or testing any truck,
automobile, motorcycle, or other motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause
noise disturbance;



      (6)   Operating any machinery, equipment, pump, fan, air
conditioning apparatus, or similar mechanical device so as to cause noise
disturbance;



      (7)   Operating or permitting to be operated any loudspeaker
or other source of amplified sound in such a manner as to violate the
permissible noise exposures of the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Act
(OSHA) for any individual in any enclosed place of public entertainment;



      (8)   Operating or permitting the operation of any motor of a
motor vehicle in excess of 10,000 pounds, manufacturer's gross vehicle weight
or any attached auxiliary equipment, for a consecutive period longer than ten
minutes while such a vehicle is standing on a public right-of-way in a
residential district or in a quiet zone or is on private property in a
residential district or quiet zone and is not within a completely enclosed
structure; and



      (9)   Creating any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud
noise within the vicinity of any school, hospital, institution of learning,
court, or other designated area where exceptional quiet is necessary, while
the same are in use, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in the
streets indicating that the same is a quiet zone.



(Prior Code, § 4-602)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-227, 16-228



§ 95.22  MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE SOUND LEVELS.



   (A)   The maximum permissible sound pressure levels at the property
line of any source of sound located on private property shall be as herein
provided. This includes, but is not limited to, sound from such activities as
production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, operating, or repair of
either vehicles, materials, goods or products, or devices. Sound pressure
levels in excess of those established in Table I for the use districts and
times herewith listed shall constitute prima facie evidence that the noise is
a noise disturbance. All railroad rights-of-way shall be considered as heavy
industrial districts within the meaning of this division. Stationary or
moving rail vehicles shall comply with the provisions of this division except
as provided for in the United States Noise Control Act of 1972 (Pub. Law No.
92-574). When a noise source can be identified and its noise measured in more
than one use district, the sound pressure level limits of the most
restrictive use district shall apply, at that district boundary. For the
purpose of this division, all properly designated quiet zones shall have the
maximum permissible sound pressure limits as set forth for residential use
districts.



 


TABLE I
Sound Pressure Level Limit
dB(A)



Use District
 
Day
7:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m.
 
Night
10:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m.


Residential, Floodway, Selected Floodway
 
65
 
60


Central Business, Highway Commercial, Business Commercial, Neighborhood
Commercial
 
70
 
65


Light Industrial, Agricultural
 
80
 
75


Heavy Industrial
 
90
 
85



 



   (B)   The maximum permissible sound pressure levels at the property
line of any steady source of sound located on private property shall be as
herein provided. This includes, but is not limited to, sound from such
activities as production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing,
operating, or repair of either vehicles, materials, goods or products, or
devices. Sound pressure levels in excess of those established in Table II for
the use districts and times herewith listed shall constitute prima facie
evidence that the noise is a noise disturbance. All railroad rights-of-way
shall be considered as heavy industrial districts within the meaning of this
division. Stationary or moving rail vehicles shall comply with the provisions
of this division except as provided for in the United States Noise Control
Act of 1972 (Pub. Law No. 92-574). When a noise source can be identified and
its noise measured in more than one use district, the sound pressure level
limits of the most restrictive use district shall apply at that district
boundary. For the purposes of this division, all properly designated quiet
zones shall have the maximum permissible steady sound pressure level limits
as set forth for residential use districts.



 


TABLE II
Sound Pressure Level Limit
dB(A)



Use District
 
Day
7:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m.
 
Night
10:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m.


Residential, Floodway, Selected Floodway
 
55
 
50


Central Business, Highway Commercial, Business Commercial, Neighborhood
Commercial
 
60
 
55


Light Industrial, Agricultural
 
70
 
65


Heavy Industry
 
80
 
75



 



   (C)   The maximum permissible sound pressure level by motor vehicles
moving in a public right-of-way shall be as herein provided. This shall
include all vehicles, whether publicly or privately owned, that are licensed
according to the laws of the state. Sound pressure levels in excess of those
established in Table III herein shall constitute prima facie evidence that
the sound is a noise disturbance. The standard measurement height shall be
five feet and the measurement distance shall be 50 feet. This distance shall
be that from the center of the monitored traffic lane to the microphone. The
maximum permissible sound pressure levels for vehicles licensed for and
operating in interstate commerce shall be those established pursuant to the
United States Noise Control Act of 1972.



 


TABLE III



Vehicle Class
 
dB(A)
@ 50 feet


Any vehicles greater than 10,000 lb. Manufacturer's gross vehicle weight
prior to January 1, 1975
 
88


After January 1, 1975 and prior to January 1, 1980
 
84


After January 1, 1980
 
80


Any other motor vehicles
 
74



 



(Prior Code, § 4-603)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-227, 16-228



§ 95.23  PERMIT FOR RELIEF FROM NOISE LEVEL DESIGNATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Applications for a permit for relief from the noise level
designated in this subchapter on the basis of undue hardship may be made to
the City Manager or his or her duly authorized representative. Any permit
granted by the City Manager hereunder shall specify a reasonable time that
the permit shall be effective. The City Manager or his or her duly authorized
representative may grant the relief as applied for if he or she finds:



      (1)   Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter
or modify his or her activity or operation to comply with this division;



      (2)   The activity, operation, or noise source will be of
temporary duration and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with this
subsection; and



      (3)   No other reasonable alternative is available to the
applicant.



   (B)   The City Manager may prescribe any conditions or requirements
he or she deems necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the community or
the surrounding neighborhood.



(Prior Code, § 4-604)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-227, 16-228



§ 95.24  EXCEPTIONS FOR EMERGENCY VEHICLES; TEMPORARY LICENSED OR PERMITTED
ACTIVITIES.



   The requirements, prohibitions, and terms of this subchapter shall not
apply to any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency
call or acting in time of emergency. The terms of this subchapter shall not
apply to those activities of a temporary duration, permitted by law, and for
which a license or permit therefore has been granted by the city, including,
but not limited to, parades and fireworks displays.



(Prior Code, § 4-605)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-227, 16-228



NOXIOUS WEEDS; LITTER; STAGNANT WATER



§ 95.35  CONTROL OF WEEDS, LITTER, STAGNANT WATER.



   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      LITTER.



         (a)   Trash, rubbish, refuse, garbage, paper, rags, and
ashes;



         (b)   Wood, plaster, cement, brick, or stone building
rubble;



         (c)   Grass, leaves, and worthless vegetation;



         (d)   Offal and dead animals; and



         (e)   Any machine or machines, vehicle or vehicles, or
parts of a machine or vehicle which have lost their identity.



      WEEDS.  Bindweed (convolvulus arvensis), puncture vine (tribulus
terrestris), leafy spurge (euphorbia esula), Canada thistle (cirsium
arvense), perennial peppergrass (lepidium draba), Russian knapweed (centaurea
picris), Johnson grass (sorghum halepense), nodding or musk thistle, quack
grass (agropyron repens), perennial sow thistle (sonchus arvensis), horse
nettle (solanum carolinense), bull thistle (cirsium lanceolatum), buckthorn
(rahmnus sp.) (tourn), hemp plant (cannabis sativa), and ragweed
(ambrosiaceae).



   (B)   Any and all lots or pieces of ground within the city shall be
drained or filled so as to prevent stagnant water or any other nuisance
accumulating thereon.



   (C)   The owner or occupant of any lot or piece of ground within the
city shall keep the lot or piece of ground and the adjoining street and
alleys free of any growth of 12 inches or more in height of weeds, grasses,
or worthless vegetation.



   (D)   The throwing, depositing, or accumulation of litter on any lot
or piece of ground within the city is prohibited.



   (E)   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance to permit or maintain
any growth of 12 inches or more in height of weeds, grasses, or worthless
vegetation or to litter or cause litter to be deposited or remain thereon
except in proper receptacles.



   (F)   Notice to abate and remove the nuisance shall be given to each
owner or owner's duly authorized agent and to the occupant, if any, by
personal service or certified mail. If notice by personal service or
certified mail is unsuccessful, notice shall be given by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city or by conspicuously posting the
notice on the lot or ground upon which the nuisance is to be abated and
removed. Within five days after receipt of the notice or publication or
posting, whichever is applicable, if the owner or occupant of the lot or
piece of ground does not request a hearing before the City Manager or fails
to comply with the order to abate and remove the nuisance, the city may have
the work done. The costs and expenses of any work shall be paid by the owner.
If unpaid for two months after the work is done, the city may either:



      (1)   Levy and assess the costs and expenses of the work upon
the lot or piece of ground so benefitted in the same manner as other special
taxes for improvements are levied and assessed; or



      (2)   Recover in a civil action the costs and expenses of the
work upon the lot or piece of ground and the adjoining streets and alleys.



(Prior Code, § 4-401)(Ord. 1876, passed 9-5-1989; Ord. 91-2010, passed
10-21-1991;  Ord. 95-2334, passed 10-2-1995; Ord. 2004-2710, passed
10-4-2004)  Penalty, see § 95.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 18-1719



§ 95.99  PENALTY



   (A)   Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions
of any section of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Unless otherwise specified in this  section, the penalty for violation shall
be in any amount not to exceed $1,000 and/or imprisonment for any length of
time not to exceed three months, in the discretion of the court; provided,
whenever any section of this chapter shall declare a nuisance, a violation of
that section shall be penalized by a fine of not more than $1,000, in which
case a new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of
the failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 4-701)



   (B)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this chapter, the
city may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the same, in the
manner provided by law. Whenever, in any action, it is established that a
nuisance exists, the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed,
enter an order of abatement as part of the judgment in the case.



(Prior Code, § 4-702)



   (C)   Any person, partnership, association or corporation violating
§§ 95.20 through 95.24 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $15 nor
more than $100 for a first offense, not less than $35 nor more than $300 for
a subsequent offense, and court costs; provided, however, that each offense
or violation of those sections shall be deemed a separate and distinct
offense.



(Prior Code, § 4-606)



   (D)   Any owner or occupant of a lot or piece of ground in violation
of § 95.35 shall, upon conviction of violating the section, be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.



(Prior Code, § 4-401)



(Ord. 1876, passed 9-5-1989; Ord. 91-2010, passed 10-21-1991; Ord. 95-2334,
passed 10-2-1995; Ord. 2004-2710, passed 10-4-2004)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-225, 16-227, 16-228, 18-1719, 18-1720, 18-1722



CHAPTER 96:  TREES AND SHRUBS



Section



General Provisions



   96.01   Title



   96.02   Definitions



   96.03   Comprehensive street tree plan



   96.04   Location, spacing of new trees on public property



   96.05   Planting, maintenance, removal of trees on public property



   96.06   Injury to trees prohibited



   96.07   Topping trees on public property prohibited



   96.08   Street and park tree stumps removed



Private Property



   96.20   City pruning of overhanging trees on private property
permitted



   96.21   Removal of dead or diseased trees permitted



   96.22   Dutch Elm disease deemed nuisance



   96.23   Notice of Dutch Elm disease; service; hearing; costs of
abatement



   96.24   Costs assessed as property lien



   96.25   Right of entry to enforce provisions



   96.26   Appeal from order procedure



   96.27   Right of city to collect costs not waived by penalty



   96.28   Arborists license



 



   96.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 96.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City Tree
Ordinance”.



(Prior Code, § 4-501)  (Ord. 2003-2660, passed 6-16-2003; Ord. 2012-2872,
passed 6-4-2012)



§ 96.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY MANAGER.  The City Manager or any other person authorized by the
City Manager.



   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.  The Public Works Director or any other
person authorized by the Director of Public Works.



   PARK TREES.  Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other wood vegetation in
public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to
which the public has free access as a park.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership,
or any other entity.



   PUBLIC STREET or STREET.  All roads, streets, avenues, boulevards,
alleys, parkways, and other public rights-of-way, or any portion thereof, of
the city.



   STREET TREES.  Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other wood vegetation on
land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or
ways within the city.



   TREE SIZE.



      (1)   Small trees:  less than 25 feet in height at maturity.



      (2)   Medium trees:  25 to 40 feet in height at maturity.



      (3)   Large trees:  over 40 feet at maturity.



(Prior Code, § 4-502)  (Ord. 2003-2660, passed 6-16-2003; Ord. 2012-2872,
passed 6-4-2012)



§ 96.03  COMPREHENSIVE STREET TREE PLAN.



   (A)   The Tree Advisory Board shall prepare and recommend, and the
City Council shall adopt by resolution, a comprehensive plan for the planting
and maintaining of trees within public streets of the city, which plan shall
be designated as the Comprehensive Street Tree Plan. The Plan shall include
those public streets identified under § 96.02 which, in the Board's
judgement, bear a relationship to the purposes of this chapter. The Plan
shall be so prepared that all appropriate public streets may be included in
the Plan. The Plan shall consist of a written statement, maps, and detailed
designs as may be appropriate, setting forth or depicting the following:



      (1)   The specific types of trees to be planted and
maintained, including their desirable spacing and location;



      (2)   The identification of those existing trees which should
be retained; and



      (3)   The identification of those trees which may constitute a
hazard of public nuisance, and which may require substantial maintenance or
removal.



   (B)  In preparing initial and subsequent versions of the Comprehensive
Street Tree Plan, the Board and City Council may limit the Plan's content to
only that information required under division (A) of this section. It is the
intent of this section that the Plan shall be developed gradually in
recognition of the practical problems associated with fulfilling all
requirements of this section within any specified period of time.



(Prior Code, § 4-503)  (Ord. 2003-2660, passed 6-16-2003; Ord. 2012-2872,
passed 6-4-2012)



§ 96.04  LOCATION, SPACING OF NEW TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   (A)   Spacing.  No trees may be planted on public property closer
together than the following,  except in special plantings described or
approved by the Tree Advisory Board:



      (1)   Small trees:  30 feet;



      (2)   Medium trees:  40 feet; and



      (3)   Large trees:  50 feet.



   (B)   Distance from curb or sidewalk.  The distance trees may be
planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the
three species size classes. No trees may be planted closer to any curb or
sidewalk than the following:



      (1)   Small trees:  two feet;



      (2)   Medium trees:  three feet; and



      (3)   Large trees:  four feet.



   (C)   Distance from street intersections.  No street trees or park
trees shall be planted within 35 feet of any street intersection, measured
from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines, or within 15 feet
of any driveway or alley. If no such curb or curbline exists, no tree shall
be planted within ten  feet from the point of intersection of the property
lines.



   (D)   Distance from utility wires, utility lines and fireplugs.  No
street tree or park tree other than those species indicated as small trees
may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire,
or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer
line, transmission line or other utility line, wire or main. No street tree
shall be planted within ten feet of any fireplug.



   (E)   Arrangement of trees in sidewalk spaces.  All trees permitted
to be planted in sidewalk spaces shall conform in line with the majority of
trees already planted in the blocks. If no trees are planted therein, the
trees as are permitted to be planted under this chapter shall be an equal
distance from the sidewalk and from the curb. Not more than two trees shall
be planted in one lot in the sidewalk space.



(Prior Code, § 4-504)  (Ord. 2003-2660, passed 6-16-2003; Ord. 2012-2872,
passed 6-4-2012)



§ 96.05  PLANTING, MAINTENANCE, REMOVAL OF TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   (A)   Authority of Public Works Director.  The Public Works
Director or authorized designee shall have the right to plant, prune,
maintain, and remove trees, plants, and shrubs within the lines of all street
rights-of-way, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds as may be
necessary to ensure public safety. The Public Works Director or authorized
designee may order any property owner to trim, prune, or remove any tree,
shrub, plant, or vegetation within the lines of the street right-of-way or
alley abutting upon the owner's property, and failure to comply with the
order after ten days' notice shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.



   (B)   Dangerous trees.  Any tree or shrub growing in a parking
strip or any public place or in private property, which is in danger or which
in any way may endanger the security or usefulness of any public street,
sewer or sidewalk, is hereby declared a public nuisance and the city may
remove or trim the tree or shrub or may require the property owner to remove
or trim any tree or shrub on private property or in a parking strip abutting
upon the owner's property. The City Manager or authorized representative
shall give notice to abate and remove the nuisance and notice of the right to
a hearing and the manner in which it may be requested to each owner or
owner's duly authorized agent and to the occupant, if any, by personal
service or certified mail. Within 30 days after the receipt of the notice, if
the owner or occupant of the lot or piece of ground does not request a
hearing or fails to comply with the order to abate and remove the nuisance,
the city may have the work done and may levy and assess all or any portion of
the costs and expense of the work upon the lot or piece of ground so
benefitted in the same manner as other special taxes for improvements are
levied or assessed.



   (C)   Removal of dead street trees.  It is hereby declared a
nuisance for any property owner to permit, allow or maintain any dead or
diseased trees within the right-of-way streets, within the corporate limits
of the city and adjacent to the property owner's property. The City Manager
or authorized representative shall give notice to abate and remove the
nuisance and notice of the right to a hearing and the manner in which it may
be requested to each owner or owner's duly authorized agent and to the
occupant, if any, by personal service or certified mail. Within 30 days after
the receipt of the notice, if the owner or occupant of the lot or piece of
ground does not request a hearing or fails to comply with the order to abate
and remove the nuisance, the city may have the work done and may levy and
assess all or any portion of the costs and expense of the work upon the lot
or piece of ground so benefitted in the same manner as other special taxes
for improvements are levied or assessed.



   (D)   Planting of street trees by adjacent property owners.  This
section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property
owners providing that the selection and location of trees is in accordance
with § 96.03.



(Prior Code, § 4-505)  (Ord. 2003-2660, passed 6-16-2003; Ord. 2012-2872,
passed 6-4-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-207, 16-231, 18-1720



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-248



§ 96.06  INJURY TO TREES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be a violation of this chapter to abuse, destroy, or mutilate
any tree, shrub, or plant in a public parking strip or any other public place
or to attach or place any rope or wire, other than one used to support a
young or broken tree, sign, poster, handbill, or other thing on a tree
growing in a public place or to cause or permit any wire charged with
electricity to come into contact with any trees or to allow any gases,
liquid, or solid substance which is harmful to trees to come into contact
with the roots or leaves of the trees.



(Prior Code, § 4-506)  (Ord. 2003-2660, passed 6-16-2003; Ord. 2012-2872,
passed 6-4-2012)  Penalty, see § 96.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-207



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-248



§ 96.07  TOPPING TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to top any street tree, park tree,
or other tree on public property. TOPPING is defined as the severe cutting
back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the
tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and
disfigure the trees. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or
certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning
practices are impractical, may be exempted from this section at the
determination of the Tree Advisory Board.



(Prior Code, § 4-507)  (Ord. 2003-2660, passed 6-16-2003; Ord. 2012-2872,
passed 6-4-2012)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.08  STREET AND PARK TREE STUMPS REMOVED.



   All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface
of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the
surface of the ground.



(Prior Code, § 4-510)  (Ord. 2003-2660, passed 6-16-2003; Ord. 2012-2872,
passed 6-4-2012)



PRIVATE PROPERTY



§ 96.20  CITY PRUNING OF OVERHANGING TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY PERMITTED.



   Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within
the city shall prune the branches so that the branches shall not obstruct the
light from any streetlamp or obstruct the light of any street intersection
and so that there shall be a clear space of 16 feet above the surface of the
street or eight feet above the surface of the sidewalk. The owner shall
remove all dead, diseased, or dangerous trees or broken or decayed limbs
which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The Public Works
Director or authorized designee shall have the right to prune any tree or
shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light
along the street from a streetlight or interferes with visibility of any
traffic control device or sign.



(Prior Code, § 4-508)  (Ord. 2003-2660, passed 6-16-2003; Ord. 2012-2872,
passed 6-4-2012)



§ 96.21  REMOVAL OF DEAD OR DISEASED TREES PERMITTED.



   The Public Works Director or authorized designee shall have the right
to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within
the city when the trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor
insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within
the city. The Public Works Director shall notify in writing the owners of the
trees. Removal shall be done by the owners, at their own expense, within 90
days after the date of service of the notice. In the event of failure of
owners to comply with the provisions of the notice, the Public Works Director
or authorized designee shall have the authority to remove the trees and
charge the cost of removal as a special assessment on the owner's property.



(Prior Code, § 4-509)  (Ord. 2003-2660, passed 6-16-2003; Ord. 2012-2872,
passed 6-4-2012)



§ 96.22  DUTCH ELM DISEASE DEEMED NUISANCE.



   (A)   Trees of all species and varieties of elm, zelkova, and
planera infected with the fungus Ceratostomella Ulmi, as determined by
laboratory analysis, are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be
removed and burned.



   (B)   Trees, or parts thereof, of elm, zelkova, or planera in a dead
or dying condition that may serve as breeding places for the European Elm
Bark Beetle, Scolytus Multistriatus, are hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and shall be removed and burned.



(Prior Code, § 4-511)  (Ord. 2003-2660, passed 6-16-2003; Ord. 2012-2872,
passed 6-4-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-207, 18-1720



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-248



§ 96.23  NOTICE OF DUTCH ELM DISEASE; SERVICE; HEARING; COSTS OF ABATEMENT.



   If trees on private property are found to be infected or in a dead or
dying condition, the City Manager or authorized designee shall give to the
owner of the premises where the same are situated written notice of the
existence of the disease or of the dead or dying condition of the trees or
parts thereof and require the removal and burning of the same under the
direction and supervision of the Public Works Director or his or her
authorized representative. The City Manager or authorized representative
shall give notice to abate and remove the nuisance and notice of the right to
a hearing and the manner in which it may be requested to each owner or
owner's duly authorized agent and to the occupant, if any, by personal
service or certified mail. Within 30 days after the receipt of the notice, if
the owner or occupant of the lot or piece of ground does not request a
hearing or fails to comply with the order to abate and remove the nuisance,
the city may have the work done and may levy and assess all or any portion of
the costs and expense of the work upon the lot or piece of ground so
benefitted in the same manner as other special taxes for improvements are
levied or assessed.



(Prior Code, § 4-512)  (Ord. 2003-2660, passed 6-16-2003; Ord. 2012-2872,
passed 6-4-2012)



§ 96.24  COSTS ASSESSED AS PROPERTY LIEN.



   The Public Works Director shall regularly report the costs to the City
Council, whereupon the City Council shall, at a regular Council meeting, by
resolution, assess the costs, together with any assessment expenses, against
the real estate, provided that notice of the time of the meeting of the City
Council shall be given in the manner provided by law. When the assessment has
been made, it shall be certified by the City Clerk and delivered to the
County Treasurer and shall be collected in the manner provided by law. The
assessment shall be a lien upon the real estate from the date of assessment
and shall draw interest at the rate of 7% per annum from the date until paid.



(Prior Code, § 4-513)  (Ord. 2003-2660, passed 6-16-2003; Ord. 2012-2872,
passed 6-4-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-231, 18-1720



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-248



§ 96.25  RIGHT OF ENTRY TO ENFORCE PROVISIONS.



   The City Manager or duly authorized representative is charged with
enforcement of this chapter and to that end may enter upon private property
at all reasonable hours for the purposes of inspecting trees thereon and may
remove specimens as are required for purposes of analysis to determine
whether or not the same are infected. It shall be unlawful for any person to
prevent the City Manager or the authorized representative from entering on
private property for purposes of carrying out his or her duties hereunder or
to interfere with the City Manager in the lawful performance of his or her
duties under the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 4-514)  (Ord. 2003-2660, passed 6-16-2003; Ord. 2012-2872,
passed 6-4-2012)  Penalty, see § 96.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-207, 16-231



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-248, 16-253



§ 96.26  APPEAL FROM ORDER PROCEDURE.



   Appeals from orders made by the City Manager or the duly authorized
representatives pursuant to this chapter may be made by filing written notice
thereof with the City Clerk within ten days after the order is received,
stating in substance that appeal is being made to the order to the City
Council. The City Clerk shall thereupon call the appeal to the attention of
the City Council at the next regular succeeding meeting, at which meeting the
appellant and the City Manager may present evidence. Action taken by the City
Council on the appeal at the hearing shall be conclusive



(Prior Code, § 4-515)  (Ord. 2003-2660, passed 6-16-2003; Ord. 2012-2872,
passed 6-4-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-207, 16-231



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-248, 16-253



§ 96.27  RIGHT OF CITY TO COLLECT COSTS NOT WAIVED BY PENALTY.



   Imposition of any penalty for a violation of this chapter shall not be
construed as a waiver of the right of the city to collect the costs of
removal or trimming of the tree in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter where it is necessary for the city to remove or trim the tree in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 4-516)  (Ord. 2003-2660, passed 6-16-2003; Ord. 2012-2872,
passed 6-4-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-207, 16-231



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-248, 16-253



§ 96.28  ARBORISTS LICENSE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business
or occupation of pruning or removing trees within the municipality without
first applying for and procuring a license.  The license fee shall be $75
annually and shall be effective from May 1 to April 30 of each year, and such
fee shall not be prorated; provided, however, that no license shall be
required of any public service company or municipal employee doing such work
in the pursuit of their public service endeavors.  Before any license shall
be issued, each applicant shall furnish the City Clerk a certificate or
certificates of insurance showing possession of liability insurance in the
minimum amounts of $500,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and $500,000 per
occurrence for property damage. The city shall be listed as an additional
insured.  Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be
revoked should the applicant permit the insurance policy herein required to
expire or lapse.



(Ord. 2012-2872, passed 6-4-2012)



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



(Ord. 2012-2872, passed 6-4-2012)



TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         110.   (RESERVED)





         111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES





         112.   ITINERANT MERCHANTS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS





         113.   TRAILER CAMPS AND CAMPING AREAS





         114.   TELEPHONE COMPANIES





         115.   GARBAGE COLLECTION





         116.   OIL AND NATURAL GAS





         117.   LOTTERY REGULATIONS





         118.   ALARM SYSTEMS




CHAPTER 110:  (RESERVED)



CHAPTER 111:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



   111.01   Hours of sale



   111.02   License application procedure



Cross-reference:



   Liquor sales occupation tax rates, see Chapter 38, Fee Schedule



§ 111.01  HOURS OF SALE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any licensed person or persons or
his, her or their agents to sell any alcoholic beverages with the
municipality except during the hours provided herein:



 


Hours of Sale





Alcoholic liquors (except beer and wine)


   Secular days


      Off sale
 
6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.


      On sale
 
6:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m.


   Sundays


      Off sale
 
12:00 p.m. to 1.00 a.m.


      On sale
 
12:00 p.m. to 2:00 a.m.


Beer and wine


   Secular days


      Off sale
 
6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.


      On sale
 
6:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m.


   Sundays


      Off sale
 
6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.


      On sale
 
6:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m.




 



   (B)   No person or persons shall consume any alcoholic beverages on
licensed premises for a period of time longer than 15 minutes after the time
fixed herein for stopping the sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises.
For the purposes of this section, ON SALE shall be defined as alcoholic
beverages sold by the drink for consumption on the premises of the licensed
establishment; OFF SALE shall be defined as alcoholic beverages sold at
retail in the original container for consumption off the premises of the
licensed establishment.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit
licensed premises from being open for business on days and hours during which
the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by this section.



(Prior Code, § 10-117)  (Ord. 2006-2784, passed 12-4-2006; Ord. 2017-2950,
passed 9-5-2017)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.02  LICENSE APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Notice. Notice of a hearing held pursuant to Neb. RS 53-134
shall be given to the applicant by the City Clerk and shall contain the date,
time, and location of the hearing. Two or more proceedings which are legally
or factually related may be heard and considered together unless any party
thereto makes a showing sufficient to satisfy the governing body that
prejudice would result therefrom.



   (B)   Procedure.



      (1)   Hearings will be informal and conducted by the City
Attorney. The intent is an inquiry into the facts, not an adversarial action.
Each witness may present his or her testimony in narrative fashion or by
question and answer.



      (2)   The governing body or the applicant may order the
hearing to be recorded by the Clerk, at the expense of the applicant(s).



      (3)   The governing body may admit and give probative effect
to evidence which possesses probative value commonly accepted by reasonably
prudent individuals. The City Attorney may limit testimony where it appears
incompetent, irrelevant, or unduly repetitious. If there is opposition to any
application and such opposition desires the opportunity to present arguments
and to cross-examine the applicant and any witnesses in favor of such
application, they shall choose a spokesperson to perform such function who
shall notify the City Attorney of his or her representation prior to the
start of the hearing.



      (4)   The order of the proceeding is as follows:



         (a)   Exhibits will be marked in advance by the Clerk
and presented to the City Attorney during the presentation;



         (b)   Presentation of evidence, witnesses, and arguments
by applicant;



         (c)   Testimony of any other citizens in favor of the
proposed license;



         (d)   Examination of applicant, witnesses, or citizens
by City Attorney, governing body, or duly appointed agent;



         (e)   Cross-examination of applicant, witnesses, or
citizens by spokesperson for opposition, if any;



         (f)   Presentation of evidence and witnesses by
opposition;



         (g)   Testimony of any other citizens in opposition to
the proposed license;



         (h)   Presentation of evidence by the municipality and
law enforcement personnel;



         (i)   Cross-examination by applicant;



         (j)   Rebuttal evidence by both parties, and by the
municipality administration and agent; and



         (k)   Summation by applicant and opposition
spokesperson, if any.



      (5)   In all cases, the burden of proof and persuasion shall
be on the party filing the application.



      (6)   Any member of the governing body and the City Attorney
may question any witness, call witnesses, or request information.



      (7)   All witnesses shall be sworn.



      (8)   The governing body may make further inquiry and
investigation following the hearing.



      (9)   The governing body or the applicant may order the
hearing to be recorded by the Clerk, at the expense of the applicant(s).



(Prior Code, § 10-425)  (Ord. 1803, passed 5-10-1986; Ord. 1885, passed
11-20-1989)



Statutory reference:



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 53-134



CHAPTER 112:  ITINERANT MERCHANTS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



Section



   112.01   Purpose



   112.02   Definitions



   112.03   Registration permit required



   112.04   Exemptions from chapter



   112.05   Application



   112.06   Investigation and issuance



   112.07   Fees



   112.08   Sales; restrictions



   112.09   Registration permit; contents



   112.10   Registration permit; to be carried and exhibited



   112.11   Registration permit; to be posted



   112.12   Registration permit; not transferable



   112.13   Permittee; further requirements



   112.14   Registration permit; revocation



   112.15   Registration permit; appeal of denial, revocation



   112.16   Registration permit; interstate commerce effect of chapter



   112.17   Sales; police enforcement



 



   112.99   Penalty



§ 112.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to prevent fraud and other crimes, to
protect citizens of the city from undue invasions of privacy, from undue
annoyance and harassment, and to maintain the health, safety, and welfare of
residents of the city, by means of regulation of itinerant and transient
merchants, peddlers, and solicitors. 



§ 112.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ITINERANT MERCHANT.  Includes the terms "transient merchant,
"transient vendor," and "itinerant vendor" and means any person, firm or
corporation who or which shall engage in, do or transact any temporary or
transient business in the city, either in one locality or location or in
traveling from place to place in the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, and
who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, shall hire, lease, use or
occupy any building or structure, motor vehicle, tent, car, boat or public
room or any part thereof, including rooms in hotels, lodging houses, or
houses of private entertainment, or any private or vacant lot or property for
a period of less than one year, for the exhibition or sale of such goods,
wares or merchandise. This definition shall include principals and their
agents and employees, and persons forming partnerships. No person shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter by reason of associating
temporarily with any local dealer, trader or merchant, or by reason of
conducting such temporary or transient business in connection with or as part
of the business in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or
auctioneer, unless the transient merchant is engaging in sales on property
owned by and adjacent to a local merchant under the terms of an agreement
whereby the local merchant is compensated for the use of his property
according to a percentage of sales by the itinerant merchant.



   PEDDLER.  Any person who shall carry from place to place any goods,
wares or merchandise and offer to sell or barter the same, or actually sell
or barter the same. All such persons who do not keep a regular place of
business, whether it be a house or a vacant lot or elsewhere, open at all
times in regular business hours and at the same place, who shall offer for
sale goods, wares and merchandise, shall be deemed peddlers under this
chapter. All persons who keep a regular place of business, open at all times
in regular business hours and at the same place, who shall, elsewhere than at
such regular place of business, personally or through their agents, offer for
sale or sell and, at the time of such offering for sale, deliver goods, wares
and merchandise, shall also be deemed peddlers as above, but this Section
shall not apply to those who sell or offer for sale in person, any item set
forth in § 112.04. This chapter  shall not include any peddler who sells to
permitted dealers or retailers only, but shall apply to any person who
solicits orders and, as a separate transaction, makes deliveries to
purchasers as part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this
chapter.



   SOLICITOR.  Any person, whether a resident of the city or not,
traveling by foot, wagon, motor vehicle or any other type of conveyance from
house to house or from street to street, or operating from a fixed location
on or near a street or house not owned by that person, taking or attempting
to take orders for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, subscriptions or
personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for
services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such
individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of such sale or whether
he or she is collecting advance payments on such sale or not; or soliciting
money or anything of value on behalf of himself or herself, or another,
whether or not in exchange for goods, wares or merchandise. 



§ 112.03  REGISTRATION PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any itinerant merchant, peddler, or
solicitor, other than a solicitor doing business by appointment, to engage in
any such business within the city without first obtaining and possessing a
valid registration permit therefore in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. In addition to the permit required under this section, any person
who shall sell edible products must also obtain the applicable food license
or health permit under the provisions of state law. No permit shall be issued
by the city without such proof being presented at the time application is
made to the City Clerk for an itinerant merchant, peddler or solicitor permit.



   (B)   A permit issued under this chapter shall not be used or
represented in any manner as an endorsement by the city or by any department,
officer or employee thereof. 



Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.04  EXEMPTIONS FROM CHAPTER.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to, nor shall the terms
peddler, solicitor, or itinerant merchant be construed to include, the
following:



   (A)   Persons, including farmers or farmers' cooperative
associations, selling, offering for sale or soliciting orders for the
following items grown or produced by them and not purchased by them for sale:
newspapers, firewood, Christmas trees, vegetables, or fruits; provided, that
a dairy who uses on the streets of the city one or more delivery trucks or
vehicles, may sell and deliver from its trucks, or vehicles, milk, butter,
cream and eggs, dairy products, and frozen food products on customer
subscribed routes.



   (B)   Persons soliciting on behalf of a candidate for public office
or on behalf of a political party.



   (C)   Salesman or agents for wholesale houses or firms who solicit
orders from, or sell to, retail dealers in the county for resale or other
commercial purposes or to manufacturers for manufacturing or other commercial
purposes.



   (D)   Sales to wholesale or retail merchants, by sample, for future
delivery made by representatives of established wholesalers or manufacturers.



   (E)   A manufacturer taxable on intangible property by the state who
peddles the goods, wares or merchandise manufactured by him at the plant, the
intangible property of which is taxed by the state and who peddles no other
goods, wares or merchandise.



   (F)   Yard sales conducted on residentially zoned property.



   (G)   The distribution of goods for which there is no charge.



   (H)   Persons giving, selling or offering for sale goods, wares or
merchandise, or soliciting orders for sale of same who qualify as bona fide
nonprofit organizations under Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code or
which are organized and operated exclusively for nonprofit, religious,
charitable, educational or civic purposes or where persons selling or
offering for sale goods, wares or merchandise, or soliciting orders for sale
of the same do so in an event held exclusively for nonprofit, religious,
charitable, educational or civic purposes.



§ 112.05  APPLICATION.



   At the time of application, applicants for a registration permit shall
present a valid driver's permit or other acceptable form of identification
and file with the City Clerk a written sworn application signed by the
applicant showing the following:



   (A)   The local and permanent address and phone number of the
applicant.



   (B)   The place or places in the city where it is proposed to carry
on the applicant's business and the length of time which it is proposed such
business shall be conducted.



   (C)   The identification of any automotive vehicle being used.



   (D)   A statement of the nature of the merchandise to be sold or
offered for sale by the applicant.



   (E)   The name, address, and phone number of the individual,
partnership, firm, or corporation for whose account the business will be
carried on, if any.



   (F)   A disclaimer of city liability relating to any action caused
or charged against the applicant.



   (G)   Such other relevant information as may be required for the
investigation of the applicant.



   (H)   The applicant's state sales tax permit number and Federal tax
identification number. 



§ 112.06  INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Upon receipt of such application, a copy shall be referred to
the Chief of Police, who shall cause within three work days after the receipt
thereof such an investigation of the applicant to the extent permitted by law
and facilities, and, if applicable, the individual, partnership, firm or
corporation who the applicant is representing, to be made as he or she deems
necessary for the protection of the public good. If, as a result of such
investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found
to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police shall endorse on such application
his or her disapproval and his or her reasons for the same, and return the
said application to the City Clerk, who shall notify the applicant that his
or her application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued.
Similarly, if the business responsibility of the individual, partnership,
firm or corporation who the applicant is representing is found to be
unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police shall endorse on such application his
disapproval and his reasons for the same, and return the said application to
the City Clerk, who shall notify the applicant that his/her application is
disapproved and that no permit will be issued.



   (B)   No permit shall be issued to any person:



      (1)   Who has been convicted of or who is currently under
indictment for a felony, or a crime involving moral turpitude within ten
years preceding the date of the filing of such application with the City
Clerk.



      (2)   Who is under the age of 16.



      (3)   Whose permit has previously been revoked for one of the
following:



         (a)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement
contained in the application for a permit.



         (b)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement
made in connection with the selling of goods, wares, or merchandise.



         (c)   Any violation of this chapter and its stipulations
contained within.



         (d)   Conviction of the permittee of any felony or of a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.



         (e)   Conducting the business permitted under this
chapter in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to threaten the health,
safety, or general welfare of the public.



   (C)   If, as a result of the investigation, the character and
business responsibility of the applicant and, if applicable, the individual,
partnership, firm or corporation the applicant is representing, are found to
be satisfactory, the Chief of Police shall endorse on the application the
approval and return the application to the City Clerk, who shall notify the
applicant that his/her application has been approved. 



Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.07  FEES.



   The daily and/or annual registration permit fee for each itinerant
merchant, peddler, or solicitor shall be as set forth in the city
comprehensive fee schedule per day per person, and/or annually per person,
for the calendar year beginning January 1 and ending December 31; the annual
fee shall not be pro-rated. 



§ 112.08  SALES; RESTRICTIONS.



   All solicitations to private residences, including but not limited to
homes, residences, rooming houses, duplexes, and apartments shall occur only
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., unless otherwise posted and
prohibited by the private property owner or by someone with apparent
authority to act for the owner. This regulation does not apply where the
solicitor is on the property by the express, prior invitation of the person
residing on the premises. A person engaged in solicitation shall not:



   (A)   Make physical contact with the person being solicited unless
that person's permission is obtained.



   (B)   Misrepresent the purpose of the solicitation.



   (C)   Misrepresent the affiliation of those engaged in the
solicitation.



   (D)   Continue efforts to solicit from an individual once that
individual informs the solicitor that he or she does not wish to give
anything to or buy anything from that solicitor.



   (E)   Represent the issuance of any permit or registration under
this chapter as an endorsement or recommendation of the solicitation.



   (F)   Enter upon any private premises when the same is posted with a
sign stating: "No Peddlers Allowed" or "No Solicitation" or other words to
that effect.



   (G)   Block, obstruct, or unduly hinder passage on public sidewalks
or passageways. For the purposes of this chapter, the judgment of a police
officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether an
area is blocked, obstructed, passage is hindered, or the public is impeded or
inconvenienced. 



Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.09  REGISTRATION PERMIT; CONTENTS.



   A permit issued under this chapter shall contain a permit number, the
name of the permit holder, the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the name
of the employer, if any, the date of issuance, the date of expiration, a
listing of the places which the applicant has identified as the place or
places at which he or she intends to do business, and the signature of the
Chief of Police or his or her authorized agent. Every permit shall set out
the prohibition of nighttime solicitation set forth in § 112.08. 



§ 112.10  REGISTRATION PERMIT; TO BE CARRIED AND EXHIBITED.



   Every peddler and solicitor or itinerant merchant shall carry the
permit issued to him or her under this chapter on his or her person at all
times while engaged in selling, peddling or soliciting in the city. It shall
also be the duty of every peddler and solicitor to exhibit such permit when
requested so to do by any law enforcement officer or other department
personnel designated by the Chief of Police, or any person with whom the
peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant attempts to do business. 



§ 112.11  REGISTRATION PERMIT; TO BE POSTED.



   (A)   The permit to the permittee hereunder by the City Clerk shall
be posted in a conspicuous place if the permittee is using a vehicle or a
building in his/her business and otherwise must be kept by the person and
exhibited at any time upon request.



   (B)   Any person who shall exercise the vocation of an itinerant
merchant, peddler or solicitor shall display the permit, and permit
expiration date issued by the City Clerk. Transient merchants shall post
conspicuously in their place of business the permit issued hereunder, which
permit shall be shown at the request of any citizen or law enforcement
officer. 



§ 112.12  REGISTRATION PERMIT; NOT TRANSFERABLE.



   Each peddler, solicitor, or itinerant merchant must secure a personal
permit. No permit shall be used at any time by any person other than the
person to whom it is issued. 



Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.13  PERMITTEE; FURTHER REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No itinerant merchant shall advertise, represent or hold any
sale as an insurer, bankrupt, insolvent, assignee, trustee, estate, executor,
administrator, receiver, wholesaler or manufacturer's closing out sale, or as
a sale of any goods damaged by smoke, fire, wreck, water, or otherwise, or in
any similar form, unless he or she shall have first so stated under oath
before the Chief of Police or his or her designee, either in the application
form required hereunder, or in a supplementary application subsequently filed
and copied on the permit, all the facts relating to the reasons and character
of such sale so advertised or represented; including a statement of the names
of the persons from whom the goods, wares or merchandise were obtained, the
date of delivery to the person applying for the permit, and the place from
which such goods, wares, and merchandise were last taken, and all details
necessary to locate exactly and fully identify all goods, wares and
merchandise to be so sold.



   (B)   Any false statement in an application, either original or
supplementary, under this section, and any failure on the part of the
permittee to comply with all requirements of this section, shall subject such
itinerant merchant, peddler or solicitor to the same penalty as if he or she
had no permit.



   (C)   No itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor shall conduct
business or sales upon or from any public property, including but not limited
to, public streets including right-of-way, sidewalks, alleys, drives, parking
lots, parks, unless authorized by the City Council in accordance with the
terms of Neb. RS 19-4301. 



Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.14  REGISTRATION PERMIT; REVOCATION.



   Permits issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the City
Manager, after notice has been issued. The notice shall include the City
Manager's reasoning for such revocation. Notice shall be sent by registered
mail, postage prepaid, to the permittee at his or her last known permanent
address. 



§ 112.15  REGISTRATION PERMIT; APPEAL OF DENIAL, REVOCATION.



   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City Manager in regard to
the denial of an application for a permit under this chapter or in connection
with the revocation of a permit shall have the right to appeal to the City
Council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Council, within 14
days after notice of the decision has been mailed to such person's last known
permanent address, a written statement setting forth the grounds for appeal.
The Council shall set the time and place for a hearing on such appeal and
notice of such hearing shall be sent by registered mail, postage prepaid, to
the permittee at his or her last known permanent address. The order of the
Council on such appeal shall be final. 



§ 112.16  REGISTRATION PERMIT; INTERSTATE COMMERCE EFFECT OF CHAPTER.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or enforced so as to be in
derogation of interstate commerce. 



§ 112.17  SALES; POLICE ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the city police to examine all places of
business and persons subject to the provisions of this chapter and to enforce
the provisions herein against any person found to be violating the same. 



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, partnership, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be punished in accordance with § 10.99.  Each distinct
act or violation of the terms of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense. 



CHAPTER 113:  TRAILER CAMPS AND CAMPING AREAS



Section



General Provisions



   113.01   Definitions



   113.02   Location of trailers; zoning requirements



   113.03   Authorized camping permit; exceptions



Requirements and Regulations



   113.30   Grading and drainage



   113.31   Driveways and access



   113.32   Toilet and service building location



   113.33   Electrical outlets



   113.34   Adequate water supply



   113.35   Requirements for service building



   113.36   Waste and garbage disposal provisions



   113.37   Office



   113.38   Camp manager; register of guests



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTOMOBILE TRAILER, TRAILER COACH and TRAILER. Any vehicle designed and
constructed in such manner as will permit the occupancy thereof as sleeping
quarters for one or more persons, or the conduct of any business or
profession, occupation or trade (or use as a selling or advertising device),
and so designed that it is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a
conveyance on highways or city streets, propelled or drawn by its own or
other motive power, excepting a device used exclusively upon stationary rails
or tracks.



   CAMPING AREA. Any park, court, camp, place, area, or tract of land upon
which are located, or which is designed, maintained or intended for the
purpose of supplying location or accommodations for two or more camping
parties using or erecting for use, tent or camping outfit, for living or
sleeping purposes, by day, week, or month, whether a charge is made therefor
or not, and having a common use of any part thereof or any convenience
thereon.



   TRAILER CAMP. Any park, trailer park, trailer court, court, camp, site,
lot, parcel, or tract of land designated, maintained, or intended for the
purpose of supplying a location or accommodations for any trailer coach or
trailer coaches and upon which any trailer coach or trailer coaches are
parked and shall include all buildings used or intended for use as part of
the equipment thereof whether a charge is made for the use of the trailer
camp and its facilities or not. TRAILER CAMP shall not include automobile or
trailer sales lots on which unoccupied trailers are parked for purposes of
inspection and sale.



   UNIT. A section of ground for the location of one automobile and one
trailer or one automobile and one camping outfit. Trailer camp spaces shall
be not less than 800 square feet and camping spaces shall be not less than
400 square feet.



(Prior Code, § 10-701)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-246



§ 113.02  LOCATION OF TRAILERS; ZONING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any
trailer on any street, alley, highway, or other public place, or on any tract
of land owned by any person, occupied or unoccupied, within the city, except
as provided in this chapter.



      (2)    Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted
on any street, alley, or highway for not longer than one and one-half hours,
subject to any other and further prohibitions, regulations or limitations
imposed by the traffic and parking regulations or ordinances for that street,
alley or highway.



      (3)   No person shall park or occupy any trailer on the
premises of any occupied dwelling, or on any lot which is not a part of the
premises of any occupied dwelling, either of which is situated outside an
approved trailer camp, except, the parking of only one unoccupied trailer in
an accessory private garage building or in a rear yard in any district is
permitted, provided, that no living quarters shall be maintained or any
business practiced in the trailer while the trailer is so parked or stored.
The City Council may by resolution permit limited business practices in a
trailer for a period not to exceed six months if the building in which the
business was located is damaged by fire, explosion, act of God, or public
enemy to the extent that utilization of a trailer is necessary.
Notwithstanding the above, a trailer coach or motor home shall be allowed to
park on the front driveways of residences from April 1 to November 1 as long
as it does not create a safety hazard.



(Prior Code, § 10-702)



   (B)   (1)   No trailer camp or camping area shall be located in
any residential zone or any other zone save and except where the zoning
ordinance is complied with.



      (2)   No trailer camp or camping area shall be located within
the city unless city water and sewer connections and fire protection
facilities are available.



      (3)   No occupied trailer shall be located within the city
within the recognized setback line for the zoning district in which the
trailer is located not less than ten feet from any other building or vehicle
or the boundary line of the tract on which the trailer is located.



(Prior Code, § 10-706)



Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-246



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-205



§ 113.03  AUTHORIZED CAMPING PERMIT; EXCEPTIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to camp upon land or premises
within the city, except at a duly registered and approved camping area,
without first having secured permission to do so from the City Council.
Application for permission shall be made in writing to the City Clerk,
accompanied by written permission from the owner of the property upon which
the person proposes to camp. The granting of permission shall be
discretionary with the City Council, taking into consideration the location
of the premises, available sanitary facilities, and the general welfare and
safety of the public, and permission to camp shall be for a limited period of
time and may be revoked at the will of the Council. It shall be unlawful for
any person to permit a person to camp upon land or premises owned or
controlled by him or her unless a permit to do so shall have been issued by
the City Council. This section shall not apply to persons who erect a tent in
the rear yard space for a period of not more than seven days for the use of
family members who reside at the address where the tent is erected.



(Prior Code, § 10-711)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-246



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-205



REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS



§ 113.30  GRADING AND DRAINAGE.



   Every trailer camp and camping area shall be located on a well-drained
area, and the premises shall be properly graded so as to prevent the
accumulation of storm or other waters.



(Prior Code, § 10-707)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-246



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-205



§ 113.31  DRIVEWAYS AND ACCESS.



   Units shall be clearly designated and the camp so arranged that all
units shall face or abut on a driveway of not less than 16 feet in width,
giving easy access from all units to a public street. The driveway shall be
at least graveled or cindered and maintained in good condition, having proper
drainage into the city's drainage system, be well lighted at night, and shall
not be obstructed.



(Prior Code, § 10-707)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-246



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-205



§ 113.32  TOILET AND SERVICE BUILDING LOCATION.



   Trailer camps and camping areas shall be so laid out that no unit shall
be located farther than 200 feet from the toilets and service buildings
provided for by this chapter, and walkways to the buildings shall be at least
graveled or cindered and welt lighted at night.



(Prior Code, § 10-707)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-246



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-205



§ 113.33  ELECTRICAL OUTLETS.



   Every trailer unit shall be furnished with an electric service outlet.
The outlet shall be equipped with an externally operated fused switch of not
less than 30 amperes capacity, and a heavy duty outlet receptacle.



(Prior Code, § 10-707)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-246



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-205



§ 113.34  ADEQUATE WATER SUPPLY.



   (A)   An adequate supply of pure water, furnished through a pipe
distribution system connected directly with the city water main, with supply
faucets located not more than 200 feet from any trailer shall be furnished
for drinking and domestic purposes in all trailer camps and camping areas.



   (B)   An abundant supply of hot water shall be provided in trailer
camps and camping areas at all times for bathing facilities.



   (C)   No common drinking vessels shall be permitted in trailer camps
or camping areas, nor shall any drinking water faucets be placed in any
toilet room or water closet compartment.



(Prior Code, § 10-707)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-246



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-205



§ 113.35  REQUIREMENTS FOR SERVICE BUILDING.



   (A)   Every trailer camp or camping area shall have erected thereon,
at a distance not greater than 200 feet from any unit it is designed to
serve, a suitable building for housing toilets and shower facilities as
required by this chapter, to be known as the "service building."



   (B)   There shall be provided separate toilet rooms for each sex.
Flush toilets provided with an adequate water supply shall be enclosed in
separate compartments and shall be provided for each sex in the ration of one
toilet for each eight units or fraction thereof. Every male toilet room shall
have one urinal for each 16 units, but in no case shall any male toilet be
without one urinal. Toilet rooms shall contain lavatories with hot and cold
water in the ratio of one lavatory to every two or less water closets.



   (C)   Separate bathing facilities for each sex shall be provided
with one shower enclosed in a compartment for each eight units or fraction
thereof. Each shower compartment shall be supplemented by an individual
dressing compartment.



   (D)   The above accommodations shall be based on the total camp
capacity according to accepted plans.



   (E)   Floors of toilets and showers shall be of concrete, tile or
similar material impervious to water and easily cleaned and pitched to a
floor drain.



(Prior Code, § 10-707)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-246



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-205



§ 113.36  WASTE AND GARBAGE DISPOSAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   All waste from showers, toilets, faucets, and lavatories shall
be wasted into a sewer system extended from and connected with the city sewer
system.



   (B)   All sanitary facilities in any trailer which are not connected
with the city sewer system by means of rigid pipe connections shall be sealed
and their use is hereby declared unlawful.



   (C)   Each faucet site shall be equipped with facilities for
drainage of waste and excess water into the sewer. In no case shall any waste
water be thrown or discharged upon the surface of the ground, or disposed of
by means other than as herein provided.



   (D)   Every unit shall be provided with a substantial flytight metal
garbage depository from which the contents shall be removed by a garbage
collection service.



(Prior Code, § 10-707)  Penalty, § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-246



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-205



§ 113.37  OFFICE.



   In every trailer camp and camping area there shall be an office
building in which shall be located the office of the person in charge of the
camp. A copy of the camp license and of this chapter shall be posted therein
and the camp register shall at all times be kept in the office.



(Prior Code, § 10-708)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-246



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-205



§ 113.38  CAMP MANAGER; REGISTER OF GUESTS.



   It is the duty of the attendant or person in charge of a trailer camp
or camping area, together with the licensee, to:



   (A)   Keep at all times a register of all guests, which shall be
open at all times to inspection by state and federal officers and officers of
the city, showing for all guests:



      (1)   Names and addresses;



      (2)   Dates of entrance and departure;



      (3)   License numbers of all trailers and towing or other
automobiles;



      (4)   States issuing the licenses; and



      (5)   Place of last location, and length of stay.



   (B)   Maintain the camp in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition
at all times;



   (C)   See that the provisions of this chapter are complied with and
enforced and report promptly to the proper authorities any violation of this
chapter or any other violations of law which may come to his or her attention;



   (D)   Report to the City Physician all cases of persons or animals
affected or suspected of being affected with any communicable disease;



   (E)   Prevent the running loose of dogs, cats, or other animals or
pets;



   (F)   Maintain in convenient places approved by the Fire Department,
hand fire extinguishers in the ratio of one to each eight units;



   (G)   Prohibit the lighting of open fires on the premises; and



   (H)   Prohibit the use of any trailer by a greater number of
occupants than that which it is designed to accommodate.



(Prior Code, § 10-709)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-246



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-205



CHAPTER 114:  TELEPHONE COMPANIES



Section



   114.01   Occupation tax imposed; exceptions



   114.02   Schedule of payments



   114.03   Payment and receipt



   114.04   Delinquent taxes; interest and penalty



   114.05   Statement of gross receipts filing



   114.06   Payment adjustment



   114.07   Right to inspect books and records



   114.08   Failure to file statement; amount due



   114.09   Right to sue for payment failure



§ 114.01  OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED; EXCEPTIONS.



   All telephone companies doing business in the city are required to pay
an occupation tax to the city in an amount equal to 1½% of the gross
receipts from the legally established basic monthly charges collected for
local exchange telephone service to subscribers within the city. There shall
be excepted from the provisions of this chapter all receipts for telephone
service to the United States government or any of its departments, and all
receipts from the state or any of its departments, and no part or portion of
the tax provided for in this chapter shall be levied upon or assessed against
or taken from the United States government, the government of the state or
any of either of their departments.



(Prior Code, § 10-1101)  (Ord. 2012-2887, passed 12-3-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-205



§ 114.02  SCHEDULE OF PAYMENTS.



   The payment of the occupation tax levied pursuant to this chapter shall
be in quarterly payments, using the calendar quarter year as a basis for
determining and computing the amount of tax payable. Each quarterly payment
shall be due 45 days after the termination of each calendar quarter year.



(Prior Code, § 10-1102)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-205



§ 114.03  PAYMENT AND RECEIPT.



   The occupation tax levied pursuant to this chapter shall be paid to the
City Clerk at the time provided by this chapter, and he or she shall issue
and deliver his or her receipt therefor upon the payment thereof, and the
amount of payment shall be credited by the City Clerk to the general fund.



(Prior Code, § 10-1103)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-205



§ 114.04  DELINQUENT TAXES; INTEREST AND PENALTY.



   All payments of the occupation tax levied pursuant to this chapter
which are made after the due date thereof shall draw interest at the rate of
1% per month and, after payment thereof has been in default for six months, a
penalty of 5% shall be added thereto in addition to the interest charges,
which shall be paid by any company subject to this occupation tax.



(Prior Code, § 10-1104)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-205



§ 114.05  STATEMENT OF GROSS RECEIPTS FILING.



   All telephone companies shall, at the time they make their quarterly
payments of the occupation tax levied pursuant to this chapter, file with the
City Clerk a full, complete and detailed statement of the gross receipts
subject to the occupation tax, which statement shall be duly verified and
sworn to by the manager in charge of the business of the particular company
in the city or by a higher managerial employee of the company.



(Prior Code, § 10-1105)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-205



§ 114.06  PAYMENT ADJUSTMENT.



   Each succeeding quarterly payment of the occupation tax levied pursuant
to this chapter may include any adjustment which is shown on the report
provided for by § 114.05, which may be necessary for the consideration of
uncollectibles or any other matters which may have resulted in either an
excess or a deficiency in the amount of tax paid in any previous quarter.



(Prior Code, § 10-1106)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-205



§ 114.07  RIGHT TO INSPECT BOOKS AND RECORDS.



   The city shall have the right at any time to inspect, through its
officers, agents, or representatives, the books and records of any telephone
company, for the purpose of verifying any report submitted pursuant to the
requirements of § 114.05.



(Prior Code, § 10-1107)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-205



§ 114.08  FAILURE TO FILE STATEMENT; AMOUNT DUE.



   In case any telephone company shall refuse, fail, or neglect to furnish
or file any report required in § 114.05 at the time required for the filing,
or shall fail or refuse to permit the city to inspect the books and records
of the company for the purpose of verifying the report, then the occupation
tax for the preceding quarter shall be the sum of $5,000, and the amount
shall be paid within 45 days following the end of the calendar quarter as
required by § 114.02 and the amount shall draw interest and be subject to
penalties as provided by § 114.04.



(Prior Code, § 10-1108)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-205



§ 114.09  RIGHT TO SUE FOR PAYMENT FAILURE.



   When any telephone company shall fail to make payment of the occupation
tax provided for by this chapter at the time specified for payment, the city
shall have the right to sue the company in any court of competent
jurisdiction for the amount of the occupation tax due and payable under the
terms and provisions of this chapter and may recover judgment against the
company for the amount so due, together with interest and penalties, and may
have execution thereon.



(Prior Code, § 10-1109)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-205



CHAPTER 115:  GARBAGE COLLECTION



Section



   115.01   Collection by private firms



§ 115.01  COLLECTION BY PRIVATE FIRMS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate, or participate in
the removal of garbage for a fee until and unless the person has received a
license from the governing body. Application for a license may be made at the
office of the City Clerk upon a blank form supplied by the municipality. The
application shall require all information and documents which the governing
body deems necessary to determine whether or not to grant a license. If the
governing body decides to grant the license, the City Clerk will issue to the
applicant the license which will entitle him or her to collect, remove, and
transport any garbage from commercial or industrial accounts for a fee in,
over, or upon any street or public way in the municipality. No private firm
shall collect from residential accounts within the municipality. Any license
so issued shall be subject to revocation by the governing body after proper
notice and a hearing if requested by the licensee. The licensee shall be
liable for all bonds required by the governing body and shall pay the
occupation as set by Council from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 10-1001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 19-2105



CHAPTER 116:  OIL AND NATURAL GAS



Section



   116.01   Licenses; permits; fees



   116.02   Requirements for permit



   116.03   Wells prohibited in streets and alleys



   116.04   Proximity to residence and public building prohibited



   116.05   Facilities screened from view required



   116.06   Best available technology and methods required



§ 116.01  LICENSES; PERMITS; FEES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to drill or
commence operations for the drilling of an oil or gas well or to operate the
same within the city limits without having first obtained from the governing
body one of the following licenses or permits.



   (A)   Before commencing the drilling of an oil and gas well within
the city, the person, firm, or corporation desiring to drill a well shall
first obtain a permit from the city. The applicant shall, at the time of
making application for the drilling permit, deposit with the City Clerk a fee
as set forth in Chapter 38, Fee Schedule, payable to the city. If the city
grants the application, the fee shall be retained by the city. If a license
is not granted, the city shall retain the sum as set forth in Chapter 38, Fee
Schedule for administrative expenses and the balance of the fee shall be
returned to the applicant.



   (B)   No permit or renewal permit shall be assigned or transferred
to any other person, firm, or corporation unless a notice of transfer is
filed with the city, giving the name of the assignee. A fee as set forth in
Chapter 38, Fee Schedule shall accompany the notice of transfer. No transfer
shall be complete until all of the requirements of this section shall have
been met.



   (C)   The permit for any well that has been determined to be a dry
well by the permitter is terminated upon determination. The permittee shall
furnish the city with the information. If any well that has been determined
to be a dry well is reworked, reopened, or work done to make it a producing
well, the owner of the well shall first obtain an original permit for
drilling a well before commencing the rework, reopening or any similar
activity.



   (D)   All persons, firms, or corporations having obtained a license
for oil or gas wells within the city, which wells are producing oil or gas,
shall pay an annual license renewal fee as set forth in Chapter 38, Fee
Schedule per each well which continues to produce oil or gas at any time
during the calendar year. The fee shall be due and payable by December 31 of
each year and shall be paid to the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 10-1701)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.02  REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMIT.



   No such permit shall be granted by the governing body until the
applicant therefor shall have submitted satisfactory evidence as follows:



   (A)   A map or plat of the area covered by the oil and gas lease,
showing the proposed location of the well, together with the copies of the
oil and gas leases from the owner or owners of the land on which the well is
proposed to be located. The map or plat shall also show the location of all
residences, buildings and other structures in the immediate vicinity of the
proposed location;



   (B)   The application must agree to provide protection to all
persons who might be affected by the drilling operations, including the
handling of slush, drilling mud, sediments, salt water, and other material
produced in connection with drilling the well. An artificial liner shall be
placed in all pits receiving oil, salt water or refuse accumulated during
drilling operations. Any fluids remaining in the pits shall be removed
immediately upon completion of drilling operations;



   (C)   The application shall agree that no crude oil shall be stored
within the city limits unless agreed to in writing by all parties involved
including the applicant, the property owner, the city, and the owners of
existing buildings located within 200 feet of the storage site;



   (D)   The applicant shall agree that, in the event the well is
nonproductive, all tools, equipment, and machinery used in connection with
the drilling thereof shall be removed within 60 days after completion
thereof, and the premises restored to its original condition;



   (E)   Any tank or tank battery for storage of oil within the city
shall be protected by dikes of sufficient height to prevent oil from escaping
in the event of the leaking or bursting of the tanks;



   (F)   A copy of the notice of intent to drill filed with the state
Oil and Gas Conservation Commission on its Form 2; and



   (G)   Evidence of formal approval by the owners of the proposed
location if required by the terms of the lease or leases. This shall
specifically include the City Council in any instance where the lease so
provides the city with the right to approve the location in advance.



(Prior Code, § 10-1702)



§ 116.03  WELLS PROHIBITED IN STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   No well shall be drilled, and no permit shall be issued for any well to
be drilled at any location within any of the streets or alleys of the city.
No street or alley shall be blocked or closed by any drilling or production
operation except upon the prior express written consent of the City Manager
for a specified temporary period.



(Prior Code, § 10-1703)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.04  PROXIMITY TO RESIDENCE AND PUBLIC BUILDING PROHIBITED.



   No well shall be drilled, nor shall any tank batteries, well
facilities, or equipment be located, and no permit shall be issued, for any
well to be drilled at any location which is nearer than 200 feet to any
occupied or unoccupied dwelling or any other building used or designed and
intended to be used for human occupancy, or any school, church, or public
building, unless the applicant has obtained written permission for the
location of the well from all owners and lessees whose dwelling or other
subject buildings are within 200 feet of the proposed well. This distance
shall be calculated from the well bore, tank batteries, well facilities, and
equipment to the closest exterior point of the dwelling or other subject
building.



(Prior Code, § 10-1704)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.05  FACILITIES SCREENED FROM VIEW REQUIRED.



   All exploration or development facilities within the city shall be
surrounded by a sight-proof fence sufficiently high and properly built to
keep persons and animals out of the enclosure. All gates shall be kept locked
when authorized persons are not within the enclosure. Any producing well
within 200 feet of an occupied dwelling, church, school, or government office
shall install evergreen vegetation or landscaped earth beams completely
around the well site, equipment, and fences of sufficient height to screen
all structures from view. The vegetation on beams shall be kept in good
condition and in an attractive state at all times.



(Prior Code, § 10-1705)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.06  BEST AVAILABLE TECHNOLOGY AND METHODS REQUIRED.



   All operations for the recovery or production of oil or natural gas
shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the
agreements and promises made in the permit application, and all state and
federal laws, including regulations of the state Oil and Gas Conservation
Commission. All drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such
a manner as to eliminate, as far as possible, dust, noise, vibration, or
noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best available technology.
The motive power for all pumping equipment shall be electricity.



(Prior Code, § 10-1706)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 117:  LOTTERY REGULATIONS



Section



   117.01   Lottery authorized; compliance with all laws, regulations
and contract terms



   117.02   Restrictions on participation



§ 117.01  LOTTERY AUTHORIZED; COMPLIANCE WITH ALL LAWS, REGULATIONS AND
CONTRACT TERMS.



   (A)   The conduct of a lottery within the corporate limits of the
city by use of a game known as Keno under the provisions of the state County
and City Lottery Act is authorized. Games shall be conducted only during the
term of a valid lottery operator agreement with the city. The City Council
may approve lottery operator agreements by resolution.



(Prior Code, § 10-1801)



   (B)   All aspects of the conduct of a Keno lottery within the
corporate limits of the city shall be conducted in strict compliance with the
provisions of the state County and City Lottery Act, the regulations
promulgated by the state Department of Revenue, and the terms of the lottery
operator agreement with the city.



(Prior Code, § 10-1802)  (Ord. 92-2071, passed 7-6-1992)



§ 117.02  RESTRICTIONS ON PARTICIPATION.



   (A)   (1)   No person under 19 years of age shall play or
participate in any way in the lottery established and conducted by the
governing body.



      (2)   No lottery operator whom the governing body contracts to
conduct its lottery or his or her immediate family, employees, or agents,
shall play in lottery established and conducted by the governing body.



      (3)   No person having an ownership interest in an authorized
sales outlet or employee thereof  shall play the lottery when actually
working at the lottery or while on duty. Keno writers shall be prohibited
from playing one hour prior to and one hour after writing Keno.



      (4)   Nothing shall prohibit any member of the governing body,
a municipal official, or the immediate family of the member or official, from
playing in the lottery established and conducted by the governing body,
provided that the person is 19 years of age or older.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, IMMEDIATE FAMILY shall mean a
person who is related to the member, official, or operator by blood,
marriage, or adoption and resides in the same household of the member,
official, or operator, or a person who is claimed by the member, official,
operator, or spouse of a member, official, or operator as a dependent for
federal income tax purposes.



(Neb. RS 9-646)  (Ord. 2007-2804, passed 12-3-2007)



CHAPTER 118:  ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



General Provisions



   118.01   Definitions



   118.02   Systems must comply with law



   118.03   Universal requirements



   118.04   Administration and oversight



Automatic Dialing and Calling Devices



   118.15   Direct interconnection permitted



   118.16   Recorded message requirements



Permits



   118.30   Permit required



   118.31   Permit application; fees



   118.32   Investigation; permit issuance



   118.33   Permit renewal



   118.34   Verification of information by inspection



   118.35   Suspension of permit



   118.36   Appeal from permit suspension



   118.37   Duty of vendor to render system compliant



   118.38   Permit holder responsible for installation, training;
maintenance



   118.39   Notice of changed circumstances



Alarm Response



   118.50   Fire or Police Department obligations



   118.51   Alarm activation



   118.52   False alarm prohibited



   118.53   Rebuttable presumption of false alarm



   118.54   Record of false alarms



   118.55   Order to disconnect; compliance



   118.56   Excessive number of false alarms



 



   118.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 118.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM SYSTEM.  Any mechanical, electrical, or electronic device that
is arranged, designed, or used to signal the occurrence in the city of a
fire, life hazard, or medical emergency or a burglary, robbery, or other
criminal offense. ALARM SYSTEMS include, but are not limited to, those by
which public safety personnel of the city are notified directly of such
signals by automatic recording devices, or are notified indirectly by way of
third persons who monitor the alarm systems and who report such signals to
public safety personnel. ALARM SYSTEMS also include those designed to
register a signal which is so audible, visible, or in other ways perceptible
outside a protected building, structure, or facility as to notify persons in
the neighborhood beyond the lot where the signal is located, who in turn
notify public safety personnel of the city of the signal. ALARM SYSTEMS do
not include those affixed to automobiles, or auxiliary devices installed by
telephone companies to protect telephone equipment, or systems which might be
damaged or disrupted by the use of any alarm system.



   FALSE ALARM.



      (1)   Any signal created by an alarm system, including but not
limited to alarm signals initiated by human error, which directly or
indirectly notifies public safety personnel of the city of the occurrence of
a fire, life hazard, or medical emergency, or a burglary, robbery, or other
criminal offense, when either of the following circumstances is present:



         (a)   No such emergency, hazard, or offense has occurred
or, as the case may be, is occurring; or



         (b)   Fire, law enforcement, or emergency medical
personnel are not needed to respond to such emergency, hazard, or offense.



      (2)   False alarm shall not include, for purposes of this
chapter, a signal activated by fire, lightning, tornado winds, flooding or
earthquake, or by telephone or power line malfunction verified in writing by
the telephone company or power supplier seven days after the alarm.



   FIRE ALARM.  Any communication, or attempted communication, whether in
person or by a mechanical, electrical, or electronic device, that is intended
or is designed to elicit a prompt response by the Fire Department of the city.



   OWNER or LESSEE.  Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or
entity who or which purchases, leases, contracts for, or obtains an alarm
system.



   POLICE ALARM.  Any communication, or attempted communication, whether
in person or by a mechanical, electrical, or electronic device, that is
intended or is designed to elicit a prompt response by the Police Department
of the city.



   PUBLIC SAFETY PERSONNEL.  The officers and other members of the Fire
Department, Volunteer Fire and Rescue Squad, and Police Department,
respectively.



   VENDOR.  Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or entity
associated with an alarm business or company either indirectly or directly,
whose duties include, but are not necessarily limited to, any of the
following: selling, replacing, moving, repairing, maintaining, or installing
an alarm system on or in any structure, building, or facility.



(Prior Code, § 6-801)  (Ord. 93-2173, passed 8-30-1993)



§ 118.02  SYSTEMS MUST COMPLY WITH LAW.



   No alarm system shall be installed, maintained or used in violation of
any of the requirements of this chapter, or any applicable statute, law, or
administrative regulation of the United States of America or the state,
provided that every alarm system existing on the effective date of this
chapter shall be made to comply with the requirements of this chapter,
including a permit, within 90 days after the date.



(Prior Code, § 6-802)  (Ord. 93-2173, passed 8-30-1993)



§ 118.03  UNIVERSAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All burglar alarm systems shall incorporate a device:



   (A)   That allows an adequate delay before the time at which
activation of the system will directly or indirectly signal public safety
personnel, or signal other parties who in turn might be expected to notify
public safety personnel. The delay time shall be such as will permit the
owner or lessee to stop a false alarm from being transmitted; or



   (B)   That limits any exterior signal to a period of time not to
exceed 15 minutes in duration, and that causes the alarm system automatically
to cease emitting a signal at the expiration of the maximum time permitted.



(Prior Code, § 6-803)  (Ord. 93-2173, passed 8-30-1993)



§ 118.04  ADMINISTRATION AND OVERSIGHT.



   The provisions of this chapter concerning fire alarms and fire alarm
systems shall be administered by the Fire Chief, and the provisions
concerning police alarms and police alarm systems shall be administered by
the Police Chief.



(Prior Code, § 6-813)  (Ord. 93-2173, passed 8-30-1993)



AUTOMATIC DIALING AND CALLING DEVICES



§ 118.15  DIRECT INTERCONNECTION PERMITTED.



   (A)   Persons owning or leasing an automatic dialing or calling
device situated on premises within the city, upon obtaining a permit
therefore as provided in this chapter, may, if authorized as provided in this
chapter, have the device interconnected to a telephone line transmitting
directly to:



      (1)   A privately-owned central alarm panel or station;



      (2)   An answering service; or



      (3)   The Fire Department or Police Department of the city as
designated by the department.



   (B)   An automatic dialing device also may be interconnected to one
or more telephone numbers available to the owner or lessee.



   (C)   No automatic dialing or calling device shall be interconnected
to any emergency telephone trunkline terminating in the Fire or Police
communication center except as authorized in this chapter, and no device
shall be connected to any telephone line or other office or department of the
city except  telephone line or lines as may be designated by the city for
the specific purpose of receiving signals from alarm systems. The owners or
lessees of all automatic dialing devices interconnected to such a trunkline
on the effective date of this chapter shall cause the devices to be
disconnected therefrom within 90 days after this date.



(Prior Code, § 6-804)  (Ord. 93-2173, passed 8-30-1993)



§ 118.16  RECORDED MESSAGE REQUIREMENTS.



   Alarm systems that automatically dial or call a telephone line that has
been designated by the city as provided in this chapter shall comply with the
following requirements:



   (A)   The total length of the recorded message being transmitted to
the Fire or Police Department, including repetition of message, shall not
exceed 30 seconds duration;



   (B)   The recorded message transmitted shall be repeated not less
than two nor more than three times;



   (C)   The recorded message being transmitted shall incorporate
language specifically identifying the message, identifying by street number
and name the location of the emergency and the nature of the event which
caused the alarm system to activate. If the location of the event signaled by
the alarm system is in a multi-family building or a multi-unit office or
commercial building, the message shall also identify by number and floor the
particular dwelling unit, office unit or commercial unit in which the event
occurred or is occurring; and



   (D)   The recorded message being transmitted shall be appropriate
for the purpose for which the alarm system was installed, and the message in
its entirety shall be intelligible and spoken in the English language.



(Prior Code, § 6-804.01)  (Ord. 93-2173, passed 8-30-1993)



PERMITS



§ 118.30  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, interconnect with, or
use any alarm system within the city without a current valid permit therefor
as provided in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-805)  (Ord. 93-2173, passed 8-30-1993)  Penalty, see §
118.99



§ 118.31  PERMIT APPLICATION; FEES.



   (A)   Each application for an alarm system permit shall be made on a
form prescribed by the Chief of the department to which the application is
made, and shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the owner or
lessee, who shall be an adult occupant of the protected premises;



      (2)   The type of premises (home, office, other), and any
business name by which the premises are known;



      (3)   The address of the protected premises, including, if the
premises are in a multiple unit residential, commercial or industrial
structure or complex, any name by which the structure or complex is commonly
known;



      (4)   The names, addresses, and telephone numbers, including
home phone numbers, of all agents having authority or responsibility with
respect to the structure or complex;



      (5)   If the alarm system component consists of automatic
dialers, the number and type thereof, the location of all remote
annunciators, and the names and telephone numbers of all persons or
businesses which are or may be preselected for automatic dialer contact;



      (6)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person
with whom the owner or lessee has contracted for maintenance of the alarm
system;



      (7)   The name, address, and telephone number of the persons,
not less than two, who can be contacted by the department 24 hours a day and
seven days a week to turn off or deactivate the alarm system; and



      (8)   A statement that the owner or lessee, in consideration
of the issuance of the requested permit, has read and agrees to be bound by
the terms of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-805.01)



   (B)   If any alarm system component is to be connected to an alarm
panel in the Fire or Police Department:



      (1)   The application for an alarm system permit shall be
accompanied by a connection fee in the amount of as set forth in Chapter 38,
Fee Schedule; and



      (2)   The owner or lessee shall pay annually, in addition, a
maintenance and monitoring fee in the amount as set forth in Chapter 38, Fee
Schedule. The latter fee shall be payable, in the first instance, with the
application, but no connection fee shall be payable by owners or lessees of
an alarm system component which is connected to the alarm panel at the time
of enactment of this chapter.



   (C)   If the alarm component is an automatic dialer to be
interconnected to a telephone in a city department, or is a system which
provides for a third party relay of calls to such a telephone, the owner or
lessee shall pay to the city department annually a monitoring fee in the
amount as set forth in Chapter 38, Fee Schedule, and a fee in such amount
shall be paid, in the first instance, with the application for a permit.



   (D)   If a permit shall be issued, fees which accompanied the
application shall be retained; otherwise, they shall be refunded.



   (E)   This section shall not apply to alarm system components owned
or leased by the city or other public law enforcement officials or
departments.



(Prior Code, § 6-805.02)



(Ord. 93-2173, passed 8-30-1993)



§ 118.32  INVESTIGATION; PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   Upon receipt of the permit application and fee, if any, the Chief of
the Department shall cause to be made such investigation as he deems
necessary. If it appears to the Chief that the proposed system will comply
with the provisions of this chapter, he or she shall issue to the applicant a
permit bearing an identifying number, specifying the alarm system for which
it is used, and setting forth the expiration date of the permit. A permit to
interconnect a component of an alarm system situated outside the corporate
limits of the city with an alarm panel or telephone(s) of the city shall not
issue unless the Chief of the Department shall find in writing that the
connection will not overburden the Department's alarm system during the
period of the permit.



(Prior Code, § 6-805.03)  (Ord. 93-2173, passed 8-30-1993)



§ 118.33  PERMIT RENEWAL.



   Alarm systems permits shall not be extendable or renewable as a matter
of right beyond the period for which a maintenance or monitoring fee has been
paid as provided in § 118.31.



(Prior Code, § 6-805.04)  (Ord. 93-2173, passed 8-30-1993)



§ 118.34  VERIFICATION OF INFORMATION BY INSPECTION.



   The Chief of the Department may inspect, or cause to be inspected, any
alarm system for which a permit is required or for which a permit has been
issued, for the purpose of ascertaining that information furnished by the
application or permittee is correct, and that a system for which a permit has
been issued is being maintained in conformance with the requirements of this
chapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-806)  (Ord. 93-2173, passed 8-30-1993)



§ 118.35  SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The following shall be grounds for suspension by the Chief of
the Department of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter:



      (1)   Any false or incomplete statement made on the permit
application;



      (2)   Programming of an automatic dialer to select any city
telephone line;



      (3)   Failure to pay an annual maintenance or monitoring fee;



      (4)   Failure to pay a false alarm charge within the time
required;



      (5)   Maintenance, installation, or use of the alarm system in
violation of any applicable law, ordinance, or regulation, including the
requirements of this chapter; and



      (6)   Failure to provide current information as required.



   (B)   If the Chief determines that there is cause for the suspension
of a permit, he or she shall mail a notice of suspension to the owner or
lessee at the latter's last known address, stating that the suspension will
be effective 30 days after the date of mailing, unless a notice of appeal is
filed with the City Manager on or before the effective date.



(Prior Code, § 6-807)  (Ord. 93-2173, passed 8-30-1993)



§ 118.36  APPEAL FROM PERMIT SUSPENSION.



   Any owner or lessee to whom has been mailed a notice of suspension may
appeal the suspension to the City Manager. The filing of a notice of appeal
shall stay the suspension until disposition of the appeal by the City Manager
after notice and hearing.



(Prior Code, § 6-807.01)  (Ord. 93-2173, passed 8-30-1993)



§ 118.37  DUTY OF VENDOR TO RENDER SYSTEM COMPLIANT.



   Any vendor installing or maintaining an alarm system shall cause such
installation or maintenance to conform to the requirements of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-808)  (Ord. 93-2173, passed 8-30-1993)



§ 118.38  PERMIT HOLDER RESPONSIBLE FOR INSTALLATION, TRAINING; MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   The holder of an alarm system permit shall, at all times, be
responsible for the proper installation, maintenance, and repair of the
system, including, but not limited to, design features, method of
installation, the repair or replacement of any component, or any condition
which may give rise to a false alarm.



(Prior Code, § 6-809)



   (B)   The holder of an alarm system permit shall be responsible for
training and re-training all employees, family members, and other persons who
may make regular use of the protected premises and who may, in the normal
course of their activities, be in a position to accidentally trigger a
sensor. The training shall include procedures and practices to avoid
accidental alarms, and steps to follow in the event the system is
accidentally triggered.



(Prior Code, § 6-809.01)



(Ord. 93-2173, passed 8-30-1993)



§ 118.39  NOTICE OF CHANGED CIRCUMSTANCES.



   Within the ten days following any change of circumstances which render
obsolete any of the information submitted on an application for an alarm
systems permit, the holder of the permit shall file an amendment to his
application setting forth the currently accurate information. No additional
fee shall be required, unless the change is of such character that the permit
is no longer applicable to the alarm system for which the permit was issued.



(Prior Code, § 6-809.02)  (Ord. 93-2173, passed 8-30-1993)



ALARM RESPONSE



§ 118.50  FIRE OR POLICE DEPARTMENT OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   The Fire or Police Department may elect not to respond to an
alarm from an alarm system which does not comply with all of the provisions
of this chapter. Regardless, the issuance of an alarm system permit under
this chapter shall not impose upon the issuing Department an obligation to
respond, or liability for failure to respond, to any alarm from the system,
and shall not require the Department to accord any priority to the alarm.



(Prior Code, § 6-810)



   (B)   Upon receiving an emergency alarm signal, the Chief of the
Fire Department or Police Department shall promptly cause the owner or
lessee, or his or her authorized representative, to be notified thereof by
telephone, if reasonably possible, and the owner or lessee or his or her
authorized representative, shall immediately come to the premises in person.



(Prior Code, § 6-810.01)



(Ord. 93-2173, passed 8-30-1993)



§ 118.51  ALARM ACTIVATION.



   No alarm system shall be activated or used except for the purpose of
summoning Fire or Police Department personnel for emergency or life hazard
situations. Without the prior express consent of the Fire or Police
Department, alarm systems shall not be tested so as to transmit a signal to
personnel of such Department when an emergency or life hazard situation does
not exist.



(Prior Code, § 6-811)  (Ord. 93-2173, passed 8-30-1993)



§ 118.52  FALSE ALARM PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to make, or cause to be made, a
fire or police alarm known, or which in the exercise of reasonable care
should be known, to be false.



(Prior Code, § 6-812)  (Ord. 93-2173, passed 8-30-1993)  Penalty, see §
118.99



§ 118.53  REBUTTABLE PRESUMPTION OF FALSE ALARM.



   If fire units, responding to an alarm and checking the premises
according to standard operating procedure, do not discover any evidence of a
fire, or immediately recent fire, there shall be a rebuttable presumption
that the alarm was false. If police units, responding to an alarm and
checking the premises according to standard Department operating procedure,
do not discover any evidence of unauthorized entry or criminal activity,
there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the alarm was false.



(Prior Code, § 6-812.01)  (Ord 93-2173, passed 8-30-1993)



§ 118.54  RECORD OF FALSE ALARMS.



   The Fire Chief and Police Chief shall cause to be maintained a record
of the date and time of any false alarms received by his or her Department,
and of the officers of the Department who responded. The record shall be open
for the inspection of the owner or lessee, or his or her authorized
representative, on regular business days between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m. at the office of the Chief of the Department.



(Prior Code, § 6-812.02)  (Ord. 93-2173, passed 8-30-1993)



§ 118.55  ORDER TO DISCONNECT; COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   In the event a false alarm was, or may have been, the result
of improper design, installation, or maintenance of the owner's or lessee's
alarm system component, the Fire Chief or, as the case may be, Police
Chief,  shall notify the owner or lessee to cause the component to comply
with the requirements of this chapter within the time specified in the
notice, and may order the component disconnected immediately pending
compliance. The notice may be either oral or in writing, in the Chief's sound
discretion.



   (B)   The ordered disconnection shall be done in a manner that
signals are not emitted so as to notify the Fire or, as the case may be,
Police Department by a signal on its alarm panel, or directly or indirectly
through automatic telephone recording devices, or to register a signal which
is so audible, visible, or in other ways perceptible outside a protected
building, structure, or facility as to notify persons in the neighborhood who
may in turn notify either the Fire Department or the Police Department of the
signal.



(Prior Code, § 6-812.03)  (Ord. 93-2173, passed 8-30-1993)



§ 118.56  EXCESSIVE NUMBER OF FALSE ALARMS.



   In the event that, within any period of 12 months, in excess of four
false alarms shall be transmitted by any alarm system component connected to
a panel in the Fire or Police Department, or by any automatic dialer or a
third party relay to a telephone in the Department, and the alarms result in
responses by the Department to the scene, the owner or lessee shall pay to
the city, as the liquidated amount of expenses incurred by the Department in
connection with responses, the sum(s) as set forth in Chapter 38, Fee
Schedule after written notice from the Chief, mailed to the owner or lessee
at his or her last known address, specifying the alarms and responses.



(Prior Code, § 6-812.04)  (Ord. 93-2173, passed 8-30-1993)



§ 118.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions
of any chapter or section of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. Unless otherwise specified in the particular chapter or section
for which the person stands convicted of violating, the penalty for the
violation shall be in any amount not less than $20 nor more than $1,000
and/or imprisonment for any length of time not to exceed three months, at the
discretion of the court; provided, whenever any section of this chapter shall
declare a nuisance, a violation of that section shall be penalized by a fine
of not more than $1,000, in which case a new violation shall be deemed to
have been committed every 24 hours of the failure to comply. Provided
further, that where licenses, charges and surcharges are due the city, the
court shall order the license secured and sums paid in addition to the fine
fixed by the court.



(Prior Code, § 6-901)



   (B)   Whenever a nuisance exists, as defined in this chapter, the
municipality may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the same, in
the manner provided by law. Whenever, in any action, it is established that a
nuisance exists, the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed,
enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.



(Prior Code, § 6-902)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 18-1720, 18-1722



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



      Chapter




         130.   GENERAL OFFENSES





         131.   CURFEW




CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



Offenses Against Property



   130.01   Malicious destruction of property



Offenses Against Persons - Sexual Predators



   130.15   Purpose



   130.16   Definitions



   130.17   Residency restrictions; exceptions



Offenses Against the Peace



   130.30   Discharge of firearms in city limits



   130.31   Disorderly conduct



   130.32   Abandoned automobiles



 



   130.99   Penalty



OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



§ 130.01  MALICIOUS DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to purposely,
willfully, or maliciously injure in any manner, or destroy any real or
personal property of any description belonging to another.



(Prior Code, § 6-409)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-227, 16-228



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 28-519



OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS - SEXUAL PREDATORS



§ 130.15  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The state Legislature has found that certain sex offenders
present a high risk to commit repeat offenses and has enabled municipalities
to restrict the persons' place of residency as provided in the Sexual
Predator Residency Restriction Act.



   (B)   Sex offenders who prey on children and who are high risks to
repeat such acts present an extreme threat to public safety. The cost of sex
offender victimization to these children and to society at large, while
incalculable, is exorbitant.



   (C)   It is the intent of this subchapter to serve the city's
compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the city by creating certain areas around
locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers where
certain sexual predators cannot reside.



(Ord. 2006-2772, passed 7-17-2006)



§ 130.16  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHILD CARE FACILITY.  A facility licensed pursuant to the Child Care
Licensing Act.



   RESIDE.  To sleep, live, or dwell at a place, which may include more
than one location, and may be mobile or transitory.



   RESIDENCE.  A place where an individual sleeps, lives, or dwells,
which may include more than one location, and may be mobile or transitory.



   SCHOOL.  A public, private, denominational, or parochial school which
meets the requirements for state accreditation or approval.



   SEX OFFENDER.  An individual who has been convicted of a crime listed
in Neb. RS 29-4003 and who is required to register as a sex offender pursuant
to the Sex Offender Registration Act.



   SEXUAL PREDATOR.  An individual who is required to register under the
Sex Offender Registration Act, who has been classified as Level 3 because of
a high risk of recidivism as determined by the State Patrol under Neb. RS
29-4013, and who has victimized a person 18 years of age or younger.



(Ord. 2006-2772, passed 7-17-2006)



§ 130.17  RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any sexual predator to reside within 500
feet from a school or child care facility.



   (B)   For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation,
the distance shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer
property line of the residence to the nearest outer boundary line of the
school or child care facility.



   (C)   This subchapter shall not apply to a sexual predator who:



      (1)   Resides within a prison or correctional or treatment
facility operated by the state or a political subdivision;



      (2)   Established a residence before July 1, 2006, and has not
moved from that residence; or



      (3)   Established a residence after July 1, 2006, and the
school or child care facility triggering the restriction was established
after the initial date of the sexual predator's residence at that location.



(Ord. 2006-2772, passed 7-17-2006)



Statutory reference:



   Sexual Predator Residency Restriction Act, see Laws 2006, LB 1199, §§
27 to 29



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 29-4003, 29-4013



OFFENSES AGAINST THE PEACE



§ 130.30  DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS IN CITY LIMITS.



   (A)   No person, except a law enforcement officer in the discharge
of his or her duty, shall fire or discharge any weapon or firearm, including
any gun, pistol, fowling piece, air gun, pellet gun, B-B gun, bow or sling
shot, or other firearm, within the city, provided that this prohibition shall
not apply to the following:



      (1)   Regularly constituted organizations or committees
conducting public observances or celebrations when specifically approved, in
writing and in advance, by the City Manager;



      (2)   Indoor or outdoor shooting ranges at specific locations
when specifically approved, in writing and in advance, by the City Manager;
and/or



      (3)   Educational programs relating to firearms usage when
specifically approved, in writing and in advance, by the City Manager.



   (B)   All requests must be made one week in advance and in writing,
and directed to the City Manager. Prior to City Manager approval, the City
Manager shall ensure sufficient bond and insurance is obtained by the
requesting party. The City Manager shall further ensure that each event
includes competent adult supervision, the competent adult supervision to be
individuals certified by the Hunter Safety Program, the state Department of
Game and Parks, the National Rifle Association, or any other legitimate
certified and competent firearm safety program.



(Prior Code, § 6-402)  (Ord. 1863, passed 3-6-1989)



§ 130.31  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to engage
in any riotous, tumultuous or disorderly conduct, to take part in any
disorderly assembly, to fight, or challenge to fight, by argument or
otherwise, to quarrel, to engage in lewd, indecent and lascivious behavior,
or to do or engage in any other disorderly act or conduct, in any place,
public or private, tending to disturb the peace of others, or the peace, good
order and quiet of the city.



   (B)   Any person who, with intent to provoke a breach of the peace
or whereby a breach of the peace may be occasioned, commits any of the
following acts, shall be deemed to have committed the offense of disorderly
conduct:



      (1)   Uses offensive, profane, indecent, disorderly,
threatening, abusive, or insulting language;



      (2)   Acts in such a manner as to annoy, disturb, threaten,
menace, interfere with, obstruct, or be offensive to others;



      (3)   (a)   Congregates with others or loiters upon a
public street, avenue, road, alley, bridge, sidewalk, highway, any place used
for the passage of persons or vehicles, or any way set apart for public
travel, and refuses to move on when ordered by the police.



         (b)   LOITER shall mean to linger, dally, be dilatory,
stand, sit, saunter, lag behind, move slowly about, loaf, or spend time idly.
The fact that such loitering was committed inside or upon a motor vehicle,
even though the same was lawfully parked, shall not be a defense in a
prosecution under this section.



      (4)   Causes a crowd to collect, except when lawfully
addressing the crowds; and/or



      (5)   Stand or sit on a sidewalk, street, street corner, or
any other place and make insulting remarks to or about persons passing on the
street or sidewalk, or otherwise annoy the persons.



(Prior Code, § 6-408)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-227, 16-228



§ 130.32  ABANDONED AUTOMOBILES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to abandon any automobile on the
municipal streets, highways, alleys, parks or other property. An automobile
shall be deemed to be abandoned if left unattended:



      (1)   With no number plates affixed thereto, for more than six
hours on any public property;



      (2)   For more than 24 hours on any public property, except a
portion thereof on which parking is legally permitted;



      (3)   For more than 48 hours after the parking of the vehicle
shall have become illegal, if left on a portion of a public property on which
parking is legally permitted; and



      (4)   For more than seven days on private property if left
initially without permission of the owner, or after permission of the owner
shall be terminated.



   (B)   The title to any automobile so abandoned which, at the time of
the abandonment, has no number plates of the current year affixed and is of a
wholesale value, taking into consideration the condition of the vehicle, of
$250 or less, shall immediately vest in the municipality. In the event the
automobile is licensed for the current year or is of a wholesale value of
over $250, the municipal police shall make a reasonable effort to contact the
owner of the automobile by sending a notice to the registered owner, if
known, by sending an inquiry to the county it is registered in, if the owner
is unknown, or by contacting the Director of Motor Vehicles, if the car is
without license plates and the owner is unknown. If notified by the Director
of Motor Vehicles that a lien or mortgage exists on the vehicle, notice shall
also be sent to the lienholder or mortgagee. Any person claiming the vehicle
shall be required to pay the cost of removal and storage of the vehicle. If
the owner, lienholder or mortgagee, is known and does not claim the
automobile within five days after the date when the notice was mailed, or
upon receiving word from the Director of Motor Vehicles that the owner is
unknown, title will immediately vest in the municipality and the automobile
may be sold. Any proceeds from the sale of the automobile less any expenses
incurred by the municipality in the removal, storage and sale shall be held
without interest in a separate account for the benefit of the owner of the
vehicle for a  period of two years. If not claimed within such period of
time, the proceeds shall then be paid into the General Fund.



   (C)   For purposes of this section, PUBLIC PROPERTY shall mean any
public right-of-way, street, highway, alley, park or other state, county or
municipally-owned property, and PRIVATE PROPERTY shall mean any
privately-owned property which is not included within the definition of
public property. Any person who abandons an automobile as hereinbefore
defined shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 6-411)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 60-1901 through 60-1911



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person violating § 130.01 shall, upon conviction
therefor, be punished as follows:



      (1)   If the conviction is for a first offense, the person
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100;



      (2)   If the conviction is for a second offense, the person
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100 and shall be confined jail
for not less than six days nor more than 30 days; and



      (3)   If the conviction is for a third offense, or subsequent
offense thereafter, the person shall be punished by a fine of not less than
$100 and confinement, with or without hard labor, in the city jail for not
less than six days nor more than three months.



(Prior Code, § 6-409)



   (C)   Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions
of §§ 130.30 through 130.32 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Unless
otherwise specified in this particular section, the penalty for the violation
shall be in any amount not less than $25 and not to exceed $1,000 and/or
imprisonment for any length of time not to exceed three months, in the
discretion of the court, provided whenever §§ 130.30 through 130.32 shall
declare a nuisance, a violation of that section shall be penalized by a fine
of not more than $1,000, in which case a new violation shall be deemed to
have been committed every 24 hours of the failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 6-412)



   (D)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this chapter, the
municipality may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the same, in
the manner provided by law. Whenever, in any action, it is established that a
nuisance exists, the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed,
enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.



(Prior Code, § 6-413)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-227, 16-228, 18-1720, 18-1722



   Similar state law provisions, see Neb. RS 28-519



CHAPTER 131:  CURFEW



Section



   131.01   Age and time restrictions



   131.02   Duty of parent or guardian



   131.03   Arrest custodial procedure



 



   131.99   Penalty



§ 131.01  AGE AND TIME RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 17 years
to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, or play in or upon the public streets,
sidewalks, highways, roads, alleys, parks, public places and public
buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots, or other
unsupervised places, or to ride in or upon, drive or otherwise operate any
automobile, bicycle, or other vehicle, in, upon, over, or through the
streets, alleys, or other public places of the city, between the hours of:



      (1)   10:30 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. of the following day of all days
of the week except on Friday and Saturday, and except that from June 1 to
August 31 of each year, the hours shall be from 11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. of
the following day on all days of the week except on Friday and Saturday; and



      (2)   12:01 a.m to 5:00 a.m. on each Saturday and Sunday,
except that from June 1 to August 31 of each year the hours shall be from
12:30 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. on each Saturday and Sunday.



   (B)   These provisions shall apply unless such person is accompanied
by a parent, guardian, or other adult person having the legal care and
custody of the minor person, or unless the minor person is upon an emergency
errand or legitimate business, directed by his or her parent, guardian, or
legal custodian.  This section does not apply to a minor who is:



      (1)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;



      (2)   Involved in an emergency;



      (3)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or
abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor;



      (4)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly; or



      (5)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of
minority removed in accordance with state law.



(Prior Code, § 6-601)  Penalty, see § 131.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-246



§ 131.02  DUTY OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN.



   It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other adult person
having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 17 years to allow or
permit the minor person to do any of the things prohibited by § 131.01 of
this chapter, unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian,
or other adult person having the legal care and custody of the minor, or
unless the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed
by his or her parent, guardian, or legal custodian.



(Prior Code, § 6-602)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-246



§ 131.03  ARREST CUSTODIAL PROCEDURE.



   No minor person taken into custody under the provisions of § 131.01
shall be confined until he or she has been taken home, or the parent,
guardian, or legal custodian notified, and it has been ascertained whether or
not the minor person is within the control of his or her parent, guardian, or
legal custodian; and if the parent, guardian, or legal custodian shall state
that the minor cannot be controlled by them, then the minor shall be
proceeded against, otherwise the parent, guardian, or custodian shall be
proceeded against.



(Prior Code, § 6-603)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-246



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any persons violating the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be fined as follows.



      (1)   For the first offense, the person shall be fined not
less than $10 nor more than $100.



      (2)   For the second and subsequent offenses, the person shall
be fined not less than $25 nor more than $100.



   (B)   All persons convicted and fined shall stand committed until
the fine and costs are paid.



(Prior Code, § 6-604)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-225, 16-246



TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



      Chapter




         150.   BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS





         151.   ZONING





         152.   SUBDIVISIONS




CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS



Section




Building Codes




   150.010   International Building Code, International Residential
Code, International Plumbing Code, International Mechanical Code,
International Fuel Gas Code, International Property Maintenance Code,
International Existing Building Code, International Energy Conservation Code
adopted by reference



   150.020   Amendments to International Building Code



   150.030   Amendments to International Residential Code



   150.040   Amendments to International Plumbing Code



   150.045   Leaking pipes deemed nuisance



   150.050   Amendments to International Mechanical Code



   150.055   Mechanical permit required



   150.056   Air conditioning or refrigeration effluent discharge



   150.060   Amendments to International Fuel Gas Code



   150.070   Amendments to International Property Maintenance Code



   150.080   Amendments to International Existing Building Code



   150.090   Amendments to International Energy Conservation Code




Building Inspector




   150.200   Creation of office



   150.202   Power and authority; stop work orders



   150.204   Right of entry



   150.206   Permit; certificate of occupancy



   150.208   Duplicate building permits to County Assessor



   150.210   Time of inspection



   150.212   Barricades and lights



   150.220   Means of appeal




Unsafe Buildings




   150.300   Definition



   150.302   Prohibition against unsafe buildings



   150.304   Determination and notice



   150.306   Hearing; appeal of decision



   150.308   Special assessments




Mobile Home Parks and Mobile Homes




   150.335   Mobile home park regulations adopted; purpose



   150.337   Mobile home requirements



   150.338   Conflict of regulations; prevailing terms




Building Moving




   150.355   Application for permit



   150.357   Application review



   150.359   Prerequisites for permit issuance; cost estimate deposit



   150.361   Certificate or policy of insurance for building moving
company




Electricity




   150.380   Overview



   150.382   Electrical Code




Contractor’s License




   150.400   License required



   150.402   Persons exempt from license requirement



   150.404   Application, content, fees



   150.406   Certificate or policy of insurance



   150.408   Revocation of license



   150.410   Unlawful use of license



   150.412   Records retention




Penalty




   150.999   Generally



BUILDING CODES



§ 150.010  INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE, INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE,
INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE, INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE, INTERNATIONAL
FUEL GAS CODE, INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE, INTERNATIONAL
EXISTING BUILDING CODE, INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE ADOPTED BY
REFERENCE.



   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided by specific amendment, the
following publications are hereby adopted, incorporated, and made a part of
this municipal code the same as though spread at large herein:



      (1)   International Building Code, 2012 Edition, as published
by the International Code Council, Inc., hereinafter referred to as the
International Building Code.



      (2)   International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, as
published by the International Code Council, Inc., hereinafter referred to as
the International Residential Code.



      (3)   International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, as published
by the International Code Council, Inc., hereinafter referred to as the
International Plumbing Code.



      (4)   International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, as
published by the International Code Council, Inc., hereinafter referred to as
the International Mechanical Code.



      (5)   International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, as published
by the International Code Council, Inc., hereinafter referred to as the
International Fuel Gas Code.



      (6)   International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition,
as published by the International Code Council, Inc., hereinafter referred to
as the International Property Maintenance Code.



      (7)   International Existing Building Code, 2012 Edition, as
published by the International Code Council, Inc., hereinafter referred to as
the International Existing Building Code.



      (8)   International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 Edition, as
published by the International Code Council, Inc., hereinafter referred to as
the International Energy Conservation Code.



   (B)   The regulations contained in the International Building Code,
the International Residential Code, the International Plumbing Code, the
International Mechanical Code, the International Fuel Gas Code, the
International Property Maintenance Code, the International Existing Building
Code and the International Energy Conservation Code shall be enforced within
the corporate limits of the city and within the unincorporated area two miles
beyond and adjacent to the city's corporate boundaries. One printed copy of
the publications described above shall be filed in the office of the City
Clerk.



(Ord. 2005-2733, passed 7-18-2005; Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 150.020  AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE.



   The International Building Code, 2012 Edition, hereinafter referred to
as the "Code", adopted by the provisions of this chapter, is hereby amended,
altered, changed, and modified as follows:



Section 101.1, Title of the Code is hereby amended by designating the name of
the jurisdiction to be the "City of McCook, Nebraska, a municipal
corporation,"



Section 101.2, Scope of the Code is hereby amended by adding a new paragraph
thereto reading as follows:



Where, in any specific case, different sections of the Municipal Code of the
City of McCook, Nebraska, including the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
McCook, Nebraska, specify different materials, methods of construction or
other requirements, the most restrictive, as determined by the Building
Official shall govern.



Section 103.2, Appointment of the Code is hereby amended to read as follows:



Any reference in this Code to "Building Official" shall mean the City
Manager. The Building Inspector and other assistants, clerks, and employees
appointed by the Building Official to administer this Code shall have such
powers as designated by the Building Official.



Section 103.3 of the Code is hereby deleted.



Section 105.2, Work exempt from permit of the Code is hereby amended to read
as follows:



105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this
Code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in
any manner in violation of the provisions of this Code or any other laws or
ordinances of this jurisdiction. Any individual performing any specific work
that has a total value of three hundred ($300.00) dollars or less shall not
be required to obtain a permit.



Building:



1.  One-story detached accessory structures, used tool and storage sheds,
playhouses, and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 200
square feet.



2.  Fences not over 6 feet high.



3.  Oil derricks.



4.  Retaining walls which are not over 4 feet in height measured from the
bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge
or impound Class I, II or IIIA liquids.



5.  Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not
exceed 5,000 gallons and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not
exceed 2 to 1.



6.  Sidewalks and driveways.



7.  Painting, paneling, papering, tiling, carpeting, replacement of floor
covering, cabinets, counter tops, similar finish work, nonstructural concrete
work, siding repair, and glass replacement.



8.  Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery.



9.  Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches deep.



10.  Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural
purposes, not including service systems.



11.  Swings and other playground equipment.



12.  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project more
than 54 inches from the exterior wall and do not require additional support.



13.  Replacement windows when the same size or smaller and involving no
structural changes.



14.  Roof repair and replacement if less than 25% of roof.



15.  Decks not exceeding 200 square feet in area, that are not more than 30
inches above grade at any point, are not attached to a dwelling and do not
serve the exit door required by Section R311.4.



16.  Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions
not over 5 feet 9 inches in height.



Electrical:



State of Nebraska, State Electrical Inspector regulates all electrical work.



Gas:



1.  Portable heating, cooking or clothes drying appliances.



2.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment
or make such equipment unsafe.



3.  Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping
system and are not interconnected to a power grid.



Mechanical:



1.  Portable heating appliance.



2.  Portable ventilation appliances.



3.  Portable cooling unit.



4.  Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling
equipment regulated by this code.



5.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment
or make such equipment unsafe.



6.  Portable evaporative cooler.



7.  Self-containing refrigeration systems containing 10 pounds or less of
refrigerant or that are actuated by motors of 1 horsepower or less.



8.  Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping
system and are not interconnected to a power grid.



Plumbing:



1.  The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe;
provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste
or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace
the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a
permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.



2.  The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or
fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such
repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves,
pipes or fixtures.



Section 105.2.1, Emergency Repairs is hereby amended to read as follows:



Section 105.2.1 Emergency Repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs
must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be
submitted within the next working business day to the Building Inspector.



Section 105.2.2, Repairs is hereby amended to read as follows:



Section 105.2.2 Repairs. Application or notice to the Building Inspector is
not required for ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps or the
connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently
installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any
wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural
beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means
of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress
requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of,
replace or relocation of any water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader,
gas, solid, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or
other work affecting public health or general safety.



Section 105.2.3, Public service agencies is hereby amended to read as follows:



Section 105.2.3 Public service agencies. A permit shall not be required for
the installation, alteration or repair of generation, transmission,
distribution, metering or other related equipment that is under the ownership
and control of public service agencies by established right.



Section 105.3, Application for permit of the Code is hereby amended to read
as follows:



105.3 Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first
file an application therefore in writing on a form furnished by the Building
and Zoning Department for that purpose. Such application shall:



1.  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is made.



2.  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal
description, street address or similar description that will readily identify
and definitely locate the proposed building or work.



3.  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.



4.  Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as
required in Section 107 and pay the fees set by ordinance of the City Council
and set out in Chapter 38 , Fee Schedule. Where work for which a permit is
required is started prior to obtaining said permit, the Building
Official/Agent may at his/her discretion issue a stop work order until said
permit is obtained and shall levy a penalty in addition to the regular permit
fee in the amount of one hundred ($100.00) dollars.



5.  State the valuation of the proposed work.



6.  Be signed by the applicant, or the applicant's authorized agent.



7.  Give such other data and information as required by the Building
Official/Agent.



8.  For new construction or for existing structures where exterior
dimensions are changed, provide a Certificate of Lot Survey, signed by a
Registered Land Surveyor licensed in the State of Nebraska, certifying that
the lot has been accurately surveyed and that each lot corner has been well
and accurately staked and marked, providing the front, side and rear yard
dimensions requested are less than 125% of minimum yard requirements.



Additional requirements for commercial applications:



1.  Submit a drainage plan based upon a ten year storm event prepared by a
Nebraska Registered Professional Engineer for any proposed use which has a
new roof area in excess of 10,000 square feet or a combination of new roof
and new paved parking in excess of 20,000 square feet. The report shall
include an evaluation of the ability of the proposed water courses, drainage
tiles, storm sewers, culverts and other improvements pertaining to drainage
or flood control to handle the runoff generated by the development of the
land within and above the tract for which the permit is required and the
impact of such drainage on downstream drainage systems. The drainage report
must be approved prior to the issuance of a building permit.



2.  Provide the estimated daily and peak hourly flow as well as the
estimated BOD of the waste as prepared by a Nebraska Registered Professional
Engineer for any proposed use which has an estimated five-day BOD greater
than 250 parts per million by weight or a temperature higher than 150°F
(65°C).



3.  Submit a water distribution report for any proposed use which will
require a new or up sized meter and/or service of two inches (2") or larger
and shall provide estimated annual, peak day, and peak hour use. The water
distribution report must be approved prior to issuance of the building permit.



4.  Provide an erosion control plan for both during and after construction
as prepared by a Nebraska Registered Professional Engineer for any
development or expansion which involves grading (fill or excavation) of any
area greater than 20,000 square feet.



Section 105.5, Expiration is hereby amended to read as follows:



105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on
the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its
issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended
or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced;
provided, however, that no permit shall be valid after two (2) years from the
date of issue.



Section 108.3, Temporary power of the Code is hereby deleted. The State of
Nebraska, State Electrical Inspector regulates all electrical work.



Section 1612.3, Establishment of flood hazard areas is hereby amended to read
as follows:



Section 1612.3 Establishment of flood hazard areas. To establish flood hazard
areas, the applicable governing authority shall adopt a flood hazard map and
supporting data. The flood hazard map shall include, at a minimum, areas of
special flood hazard as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
in an engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for the City of
McCook," dated January 1, 1975, as amended or revised with the accompanying
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)
and related supporting data along with any revisions thereto. The adopted
flood hazard map and supporting data are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be part of this section.



Section 3412.2, Applicability is hereby amended to read as follows:



Section 3412.2 Applicability. Structures existing prior to June 11, 1951 in
which there is work involving additions, alterations or changes of occupancy
shall be made to comply with the requirements of this section or the
provisions of Sections 3403 through 3409.



(Ord. 2005-2733, passed 7-18-2005; Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 150.030  AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE.



   The International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, hereinafter referred
to as the "Code", and adopted by the provision of this chapter, is hereby
amended, altered, changed, and modified as follows:



Section R101.1, Title of the Code is hereby amended by designating the name
of the jurisdiction to be the "City of McCook, Nebraska, a municipal
corporation."



Section R101.2, Scope of the Code is hereby amended by adding a new paragraph
thereto reading as follows:



Where, in any specific case, different sections of the Municipal Code of the
City of McCook, Nebraska, including the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
McCook, Nebraska, specify different materials, methods of construction or
other requirements, the most restrictive, as determined by the Building
Official, shall govern.



Section R103.2, Appointment of the Code is hereby amended to read as follows:



Any reference in this Code to "Building Official" shall mean the City
Manager. The Building Inspector and other assistants, clerks, and employees
appointed by the Building Official to administer this Code shall have such
powers as designated by the Building Official.



Section R103.3 of the Code is hereby deleted.



Section R105.2, Work exempt from permit of the Code is hereby amended to read
as follows:



R105.2 Work exempt from permit. Permits shall not be required for the
following. Exemption from the permit requirements of this code shall not be
deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in
violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of
this jurisdiction. Any individual performing any specific work that has a
total value of three hundred ($300.00) dollars or less shall not be required
to obtain a permit.



Building:



1.  One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds,
playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 200
square feet.



2.  Fences not over 6 feet high.



3.  Retaining walls which are not over 4 feet in height measured from the
bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge.



4.  Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not
exceed 5,000 gallons and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not
exceed 2 to 1.



5.  Sidewalks and driveways.



6.  Painting, paneling, papering, tiling, carpeting, replacement of floor
covering, cabinets, counter tops, similar finish work, nonstructural concrete
work, siding repair, and glass replacement.



7.  Prefabricated swimming pools which are less than 24 inches deep.



8.  Swings and other playground equipment.



9.  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project more
than 54 inches from the exterior wall and do not require additional support.



10.  Replacement windows when the same size or smaller and involving no
structural changes.



11.  Roof repair and replacement if less than 25% of roof.



12.  Decks not exceeding 200 square feet in area, that are not more than 30
inches above grade at any point, are not attached to a dwelling and do not
serve the exit door required by Section 311.4.



Electrical:



State of Nebraska, State Electrical Inspector regulates all electrical work.



Gas:



1.  Portable heating, cooking or clothes drying appliances.



2.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment
or make such equipment unsafe.



3.  Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping
system and are not interconnected to a power grid.



Mechanical:



1.  Portable heating appliance.



2.  Portable ventilation appliances.



3.  Portable cooling unit.



4.  Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling
equipment regulated by this code.



5.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment
or make such equipment unsafe.



6.  Portable evaporative cooler.



7.  Self-containing refrigeration systems containing 10 pounds or less of
refrigerant or that are actuated by motors of 1 horsepower or less.



8.  Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping
system and are not interconnected to a power grid.



Plumbing:



1.  The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe;
provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste
or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace
the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a
permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.



2.  The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or
fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such
repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves,
pipes or fixtures.



Section R105.2.1, Emergency Repairs is hereby amended to read as follows:



Section R105.2.1 Emergency Repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs
must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be
submitted within the next working business day to the Building Inspector.



Section R105.2.2, Repairs is hereby amended to read a follows:



Section R105.2.2 Repairs. Application or notice to the Building Inspector is
not required for ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps or the
connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently
installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any
wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural
beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means
of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress
requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of,
replace or relocation of any water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader,
gas, solid, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or
other work affecting public health or general safety.



Section R105.2.3, Public service agencies is hereby amended to read as
follows:



Section R105.2.3 Public service agencies. A permit shall not be required for
the installation, alteration or repair of generation, transmission,
distribution, metering or other related equipment that is under the ownership
and control of public service agencies by established right.



Section R105.3, Application for permit of the Code is hereby amended to read
as follows:



R105.3 Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first
file an application therefore in writing on a form furnished by the Building
and Zoning Department for that purpose. Such application shall:



1.  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is made.



2.  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal
description, street address or similar description that will readily identify
and definitely locate the proposed building or work.



3.  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.



4.  Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as
required in Section 106.1 and pay the fees set by ordinance of the City
Council and set out in Chapter 38 , Fee Schedule. Where work for which a
permit is required is started prior to obtaining said permit, the Building
Official/Agent may at his/her discretion issue a stop work order until said
permit is obtained and shall levy a penalty in addition to the regular permit
fee in the amount of one hundred ($100.00) dollars.



5.  State the valuation of the proposed work.



6.  Be signed by the applicant, or the applicant's authorized agent.



7.  Give such other data and information as required by the Building
Official/Agent.



8.  For new construction or for existing structures where exterior
dimensions are changed, provide a Certificate of Lot Survey, signed by a
Registered Land Surveyor licensed in the State of Nebraska, certifying that
the lot has been accurately surveyed and that each lot corner has been well
and accurately staked and marked, providing the front, side and rear yard
dimensions requested are less than 125% of minimum yard requirements.



Additional requirements for applications may include:



1.  Submit a drainage plan based upon a ten year storm event prepared by a
Nebraska Registered Professional Engineer for any proposed use which has a
new roof area in excess of 10,000 square feet or a combination of new roof
and new paved parking in excess of 20,000 square feet. The report shall
include an evaluation of the ability of the proposed water courses, drainage
tiles, storm sewers, culverts and other improvements pertaining to drainage
or flood control to handle the runoff generated by the development of the
land within and above the tract for which the permit is required and the
impact of such drainage on downstream drainage systems. The drainage report
must be approved prior to the issuance of a building permit.



2.  Provide the estimated daily and peak hourly flow as well as the
estimated BOD of the waste as prepared by a Nebraska Registered Professional
Engineer for any proposed use which has an estimated five-day BOD greater
than 250 parts per million by weight or a temperature higher than 150°F
(65°C).



3.  Submit a water distribution report for any proposed use which will
require a new or upsized meter and/or service of two inches (2") or larger
and shall provide estimated annual, peak day, and peak hour use. The water
distribution report must be approved prior to issuance of the building permit.



4.  Provide an erosion control plan for both during and after construction
as prepared by a Nebraska Registered Professional Engineer for any
development or expansion which involves grading (fill or excavation) of any
area greater than 20,000 square feet.



Section R105.5, Expiration of the Code is hereby amended to read as follows:



R105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work
on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its
issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended
or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced;
provided, however, that no permit shall be valid after two (2) years from the
date of issue.



Section R107.3, Temporary power of the Code is hereby deleted. The State of
Nebraska, State Electrical Inspector regulates all electrical work.



Table R301.2(1), Design criteria inserted in table.



 


TABLE R3011(1)




CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA




GROUND SNOW LOAD

 

WIND DESIGN

 

SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY

 

SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM

 

WINTER DESIGN TEMP

 

ICE BARRIER UNDERLAY-MENT REQUIRED

 
FLOOD HAZARD
 

AIR FREEZ- ING INDEX

 

MEAN ANNUAL TEMP




Speed (mph)

 

Topo- graphic effects

 

Weathering

 

Frost line depth

 

Termite




25

 

90

 

No

 

A

 

Severe

 

36"

 

Moderate

 

-4

 

Yes

 

**

 

1062

 

52.3




 



**refer to the Red Willow County Flood Plain Administrator



Section R313, Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems of the Code is hereby omitted
in its entirety for townhouses and one- and two-family dwellings.



Section R403, Footings shall have a minimum depth of thirty-six (36) inches
for frost protection.



Section R403.1.4.1, Frost protection of the Code is hereby amended as follows:



Section R403.1.4.1, Frost protection. Carports to follow manufactures
instructions.



Section R502.11.4, Truss design drawings of the Code is hereby amended as
follows:



Section R502.11.4, Truss design drawings is hereby deleted in its entirety
due to being engineered designed.



(Ord. 20052733, passed 7-18-2005; Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 150.040  AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE.



   The International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, hereinafter referred to
as the "Code", and adopted by the provision of this chapter, is hereby
amended, altered, changed, and modified as follows:



Section 101.1, Title of the Code is hereby amended by designating the name of
the jurisdiction to be the "City of McCook, Nebraska, a municipal
corporation."



Section 103.2, Appointment of the Code is hereby amended to read as follows:



Any reference in this Code to "Code Official" shall mean the Building
Official. The Building Inspector and other assistants, clerks, and employees
appointed by the Building Official to administer this Code shall have such
powers as designated by the Building Official.



Section 103.3 of the Code is hereby deleted.



Section 106.6.2, Fee schedule of the Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:



Any person desiring a plumbing permit shall at the time of filing an
application therefore pay to the City of McCook a fee set by ordinance of the
City Council and set forth in Chapter 38 , Fee Schedule.



Section 608.15.4.2, of the code is hereby deleted.



Section 608.16.5, Connections to lawn irrigation systems is hereby amended to
read as follows:



608.16.5 Connections to lawn irrigation systems. The potable water supply to
lawn irrigation systems shall be protected against backflow by a check valve,
an atmospheric-type vacuum breaker, a pressure-type vacuum breaker assembly,
or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. Valves shall
not be installed downstream from an atmospheric vacuum breaker. Where
chemicals are introduced into the system, the potable water supply shall be
protected against backflow by a reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention assembly.



(Ord. 2005-2734, passed 7-18-2005; Ord. 2009-2831, passed 9-21-2009)



Section 903.1, Roof extension is hereby amended to read as follows:



903.1 Roof extension. Open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall be
terminated not less than 12 inches above the roof, except that where a roof
is to be used for any purpose other than weather protection, the vent
extensions shall terminate not less than 7 feet above the roof.



(Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 150.045  LEAKING PIPES DEEMED NUISANCE.



   Leaking water, sewer, or gas pipes or fixtures, whether on public or
private property, shall be deemed a nuisance and shall forthwith be repaired
upon notice from the Building Official/Agent.



(Ord. 2005-2734, passed 7-18-2005; Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 150.050  AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE.



   The International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, hereinafter referred
to as the "Code", and adopted by the provision of this chapter, is hereby
amended, altered, changed, and modified as follows:



Section 101.1, Title of the Code is hereby amended by designating the name of
the jurisdiction to be the "City of McCook, Nebraska, a municipal
corporation."



Section 103.2, Appointment of the Code is hereby amended to read as follows:



Any reference in this Code to "Code Official" shall mean the Building
Official. The Building Inspector and other assistants, clerks, and employees
appointed by the Building Official to administer this Code shall have such
powers as designated by the Building Official.



Section 103.3 of the Code is hereby deleted.



Section 106.5.2, Fee Schedule of the Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:



Any person desiring a mechanical permit shall at the time of filing an
application therefore pay to the City of McCook a fee set by ordinance of the
City Council and set forth herein in Chapter 38 , Fee Schedule.



(Ord. 2005-2735, passed 8-1-2005; Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 150.055  MECHANICAL PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Mechanical work shall not be commenced until a permit has been issued
by the Building Official/Agent. Permits are not required for any portable
heating or cooling or ventilation equipment nor for any replacement of any
mechanical fixture with a new fixture of the same type and capacity being
replaced.



(Ord. 2005-2735, passed 8-1-2005; Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 150.056  AIR CONDITIONING OR REFRIGERATION EFFLUENT DISCHARGE.



   (A)   The effluent from any air conditioning or refrigeration
equipment installed in any building shall be discharged under all applicable
rules and regulations of the Nebraska Department of Environmental quality.



   (B)   The provisions of this section apply to existing installations
of all air conditioning and refrigeration equipment to be installed.



(Neb. RS 18-2307, 18-2312) (Prior Code, § 9-204)  (Ord. 2016-2928, passed
5-16-2016)



§ 150.060  AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE.



   The International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, hereinafter referred to
as the "Code", and adopted by the provision of this chapter, is hereby
amended, altered, changed, and modified as follows:



Section 101.1, Title of the Code is hereby amended by designating the name of
the jurisdiction to be the "City of McCook, Nebraska, a municipal
corporation."



Section 101.2, Scope of the Code is hereby amended by adding a new paragraph
thereto reading as follows:



Where, in any specific case, different sections of the Municipal Code of the
City of McCook, Nebraska, including the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
McCook, Nebraska, specify different materials, methods of construction or
other requirements, the most restrictive, as determined by the Building
Official, shall govern.



Section 103.2, Appointment of the Code is hereby amended to read as follows:



Any reference in this Code to "Code Official" shall mean the Building
Official. The Building Inspector and other assistants, clerks, and employees
appointed by the Building Official to administer this Code shall have such
powers as designated by the Building Official.



Section 103.3 of the Code is hereby deleted.



Section 106.6.2, Fee Schedule of the Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:



Any person desiring a mechanical permit shall at the time of filing an
application therefore pay to the City of McCook a fee set by ordinance of the
City Council and set forth herein in Chapter 38 , Fee Schedule.



(Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 150.070  AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.



   The International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, hereinafter
referred to as the "Code", and adopted by the provision of this chapter, is
hereby amended, altered, changed, and modified as follows:



Section 101.1, Title of the Code is hereby amended by designating the name of
the jurisdiction to be the "City of McCook, Nebraska, a municipal
corporation."



Section 101.2, Scope of the Code is hereby amended by adding a new paragraph
thereto reading as follows:



Where, in any specific case, different sections of the Municipal Code of the
City of McCook, Nebraska, including the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
McCook, Nebraska, specify different materials, methods of construction or
other requirements, the most restrictive, as determined by the Building
Official, shall govern.



Section 103.2, Appointment of the Code is hereby amended to read as follows:



Any reference in this Code to "Code Official" shall mean the Building
Official. The Building Inspector and other assistants, clerks, and employees
appointed by the Building Official to administer this Code shall have such
powers as designated by the Building Official.



Section 103.3, Deputies of the Code is hereby deleted.



Section 103.5, Fee Schedule of the Code is hereby amended to read as follows:



Any person desiring a mechanical permit shall at the time of filing an
application therefore pay to the City of McCook a fee set by ordinance of the
City Council and set forth herein in Chapter 38 , Fee Schedule.



Section 302.4, Weeds is hereby amended to read as follows:



Section 302.4, Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained
free from weeds or plant growth as set forth in Chapter 95, § 95.35 Control
of Weeds, Litter, Stagnant Water.



(Ord. 2005-2736, passed 7-18-2005; Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 150.080  AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE.



   The International Existing Building Code, 2012 Edition, hereinafter
referred to as the "Code", and adopted by the provision of this chapter, is
hereby amended, altered, changed, and modified as follows:



Section 101.1, Title of the Code is hereby amended by designating the name of
the jurisdiction to be the "City of McCook, Nebraska, a municipal
corporation."



Section 101.2, Scope of the Code is hereby amended by adding a new paragraph
thereto reading as follows:



Where, in any specific case, different sections of the Municipal Code of the
City of McCook, Nebraska, including the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
McCook, Nebraska, specify different materials, methods of construction or
other requirements, the most restrictive, as determined by the Building
Official, shall govern.



Section 103.2, Appointment of the Code is hereby amended to read as follows:



Any reference in this Code to "Code Official" shall mean the Building
Official. The Building Inspector and other assistants, clerks, and employees
appointed by the Building Official to administer this Code shall have such
powers as designated by the Building Official.



Section 103.3 of the Code is hereby deleted.



Section 105.2, Work exempt from permit of the Code is hereby amended to read
as follows:



105.2 Work exempt from permit. Permits shall not be required for the
following. Exemption from the permit requirements of this code shall not be
deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in
violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of
this jurisdiction. Any individual performing any specific work that has a
total value of three hundred ($300.00) dollars or less shall not be required
to obtain a permit.



Building:



1.  Sidewalks and driveways.



2.  Painting, paneling, papering, tiling, carpeting, replacement of floor
covering, cabinets, counter tops, similar finish work, nonstructural concrete
work, siding repair, and glass replacement.



3.  Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery.



4.  Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes,
not including service systems.



5.  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project more
than 54 inches from the exterior wall and do not require additional support.



6.  Replacement windows when the same size or smaller and involving no
structural changes.



7.  Roof repair and replacement if less than 25% of roof.



8.  Decks not exceeding 200 square feet in area, that are not more than 30
inches above grade at any point, are not attached to a dwelling and do not
serve the exit door required by Section R311.4.



9.  Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions not
over 5 feet 9 inches in height.



Electrical:



State of Nebraska, State Electrical Inspector regulates all electrical work.



Gas:



1.  Portable heating, cooking or clothes drying appliances.



2.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment
or make such equipment unsafe.



Mechanical:



1.  Portable heating appliance.



2.  Portable ventilation appliances.



3.  Portable cooling unit.



4.  Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling
equipment regulated by this code.



5.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment
or make such equipment unsafe.



6.  Portable evaporative cooler.



7.  Self-containing refrigeration systems containing 10 pounds or less of
refrigerant or that are actuated by motors of 1 horsepower or less.



Plumbing:



1.  The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe;
provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste
or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace
the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a
permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.



2.  The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or
fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such
repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves,
pipes or fixtures.



Section 105.2.1, Emergency Repairs is hereby amended to read as follows:



Section 105.2.1 Emergency Repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs
must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be
submitted within the next working business day to the Building Inspector.



Section 105.2.2, Repairs is hereby amended to read as follows:



Section 105.2.2, Repairs. Application or notice to the Building Inspector is
not required for ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps or the
connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently
installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any
wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural
beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means
of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress
requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of,
replace or relocation of any water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader,
gas, solid, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or
other work affecting public health or general safety.



Section 105.2.3, Public service agencies is hereby amended to read as follows:



Section 105.2.3, Public service agencies. A permit shall not be required for
the installation, alteration or repair of generation, transmission,
distribution, metering or other related equipment that is under the ownership
and control of public service agencies by established right.



Section 105.3, Application for permit of the Code is hereby amended to read
as follows:



105.3 Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first
file an application therefore in writing on a form furnished by the Building
and Zoning Department for that purpose. Such application shall:



1.  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is made.



2.  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal
description, street address or similar description that will readily identify
and definitely locate the proposed building or work.



3.  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.



4.  Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as
required in Section 107 and pay the fees set by ordinance of the City Council
and set out in Chapter 38 , Fee Schedule. Where work for which a permit is
required is started prior to obtaining said permit, the Building
Official/Agent may at his/her discretion issue a stop work order until said
permit is obtained and shall levy a penalty in addition to the regular permit
fee in the amount of one hundred ($100.00) dollars.



5.  State the valuation of the proposed work.



6.  Be signed by the applicant, or the applicant's authorized agent.



7.  Give such other data and information as required by the Building
Official/Agent.



8.  For new construction or for existing structures where exterior
dimensions are changed, provide a Certificate of Lot Survey, signed by a
Registered Land Surveyor licensed in the State of Nebraska, certifying that
the lot has been accurately surveyed and that each lot comer has been well
and accurately staked and marked, providing the front, side and rear yard
dimensions requested are less than 125% of minimum yard requirements.



Additional requirements for commercial applications:



1.  Submit a drainage plan based upon a ten year storm event prepared by a
Nebraska Registered Professional Engineer for any proposed use which has a
new roof area in excess of 10,000 square feet or a combination of new roof
and new paved parking in excess of 20,000 square feet. The report shall
include an evaluation of the ability of the proposed water courses, drainage
tiles, storm sewers, culverts and other improvements pertaining to drainage
or flood control to handle the runoff generated by the development of the
land within and above the tract for which the permit is required and the
impact of such drainage on downstream drainage systems. The drainage report
must be approved prior to the issuance of a building permit.



2.  Provide the estimated daily and peak hourly flow as well as the
estimated BOD of the waste as prepared by a Nebraska Registered Professional
Engineer for any proposed use which has an estimated five-day BOD greater
than 250 parts per million by weight or a temperature higher than 150°F
(65°C).



3.  Submit a water distribution report for any proposed use which will
require a new or upsized meter and/or service of two inches (2") or larger
and shall provide estimated annual, peak day, and peak hour use. The water
distribution report must be approved prior to issuance of the building permit.



4.  Provide an erosion control plan for both during and after construction
as prepared by a Nebraska Registered Professional Engineer for any
development or expansion which involves grading (fill or excavation) of any
area greater than 20,000 square feet.



Section 105.5, Expiration is hereby amended to read as follows:



105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on
the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its
issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended
or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced;
provided, however, that no permit shall be valid after two (2) years from the
date of issue.



Section 107.3, Temporary power of the Code is hereby deleted. The State of
Nebraska, State Electrical Inspector regulates all electrical work.



Section 1401.2, Applicability is hereby amended to read as follows:



Section 1401.2, Applicability. Structures existing prior to June 11, 1951 in
which there is work involving additions, alterations or changes of occupancy
shall be made to comply with the requirements of this section or the
provisions of Chapters 5 through 13.



(Ord. 2005-2733, passed 7-18-2005; Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 150.090  AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.



   The International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 Edition, hereinafter
referred to as the "Code", and adopted by the provision of this chapter, is
hereby amended, altered, changed, and modified as follows:



Section C101.1, Title of the Code is hereby amended by designating the name
of the jurisdiction to be the "City of McCook, Nebraska, a municipal
corporation."



Section C101.2, Scope of the Code is hereby amended by adding new paragraphs
thereto reading as follows:



Any reference in this Code to "Code Official" shall mean the Building
Official. The Building Inspector and other assistants, clerks, and employees
appointed by the Building Official to administer this Code shall have such
powers as designated by the Building Official.



The Code is hereby amended by adding a new section, to be numbered and titled
Section C101.2.4, Exempt buildings, which reads as follows:



C101.2.4 Exempt buildings. The following shall be exempt from this Code:



(1) Any building (a) listed on the National Register of Historic Places, (b)
determined to be eligible for the National Register of Historic Places by the
State Historic Preservation Officer, or (e) designated as an individual
landmark or heritage preservation site by a municipality or located within a
designated landmark or heritage preservation district.



(Ord. 2005-2733, passed 7-18-2005; Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



BUILDING INSPECTOR



§ 150.200  CREATION OF OFFICE.



   (A)   The Building Inspector, as appointed by and under the
direction of the City Manager, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce
all the provisions of the municipal code pertaining to building construction
and repair under the direction of the City Manager. For this purpose, he or
she shall have policing powers. Under the direction of the City Manager and
upon presentation of proper credentials, the Building Inspector, or his or
her duly authorized representative, may enter at all reasonable times any
building, structure, or premise to perform any duty imposed upon the City
Manager by any Building Code, Residential Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical
Code, Fuel Gas Code, Property Maintenance Code, Existing Building Code,
Energy Conservation Code, or Housing Code duly adopted by reference in the
municipal code, or any provision of the municipal code.



   (B)   The Building Inspector, acting in good faith and without
malice in the discharge of his or her duties, shall not thereby render
himself or herself personally liable and is hereby relieved from all personal
liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as the result
of any act or omission in the discharge of his or her duties. Any suit
brought against the Building Inspector, because of an alleged act or omission
performed by him or her in the enforcement of any provision of the municipal
codes relating to buildings or building construction shall be defended by the
legal department of the municipality until final termination of the
proceedings. The Building Inspector may request, and shall receive so far as
may be necessary in the discharge of his or her duties, the assistance and
cooperation of other officials of the municipality. The Building Inspector
shall have additional duties, carry out tasks, and make reports as the City
Manager may prescribe from time to time.



(Ord. 2005-2739, passed 7-18-2005; Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 150.202  POWER AND AUTHORITY; STOP WORK ORDERS.



   (A)   Under the direction of the City Manager, the Building
Inspector shall be the municipal official who shall have the duty of
enforcing all building and housing regulations as herein prescribed. He or
she shall inspect all buildings repaired, altered, built, or moved in the
municipality as often as necessary to ensure compliance with all municipal
ordinances.



   (B)   Whenever any building or construction work is being done
contrary to the provisions of the codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner,
the Building Inspector at his discretion, may order the work stopped by
notice in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing the work
to be done. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is
authorized to resume. Any person shall immediately stop, or cause to be
stopped, the work until authorization is received from the Building Inspector
to continue the work. If the stop order is an oral one, it shall be followed
by a written stop order within one business day. The written order may be
served by any municipal police officer.



   (C)   When any structure is in a dangerous condition or the building
is being used contrary to the provisions of the laws of the municipality, the
Building Inspector, under the direction of the City Manager, may order the
use discontinued or the structure, or portion thereof in violation, vacated
as set forth in Chapter 150, Unsafe Buildings, §§ 150.300 et al.



(Ord. 2005-2739, passed 7-18-2005; Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 150.204  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to allow the Building
Inspector entry into any building or structure where the work of
construction, alteration, repair, or relocation is taking place for the
purpose of making official inspections at any reasonable hour.



(Prior Code, § 9-102) (Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999.



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-234



§ 150.206  PERMIT; CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   No building construction, alteration, repair, or demolition requiring a
permit pursuant to this chapter shall be commenced until the permit holder,
or his or her agent, shall have posted a permit card in a conspicuous place
on the front of the premises where the work is being performed. The permit
card shall be maintained in the place by the permit holder until a
certificate of occupancy has been signed by the Building Inspector and no
building shall be occupied in any part thereof until the certificate of
occupancy has been issued by the Building Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 9-103) (Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-234



§ 150.208  DUPLICATE BUILDING PERMITS TO COUNTY ASSESSOR.



   Whenever a building permit is issued for the erection, alteration, or
repair of any building within the municipality's jurisdiction, and the
improvement is $2,500 or more, a duplicate of the permit shall be issued to
the County Assessor.



(Neb. RS 18-1743) (Prior Code, § 9-203) (Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 150.210  TIME OF INSPECTION.



   Under the direction of the City Manager, the Building Inspector, upon
notification from the permit holder or his or her agent, shall make those
inspections required in the International Building Code, International
Residential Code, International Plumbing Code, International Mechanical Code,
International Fuel Gas Code, International Property Maintenance Code,
International Existing Building Code, and the International Energy
Conservation Code, and shall either approve that portion of the construction
as completed, or shall notify the permit holder, or his or her agent, that
the work fails to comply with the requirements of the municipal code.



(Ord. 2005-2739, passed 7-18-2005; Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 150.212  BARRICADES AND LIGHTS.



   It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant, or lessee causing the
construction, demolition, or moving of any building or improvement within the
municipality to have during the work all excavations, open basements,
building materials, and debris protected by suitable guards or barricades by
day, and by warning lights at night. The failure, neglect, or refusal of
persons to erect the guards shall constitute a violation of this section and
the Municipal Police or the Building Inspector shall stop all work until
guards are erected and maintained as required.



(Prior Code, § 9-106) (Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-246



   Similar to state law provisions, see Neb. RS 16-232



§ 150.220  MEANS OF APPEAL.



   (A)   The Building and Housing Code Advisory and Appeals Board shall
hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the
Building Official/Agent relative to the application and interpretation of the
codes or the suitability of alternate materials and methods of installation.
The Building and Housing Code Advisory and Appeals Board shall have no
authority to waive requirements of the codes.



   (B)   Any person who is aggrieved by any decision of the Building
Official/Agent relating to suitability of alternate materials, methods of
construction, or interpretations of any provisions of this code may appeal
such decision to the Building and Housing Code Advisory and Appeals Board by
filing an appeal on forms furnished by the Building Official/Agent within 30
days from the date of such decision. Review of an application for appeal
shall be based on a claim that the true intent of the codes or the rules
legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions
of this code do not apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately
satisfied by other means. The filing of a completed appeals form, along with
the payment of the prescribed fee, shall be sufficient for the purpose of
commencing an appeal proceeding hereunder.



(Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



UNSAFE BUILDINGS



§ 150.300  DEFINITION.



   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      UNSAFE BUILDING. Any building, mobile home, shed, fence, or other
human-made structure:



         (a)   Which is dangerous to the public health because of
its condition, and which may cause or aid in the spread of disease or injury
to the health of the occupants of it or neighboring structures;



         (b)   Which because of faulty construction, age, lack of
proper repair, or any other cause is especially liable to fire and
constitutes or creates a fire hazard;



         (c)   Which by reason of faulty construction or any
other cause is liable to cause injury or damage by the collapse or fall of
all or any part of the structure; or



         (d)   Which is 50% damaged, decayed, or deteriorated
from its original condition.



   (B)   Any unsafe building in the municipality is hereby declared to
be a nuisance.



(Neb. RS 16-234) (Prior Code, § 9-801) (Ord. 2009-2822, passed 3-16-2009;
Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-234



§ 150.302  PROHIBITION AGAINST UNSAFE BUILDINGS.



   It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any unsafe
building in the municipality and it shall be unlawful for the owner,
occupant, or person in custody of any dangerous building to permit the same
to remain in an unsafe condition or to occupy the building or permit it to be
occupied while it is in an unsafe condition.



(Prior Code, § 9-802) (Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-234



§ 150.304  DETERMINATION AND NOTICE.



   (A)   Whenever the Building Inspector, the Fire Official, the Health
Official, or the governing body shall be of the opinion that any building,
mobile home, or structure in the municipality is an unsafe building, he or
she shall file a written statement to this effect with the City Clerk, The
Clerk shall thereupon cause the property to be posted accordingly, and shall
file a copy of the determination in the office of the County Register of
Deeds, and shall serve written notice upon the owner thereof, and upon the
occupant thereof, if any, by certified mail or by personal service. The
notice shall state that the building has been declared to be in an unsafe
condition, and that the condition(s) must be remedied within 60 days from the
date of receipt.



   (B)   Consideration shall include, but not be limited to, the
following standards in determining whether an unsafe building or public
nuisance shall be repaired, altered, rehabilitated, demolished or removed per
the inspection and recommendation of the Building Inspector:



      (1)   If the building, mobile home, or other structure or any
part thereof can reasonably be repaired, altered, or rehabilitated so that it
will no longer exist in violation of the city code or Building Code, as
amended and adopted, it shall be ordered repaired, altered, or rehabilitated.



      (2)   If the building, mobile home, or the structure or any
part thereof is in such condition that it cannot reasonably be repaired so
that it will no longer exist in violation of the city code or Building Code,
as amended and adopted, it shall be ordered demolished or removed.



      (3)   In any case where a building, mobile home, or other
structure or any part thereof is 50% damaged, decayed or deteriorated from
its original value or structure, it shall be demolished and removed.



      (4)   In any case where a building, mobile home, or other
structure or any part thereof is a fire hazard existing in violation of the
city code or Building Code as amended or adopted, or the state statutes,
including but not limited to the Life Safety Code, it shall be demolished or
removed.



   (C)   The 60 day notice may be in the following terms:



To                                                
(owner-occupant of premises) of the premise known and described as      
                                                   
      .



You are hereby notified that                                
      (describe building) on the premises above mentioned has been
determined to be an unsafe building and a nuisance after inspection by    
                                      . The causes for
this decision are                                        
        (here insert the facts as to the dangerous condition).



You must remedy this condition or demolish the building within 60 days from
the date of receipt of this notice or the municipality will proceed to do so.
Appeal of this determination may be made to the Building Advisory and Appeals
Board, by filing with the City Clerk within ten days from the date of receipt
of this notice a request for a hearing.



   (D)   If the person receiving the notice has not complied therewith
within 60 days from the date of receipt of the notice or taken an appeal from
the determination of the officer or employee finding that a dangerous
building exists within ten days from the time when this notice is served upon
the person by personal service or certified mail, the Building Inspector may,
after the 60 day time period has expired, upon orders of the governing body,
proceed to remedy the condition or demolish the unsafe building.



(Prior Code, § 9-803) (Ord. 97-2382, passed 7-7-1997; Ord. 2009-2823, passed
4-6-2009; Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 150.306  HEARING; APPEAL OF DECISION.



   (A)   Upon receiving the notice to repair or demolish the building,
the owner of the building, within ten days of the receipt of the notice, may
in writing to the City Clerk request a hearing before the Building and
Housing Code Advisory and Appeals Board, to present reasons why the building
should not be repaired or demolished. The Building and Housing Code Advisory
and Appeals Board shall grant the hearing within ten days from the date of
receiving the request. A written notice of the Building and Housing Code
Advisory and Appeals Board's decision following the hearing shall be sent to
the property owner by certified mail. If the Building and Housing Code
Advisory and Appeals Board rejects the appeal, the owner shall have 60 days
from the sending of the decision to remedy the condition or demolish the
building. If, after the 60 day period, the owner has not remedied the
condition or demolished the building, the Building Inspector shall proceed to
cause the work to be done.



   (B)   The property owner may appeal the decision of the Building and
Housing Code Advisory and Appeals Board to the governing body if done in
writing within seven days of the receipt of the decision of the Building and
Housing Code Advisory and Appeals Board by filing the same with the City
Clerk. A hearing shall be held before the governing body within ten days of
the receipt of the notice of appeal by the property owner. Written notice of
the governing body's decision following the hearing shall be sent to the
property owner by certified mail.



   (C)   If the governing body rejects the appeal of the property
owner, the owner shall have 60 days from the sending of the decision to
remedy the condition or demolish the building. If, after the 60 day period,
the owner has not remedied the condition or demolished the building, the
Building Inspector shall proceed to cause the work to be done.



   (D)   The property owner may appeal the decision to the appropriate
court for adjudication during which proceedings the decision of the governing
body shall be stayed.



(Prior Code, § 9-804) (Ord. 97-2382, passed 7-7-1997; Ord. 2016-2928, passed
5-16-2016)



§ 150.308  SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.



   (A)   In case the owner of any building or structure shall fail,
neglect, or refuse to comply with notice by or on behalf of the municipality
to repair, rehabilitate, or demolish and remove a building or structure which
is unsafe and a public nuisance, the municipality may proceed with the work
specified in the notice to the property owner. A statement of the cost of the
work shall be transmitted to the governing body.



   (B)   The governing body may:



      (1)   Levy the cost as a special assessment against the lot or
real estate upon which the building or structure is located. The special
assessment shall be a lien on the real estate and shall be collected in the
manner provided for special assessments; or



      (2)   Collect the cost from the owner of the building or
structure and enforce the collection by a civil action in any court of
competent jurisdiction.



(Prior Code, § 9-805) (Ord. 97-2382, passed 7-7-1997; Ord. 2016-2928, passed
5-16-2016)



MOBILE HOME PARKS AND MOBILE HOMES



§ 150.335  MOBILE HOME PARK REGULATIONS ADOPTED; PURPOSE.



   For the purpose of setting minimum standards to promote the public
health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare
of the community, to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers, to
prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population,
and to facilitate the adequate provisions of transportation, water, sewerage,
parks, and other public requirements, the Mobile Home Park Regulations for
the city, as published in pamphlet form, have been adopted by Ordinance 1226,
June 5, 1972. Three copies of the adopted Mobile Home Park Regulations shall
be kept on file with the City Clerk and available for inspection by any
member of the public during office hours.



(Prior Code, § 10-601) (Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 150.337  MOBILE HOME REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All mobile homes shall be adequately skirted, tied down,
connected to utilities, landscaped to promote drainage and have sidewalks and
otherwise meet all applicable codes and regulations of the city prior to
issuance of a permit of occupancy by the owner or others.



   (B)   Set-down permits fee as set out in Chapter 38, Fee Schedule.



   (C)   Permit for set-down must be obtained and paid for before the
issuance of other permits.



   (D)   No mobile home shall have any building attachments, provided
that a mobile home may have an enclosed entryway attached, such entryway to
consist of not more than 50 square feet and shall be located only at the main
entry door to the mobile home. The entryway shall not be used for any other
purpose other than as an entryway between the outdoors and the main door of
the mobile home.



   (E)   Provided further that a mobile home may also have a patio or
carport cover attached to be entirely open on all sides except for the side
attached to the mobile home, and to be constructed of non-combustible
materials with a steel or metal frame. The area may never be enclosed and any
enclosure must be removed immediately upon request by the Building Inspector.



   (F)   Provided further that all attachments must be approved by the
city, meet all zoning and setback regulations, and have had a valid building
permit issued for their construction and erection before they will be allowed
to be installed and constructed.



   (G)   For mobile homes built prior to June 15, 1976, a label
certifying compliance to the Standard for Mobile Homes, NFPA 501, in effect
at the time of manufacture is required.



(Prior Code, § 9-902) (Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 19-922, 71-4610, 71-4611



§ 150.338  CONFLICT OF REGULATIONS; PREVAILING TERMS.



   In any case where a provision of this subchapter is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health
ordinance or code of the city existing on the effective date of this
subchapter, the provision which, in the judgment of the Health Officer,
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the
health and safety of the people, shall prevail. In any case where a provision
of this subchapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other
ordinance or code of the city existing on the effective date of this
subchapter, this subchapter shall be deemed to prevail, and other ordinances
or codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be
found in conflict with this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 9-907) (Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 19-922, 71-4610, 71-4611



BUILDING MOVING



§ 150.355  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to move any
building or structure within the municipality without written permit to do
so. Application may be made to the Building Inspector, and shall include the
present and future location of the building to be moved, the proposed route,
the equipment to be used, a general statement of the type of repairs,
remodeling, construction, or other work that the applicant intends to do on
the building, and other information as the Building Inspector may require.
The application shall be accompanied by a certificate issued by the County
Treasurer to the effect that all the provisions regulating the moving of
buildings have been complied with on the part of the owner of the real estate
upon which the building is presently located. The applicant shall also
furnish the Building Inspector with the certificate of an insect exterminator
stating that he or she inspected the building and found it free of termites
or that any found had been effectively exterminated. In addition, applicant
shall furnish satisfactory evidence to the Building Inspector that all
plumbing, mechanical and electrical wiring in the building conform to the
Plumbing, Mechanical and Electrical Codes of the city.



(Prior Code, § 9-701) (Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-209, 16-210, 60-6,299



§ 150.357  APPLICATION REVIEW.



   All applications for permits to move buildings into or within the city
or its two-mile jurisdiction made pursuant to this subchapter shall be
submitted to the City Council for review before issuance. The person making
application for a permit shall, at least two weeks in advance of the hearing
before the City Council thereon, post a written notice of the pendency of his
or her application and the date of the hearing thereon, which notice shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the property to which he or she proposes to
move the building or structure. The notice shall state the address or
location of the building sought to be moved. The City Council shall make its
determination as to whether or not a permit should be granted using as
criteria for judgment the items set forth in this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 9-702) (Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-209, 16-210, 60-6,299



§ 150.359  PREREQUISITES FOR PERMIT ISSUANCE; COST ESTIMATE DEPOSIT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any one to proceed with moving along
the streets or alleys or elsewhere in the city, any building or structure of
such height or dimension as to come in contact with any telephone, or
electric light wires, or poles or fixtures, or either, without first
presenting to the City Clerk a written statement duly signed by the Public
Works Director, the City Engineer, and the person or the local manager of the
company whose wires or poles or fixtures, or any of them, may be affected or
disturbed as aforesaid, setting forth the estimated expense incident to the
necessary changing, cutting, removing, raising, lowering, or handling of the
wires or poles or fixtures in the instance of each person or company so
affected, also specifying the streets and alleys to be used, and, at the same
time, depositing with the City Clerk the amount of the aforesaid estimate,
and receiving a written license and permit, and paying the City Clerk the sum
set by ordinance of the City Council and set out in Chapter 38, Fee Schedule.



   (B)   Provided, that the aforesaid estimated compensation to the
person or company whose wires or poles or fixtures may be affected by the
moving of the building or structure shall in no way preclude recovery from
the owner of the building or structure so moved, of any and all damages that
may be caused in excess of the amount estimated and deposited as aforesaid,
and which shall be paid over to the person or company that may be entitled
thereto on the completion of the removal, and it is hereby made unlawful for
anyone, except some employee or representative of the person or company whose
wires or poles or fixtures, or any of them, may be disturbed or affected by
the moving of the building or structure, to attempt to, or change, cut,
remove, raise or lower or handle in any way any of the wires or poles or
fixtures.



(Prior Code, § 9-703) (Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)  Penalty, see §
150.999



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-209, 16-210, 60-6,299



§ 150.361  CERTIFICATE OR POLICY OF INSURANCE FOR BUILDING MOVING COMPANY.



   (A)   Any person engaged in the business of moving houses or other
buildings shall provide a Certificate or Policy of Insurance in the amount of
$300,000, conditioned for the payment of any damages sustained by the city
resulting from the moving of any building over and across any street, alley,
crossing, or culvert within the city.



   (B)   Any license required by this section may be sued upon for the
recovery of any and all damages sustained by any individual or corporation,
and also any damages sustained by the city to any street, alley, culvert, or
crossing caused by the moving of any building over the crossings or culverts,
either under the supervision of the principal or his or her agents or
employees.



(Prior Code, § 9-704) (Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 16-209, 16-210, 60-6,299



ELECTRICITY



§ 150.380  OVERVIEW.



   (A)   Nebraska Statutes governing electrical licensing and
inspection are known as the Nebraska State Electrical Act, Neb. RS 81-2101
through 81-2143. No alteration or change shall be made in the electrical
wiring or apparatus located within a building for use in connection with the
production of electric light, heat, or power, nor shall any electric wiring
or apparatus be installed in any building without first securing from the
State Electrical Inspector a permit therefore, nor shall any change be made
in any wiring or apparatus after inspection, without notifying the State
Electrical Inspector and securing a permit therefore.



   (B)   The Nebraska State Electrical Board rules consist of 19
promulgated rules adopted by the Board to enable it to carry out its mission
of public safety through electrical licensing and inspection.



(Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 150.382  ELECTRICAL CODE.



   (A)   The minimum electrical wiring standard shall be the 2014
National Electrical Code, National Fire Protection Association Publication
Number 70-2014, as adopted in whole or amended in part by the State
Electrical Board which is incorporated herein by reference and filed with the
Secretary of State. The effective date of this rule is April 10, 2014.



   (B)   The provisions of the Code adopted by this section shall apply
and be enforced in the unincorporated area two miles beyond and adjacent to
the corporate boundaries of this city with the same force and effect as if
the outlying area were within the corporate boundaries of this city, provided
no provision shall be extended or applied so as to prohibit, prevent or
interfere with the conduct of existing farming, livestock operations,
businesses, or industry.



   (C)   The State Electrical Inspector shall be the administrative
authority who shall administer and enforce the Code and shall take such
actions as may be reasonable and necessary to secure compliance with it. He
or she shall appoint such Electrical Inspectors, assistants, clerks, and
other employees as may be required to administer the Code and fix their
compensation.



(Prior Code, § 9-402) (Ord. 1781, passed 9-16-1985; Ord. 2016-2928, passed
5-16-2016)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 19-922, 81-2104, 81-2124, 81-2125



CONTRACTOR'S LICENSE



§ 150.400  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person or corporation shall engage in the practice of general
contractor, roofing contractor, plumbing contractor, mechanical contractor,
sign contractor, demolition contractor or structure moving contractor in the
city without first having obtained a license to engage in any such practice
and without giving the proof of surety as hereinafter provided for in this
chapter.



(Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 150.402  PERSONS EXEMPT FROM LICENSE REQUIREMENT.



   Any bona fide owner of a residential or commercial structure, including
the usual accessory structures, shall be exempt from the contractor's
licensing requirements and may be granted a building permit to improve said
structure provided he or she personally purchases and installs all materials
used, and further provided, all work shall be inspected and approved by the
city.



(Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 150.404  APPLICATION, CONTENT, FEES.



   Any person or persons desiring to engage in the practice of general
contractor, roofing contractor, plumbing contractor, mechanical contractor,
sign contractor, demolition contractor or structure moving contractor shall
first make application to the City Building Inspector for the license(s) to
engage in such practice(s). Such application for a contractor's license shall
contain the following information: (1) the name and address of the applicant,
(2) the business location of the applicant, (3) the telephone number of the
place of business, and (4) proof of a certificate or policy of insurance; and
if a partnership, shall include the names, correct mailing addresses, and
telephone numbers of all partners together with such other information as may
be required. Upon the filing of such application, the City Building Inspector
shall provide such application to the Building and Housing Code Advisory and
Appeals Board to make such investigation as they may deem necessary as to the
qualifications of the individual(s) and any employees, and if the applicant
and employees are found to be qualified to engage in such practice and
possessed of sufficient skill, experience, and training to engage in such
practice in compliance with the applicable model codes of the city, after
which shall approve or disapprove the application. If approved, the City
Building Inspector shall authorize the issuance of a license to the
individual(s). Such application shall be accompanied by a registration fee of
$75 for a new applicant or $25 for a renewal application. Registration shall
run concurrently with licenses, expiring on the last day of December during
the year following the date of issuance and shall not be assignable.



(Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 150.406  CERTIFICATE OR POLICY OF INSURANCE.



   Every person or company applying for a license shall present to the
City Building Inspector, to be filed, a Certificate or Policy of Insurance in
the amount of $300,000, minimum, public liability insurance for each license
held. Further that the issuing insurance company agrees to provide 30 day
written notice in the event of expiration or of proposed cancellation of the
insurance policy. Surety shall be conditioned that the principal, and all
employees, will comply with all the ordinances of the city relating to model
codes and to hold the city harmless on account of any damages arising from
faulty performance or neglect of duty by the holder of such license.



(Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 150.408  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked
by the City Building Inspector upon proof that the licensee(s) has failed,
neglected, or refused to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or
with other ordinances of the city relating to or regulating the particular
type of work for which such license was granted: Provided, that no such
license shall be revoked without the giving of a written notice of the
intention to revoke such license and without giving such licensee a full
opportunity to be heard before the Building and Housing Code Advisory and
Appeals Board as to any complaint made against him or her. Upon the
revocation of any license granted under the provisions of this chapter, no
refund shall be made of any part of the license fee previously paid by the
licensee.



(Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 150.410  UNLAWFUL USE OF LICENSE.



   No license issued hereunder shall be assignable or transferable, and it
shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit his, her or its license to be
used or allow permits to be taken out in the name of such licensee by any
other person, firm, or corporation. Any licensed contractor that hires a
subcontractor(s) shall provide the City Building Inspector a copy of the
sub-contractor(s) Certificate or Policy of Insurance.



(Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



§ 150.412  RECORDS RETENTION.



   The Building and Zoning Department, shall keep a complete record of all
licenses issued, the names of all helpers and apprentices, and certificate or
policy of insurance registered under the provisions of this chapter and shall
cause suitable records of all official actions taken hereunder to be kept and
preserved.



(Ord. 2016-2928, passed 5-16-2016)



PENALTY



§ 150.999  GENERALLY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions
of any section of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Unless otherwise specified in the particular section for which the person
stands convicted of violating, the penalty for the violation shall be in any
amount not to exceed $1,000 and/or imprisonment for any length of time not to
exceed three months, in the discretion of the court, provided whenever any
section of this chapter shall declare a nuisance, a violation of that section
shall be penalized by a fine of not more than $1,000, in which case a new
violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of the
failure to comply.



(Prior Code, § 9-1201)



   (C)   (1)   Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this
chapter, the municipality may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate
the same, in the manner provided by law.



      (2)   Whenever, in any action, it is established that a
nuisance exists, the court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed,
enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the case.



(Prior Code, § 9-1202) (Ord. 2003-2650, passed 1-20-2003; Ord. 2016-2928,
passed 5-16-2016)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 18-1914, 18-1918, 29-835, 48-434, 48-442,
48-2114, 60-6,299, 71-4608, 71-4631, 71-4632



CHAPTER 151:  ZONING



Section



   151.01   Zoning regulations adopted by reference



§ 151.01  ZONING REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   For the purpose of setting minimum standards to promote the public
health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare
of the community, and to lessen congestion in the streets, to secure safety
from fire, panic, and other dangers, to provide adequate light and air, to
prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population,
and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage,
schools, parks, and other public requirements, the Zoning Regulations for the
city, as published in pamphlet form, have been adopted by Ordinance No.
2013-2897, November 18, 2013. Three copies of the adopted Zoning Regulations
shall be kept on file with the City Clerk and available for inspection by any
member of the public during office hours.



(Prior Code, § 11-101)  (Ord. 2016-2931, passed 5-16-2016)



CHAPTER 152:  SUBDIVISIONS



Section



   152.01   Subdivision regulations adopted by reference



§ 152.01  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   To provide for harmonious development of the municipality and its
environs; for the integration of new subdivision streets with other existing
or planned streets or with other features of the Comprehensive Plan; for
adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light and air; for the
distribution of population and traffic in a manner which will tend to create
conditions favorable to health, safety, convenience, or prosperity; to insure
conformance of subdivision plans with the capital improvement program of the
municipality; and, to secure equitable handling of all subdivision plats by
providing uniform procedures and standards for observance by subdividers and
the Planning Commission and governing body, the Subdivision Regulations for
the city, as published in pamphlet form, have been adopted by Ordinance No.
2014-2900, January 20, 2014. Three copies of the adopted Subdivision
Regulations shall be kept on file with the City Clerk and available for
inspection by any member of the public during office hours.



(Prior Code, § 11-201)  (Ord. 2016-2932, passed 5-16-2016)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



      Table




         I.   FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS




TABLE I:  FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


-
 
- -
 
Granting a franchise to Horizon Communication Corp. for the term of 20 years
to provide CATV services. (Prior Code, §§ 10-801 through 10-816; Appendix
IX, CATV Rates)


-
 
- -
 
Granting a franchise to Kansas-Nebraska Natural Gas Company, Inc., for the
term of 25 years to provide natural gas services. (Prior Code, §§ 10-901
through 10-910; Appendix X, Natural Gas Rates)


 
 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Nebraska Revised Statutes





References to Prior Code





References to Resolutions





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO NEBRASKA REVISED STATUTES



 

Neb. RS Section
 
Code Section




1-605
 
90.25


6-207
 
94.29


9-646
 
117.02


11-101
 
30.060


11-103 - 11-118
 
30.002


11-104
 
30.002


13-403
 
31.59


13-504
 
33.02


13-505
 
33.02


13-506
 
33.02, 33.03


13-507
 
33.03


13-508
 
33.04


13-509
 
33.04


13-518 - 13-522
 
33.03, 33.04


13-903
 
33.25


16-101
 
31.01


16-115
 
30.041, 31.02


16-201
 
31.03, 31.56


16-202
 
31.56


16-205
 
36.01 - 36.06, 113.02, 113.03, 113.30 - 113.38, 114.01 - 114.09


16-206
 
90.05, 90.24, 90.25, 90.28, 90.29


16-207
 
31.57, 31.58, 94.27, 94.30, 94.32 - 94.34, 96.05, 96.06, 96.22, 96.25 - 96.27


16-209
 
94.31, 94.33, 150.355, 150.357, 150.359, 150.361


16-210
 
31.57, 31.58, 94.28 - 94.30, 94.32 - 94.34, 94.36, 150.355, 150.357, 150.359,
150.361


16-219
 
30.002


16-222
 
53.01, 91.02, 91.11, 91.19 - 91.22


16-225
 
30.043, 51.999, 52.10, 53.15, 95.99, 131.99


16-226
 
91.07


16-227
 
91.08, 91.55, 95.20, 95.21, 95.23, 95.99, 130.01, 130.31, 130.99


16-228
 
95.20, 95.21, 95.23, 95.24, 95.99, 130.01, 130.31, 130.99


16-230
 
94.33


16-231
 
96.05, 96.24 - 96.27


16-232
 
51.004, 94.34, 94.36, 150.212


16-233
 
54.049


16-234
 
150.204, 150.206, 150.300, 150.302


16-235
 
90.01, 90.23


16-236
 
90.30, 90.99


16-238
 
30.043, 35.045, 35.046


16-239
 
54.045, 54.049, 54.053


16-240
 
90.02, 90.05


16-241
 
54.130, 54.131, 54.135


16-242 - 16-245
 
54.082


16-244
 
54.080, 54.088, 54.095, 54.115 - 54.120, 54.136, 54.137


16-245
 
54.080, 54.081, 54.083 - 54.101, 54.115 - 54.120, 54.132, 54.134, 54.136,
54.137, 54.999


16-246
 
10.99, 51.021, 51.055, 51.056, 52.08, 54.045, 54.049, 54.053, 91.11, 113.01 -
113.03, 113.30 - 113.38, 131.01 - 131.03, 131.99, 150.212


16-247
 
10.15, 31.04


16-248
 
54.002, 96.05, 96.06, 96.22, 96.24 - 96.27


16-253
 
72.51, 96.25 - 96.27


16-304
 
30.002


16-305
 
30.022


16-308
 
30.045, 30.046, 30.048, 53.01


16-309
 
53.01


16-310
 
30.075


16-317
 
30.040, 94.10


16-318
 
30.037


16-318.01
 
30.022


16-319
 
30.036


16-320
 
30.042


16-321
 
30.042, 94.09


16-322
 
30.042


16-323
 
30.043


16-323
 
53.15


16-401
 
31.23


16-402
 
31.23


16-403
 
31.24, 32.01, 32.02


16-404
 
32.01, 32.03, 32.04, 32.06, 32.09


16-405
 
32.06, 32.07


16-406
 
31.26


16-501
 
33.50


16-503
 
31.19, 33.51


16-609
 
31.55, 31.57, 94.26, 94.28 - 94.30, 94.34, 94.40


16-613
 
32.05


16-614
 
94.25


16-617
 
94.26


16-624
 
94.37


16-645
 
94.26


16-661
 
94.04 - 94.08, 94.12, 94.13


16-662
 
94.03, 94.07, 94.08, 94.12


16-663
 
94.01, 94.02


16-664
 
94.09


16-666
 
94.09


16-675
 
52.01


16-681
 
51.001 - 51.006, 51.020 - 51.022, 51.035, 51.037 - 51.041, 51.070 - 51.075,
51.090 - 51.096, 51.999, 52.02 - 52.04, 52.06, 52.07, 52.09, 52.11, 52.12,
52.25 - 52.27, 52.29, 52.30, 52.45 - 52.48


16-682
 
52.47


16-695
 
54.065


16-695 - 16-697.02
 
54.001, 54.015


16-696
 
54.065, 54.066


16-697.01
 
54.015


16-699
 
36.05


16-702
 
33.20


16-704
 
33.23


16-706
 
33.24


16-712
 
33.25


16-712 - 16-721
 
33.39


16-713
 
33.36


16-714
 
33.37


16-715
 
33.37


16-716
 
33.38


16-717
 
30.037


16-719
 
30.037


16-721
 
33.24


16-722
 
33.01


16-726
 
33.25


16-726 - 16-729
 
33.24


16-901
 
95.04


16-1001 - 16-1019
 
37.60


16-1020 - 16-1042
 
37.61


16-1039
 
37.61


17-702
 
33.21


18-132
 
35.048, 91.01


18-305 - 18-312
 
30.076


18-1001 - 18-1006
 
31.03, 31.56


18-1214
 
33.22


18-1719
 
95.35, 95.99


18-1720
 
10.99, 70.99, 91.99, 93.01 - 93.03, 94.99, 95.01 - 95.04, 95.99, 96.05,
96.22, 96.24, 118.99, 130.99


18-1722
 
10.99, 70.99, 91.99, 94.99, 95.99, 118.99, 130.99


18-1736
 
72.16


18-1737
 
72.16, 72.17, 72.24


18-1738
 
72.15, 72.18, 72.23


18-1738.01
 
72.19, 72.23


18-1738.02
 
72.18, 72.19


18-1739
 
72.16, 72.17, 72.20


18-1740
 
72.21


18-1741
 
72.22


18-1741.01
 
72.15, 72.23


18-1741.02
 
Ch. 38, App. G; 72.25


18-1741.04
 
72.23


18-1741.06
 
72.23


18-1743
 
150.208


18-1748
 
51.110, 94.39


18-1755
 
31.59


18-1914
 
150.999


18-1918
 
150.999


18-2101 - 18-2144
 
35.015


18-2101.01
 
35.015


18-2307
 
150.056


18-2312
 
150.056


Ch. 18, Art. 25
 
31.42


18-2501 - 18-2511
 
31.42


Ch. 19, Art. 6
 
30.005


19-611
 
32.01


19-612(2)
 
31.40


19-615
 
30.040, 31.23, 33.51


19-616
 
30.075, 30.076


19-617
 
30.005, 31.23


19-618
 
30.020, 30.037, 30.040, 30.042, 30.045, 30.048, 52.01, 53.01


19-620
 
30.020, 30.075


19-645 - 19-648
 
30.035


19-646
 
94.11


19-710
 
95.05


19-907 - 19-910
 
35.030


19-908
 
35.001


19-922
 
150.337, 150.338, 150.382


19-924 - 19-929
 
35.001


19-929
 
35.001


19-1101
 
30.039


19-1102 - 19-1104
 
30.040


19-1103
 
30.039


19-1104
 
30.039


19-1301
 
33.21


19-1302
 
33.21, 54.045, 54.049, 54.053


19-1303
 
33.21


19-1304
 
33.21


19-1305
 
52.01


19-2101 - 19-2106
 
55.02


19-2105
 
115.01


19-2106
 
55.01, 55.04 - 55.08


19-2428 - 19-2431
 
94.37


19-2903
 
33.05


19-2904
 
33.05


19-2905
 
33.05


19-2906 - 19-2909
 
33.05


19-4301
 
112.13


20-301 - 20-344
 
92.01


25-510.02(2)
 
31.02


25-1801
 
50.99


28-401
 
92.02


28-519
 
91.13, 130.01, 130.99


28-906
 
90.26


28-907
 
91.18


28-908
 
91.12, 91.14, 91.17


28-1229
 
91.56


29-401
 
30.043


29-422
 
70.18


29-424
 
70.18


29-835
 
150.999


29-4003
 
130.16, 130.17


29-4013
 
130.16, 130.17


Ch. 32
 
31.40


32-505
 
31.40


35-520
 
91.18


45-106
 
30.038


46-1212
 
31.60


48-434
 
150.999


48-442
 
150.999


48-2114
 
150.999


49-801(16)
 
10.05


49-14,103.01 - 49-14,103.03
 
30.076


51-209
 
54.031


51-211
 
54.028, 54.029


51-215
 
33.21


51-216
 
33.21


53-134
 
111.02


54-606
 
90.20


54-619
 
90.24


Ch. 60
 
70.01


60-3.113
 
72.17


60-301 - 60-335
 
72.37


60-323
 
72.09


60-329 - 60-339
 
33.22


60-435
 
70.15


60-680
 
70.02, 70.16, 70.19, 70.20, 71.16, 72.01, 72.03 - 72.07, 72.09, 72.35, 72.37,
72.50, 72.51; Ch. 74, Sch. I, II


60-683
 
70.16


60-6,114
 
72.08


60-6,119 - 60-6,121
 
70.02


60-6,165
 
72.50


60-6,166
 
72.04, 91.15


60-6,167
 
72.01, 72.03, 72.04


60-6,168
 
72.02


60-6,183
 
91.17


60-6,184
 
91.16


60-6,186
 
71.01


60-6,190
 
71.01, 71.02; Ch. 73, Sch. I


60-6,250
 
94.31


60-6,294
 
94.31


60-6,299
 
150.355, 150.357, 150.359, 150.361, 150.999


60-1901 - 60-1911
 
130.32


60-3113
 
72.16


70-624.04
 
30.076


71-4401
 
90.20


71-4401 - 71-4412
 
90.40 - 90.45


71-4608
 
150.999


71-4610
 
150.337, 150.338


71-4611
 
150.337, 150.338


71-4631
 
150.999


71-4632
 
150.999


73-102
 
33.52


77-1343
 
94.37


77-2202
 
30.038


77-2203
 
30.038


77-2209
 
30.037


77-2210 - 77-2212
 
30.038


77-2337
 
33.21


77-2339
 
33.21


77-2341
 
33.39


81-502
 
91.01


81-512
 
91.03 - 91.06, 91.10


81-520.01
 
91.09


81-1175 - 81-1177
 
35.076


81-1176
 
31.05


81-2101 - 81-2143
 
150.380


81-2104
 
150.382


81-2124
 
150.382


81-2125
 
150.382


81-3423
 
31.60


81-3445
 
31.60


81-3449 - 81-3453
 
31.60


84-1409(2)
 
31.15


84-1411
 
31.18, 31.21


84-1412
 
31.19, 31.22


84-1413
 
31.19


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE



 

Prior Code Section
 
2010 Code Section




1-101
 
31.01


1-102
 
31.02


1-103
 
31.03


1-104
 
31.04


1-201
 
30.001


1-202
 
30.003


1-203
 
30.004


1-204
 
30.005


1-301
 
30.020


1-302
 
30.021


1-303
 
30.035


1-304
 
30.036


1-306
 
30.037


1-307
 
30.037


1-308
 
30.038


1-309
 
30.039


1-310
 
30.038


1-311
 
30.040


1-312
 
30.040


1-313
 
30.042


1-314
 
30.042


1-315
 
30.043


1-317
 
30.044


1-318
 
30.045


1-319
 
30.046


1-320
 
30.048


1-321
 
30.049


1-322
 
30.050


1-323
 
30.022


1-401
 
30.002


1-402
 
30.002


1-403
 
30.060


1-501
 
30.041


1-601
 
31.15


1-602
 
31.15


1-603
 
31.16


1-604
 
31.17


1-605
 
31.18


1-606
 
31.19


1-607
 
31.20


1-608
 
31.21


1-609
 
31.22


1-610
 
31.23


1-611
 
31.24


1-612
 
31.25


1-613
 
31.26


1-701
 
32.01


1-702
 
32.02


1-703
 
32.03


1-704
 
32.04


1-705
 
32.05


1-706
 
32.06


1-707
 
32.06


1-708
 
32.07


1-709
 
32.09


1-801
 
31.40


1-806
 
31.41


1-901
 
33.01


1-902
 
33.02


1-906
 
33.20


1-908
 
33.24


1-909
 
33.24


1-910
 
33.21


1-911
 
33.25


1-912
 
33.36


1-913
 
33.37


1-914
 
33.37


1-915
 
33.38


1-917
 
33.53


1-918
 
33.50


1-919
 
33.51


1-923
 
33.52


1-927
 
33.54


1-928
 
33.22


1-1001
 
30.075


1-1002
 
30.076


1-1003
 
30.077


1-1101
 
31.42


1-1201
 
30.999, 31.99, 32.99, 33.99, 34.99


2-101
 
35.001


2-102
 
35.030


2-103
 
35.045


2-105
 
35.002


2-107
 
35.035


2-110
 
35.031


2-111
 
35.032


2-112
 
35.033


2-201
 
35.075


2-202
 
35.076


2-203
 
35.076


2-204
 
35.077


2-205
 
35.078


2-206
 
35.079


2-207
 
35.080


2-208
 
35.080


2-209
 
35.081


2-210
 
35.082


3-101
 
52.01


3-102
 
52.02


3-103
 
52.03


3-104
 
52.03


3-105
 
52.05


3-106
 
52.03


3-107
 
52.25


3-108
 
52.26


3-109
 
52.27


3-112
 
52.46


3-113
 
52.47


3-115
 
52.48


3-116
 
52.07


3-117
 
52.12


3-118
 
52.09


3-119
 
52.04


3-120
 
52.06


3-121
 
52.10


3-122
 
52.08


3-123
 
52.29


3-124
 
52.30


3-125
 
52.11


3-127
 
52.28


3-128
 
52.60


3-128.01
 
52.61


3-128.02
 
52.62


3-128.03
 
52.63


3-128.04
 
52.64


3-128.05
 
52.65


3-128.06
 
52.99


3-128.07
 
52.66


3-201
 
51.001


3-202
 
51.020


3-203
 
51.002


3-204
 
51.004


3-205
 
51.021


3-206
 
51.005


3-207
 
51.006


3-208
 
51.022


3-209
 
51.999


3-210
 
51.035


3-210.01
 
51.036


3-211
 
51.037


3-212
 
51.038


3-213
 
51.039


3-214
 
51.040


3-215
 
51.041


3-216
 
51.041


3-217
 
51.038


3-218
 
51.003


3-219
 
51.003


3-220
 
51.003


3-221
 
51.055


3-222
 
51.055


3-223
 
51.056


3-224
 
51.057


3-225
 
51.070


3-226
 
51.071


3-227
 
51.072


3-228
 
51.073


3-229
 
51.074


3-231
 
51.075


3-232
 
51.091


3-233
 
51.092


3-234
 
51.093


3-235
 
51.094


3-236
 
51.095


3-237
 
51.096


3-238
 
51.094


3-240
 
51.999


3-241
 
51.110


3-301
 
53.01


3-401
 
53.15


3-501
 
54.001


3-502
 
54.002


3-601
 
54.015


3-602
 
54.016


3-701
 
54.025


3-702
 
54.026


3-703
 
54.027


3-704
 
54.028


3-705
 
54.029


3-706
 
54.029


3-707
 
54.030


3-708
 
54.031


3-801
 
55.02


3-901
 
54.045


3-902
 
54.046


3-903
 
54.047


3-904
 
54.048


3-905
 
54.049


3-906
 
54.050


3-907
 
54.051


3-908
 
54.052


3-909
 
54.053


3-910
 
54.054


3-912
 
54.055


3-1002
 
54.080


3-1003
 
54.081


3-1004
 
54.082


3-1005
 
54.083


3-1006
 
54.084


3-1007
 
54.084


3-1008
 
54.085


3-1009
 
54.086


3-1010
 
54.087


3-1012
 
54.088


3-1013
 
54.088


3-1016
 
54.089


3-1017
 
54.090


3-1018
 
54.090


3-1019
 
54.091


3-1021
 
54.092


3-1022
 
54.093


3-1023
 
54.094


3-1024
 
54.095


3-1025
 
54.096


3-1026
 
54.097


3-1028
 
54.098


3-1031
 
54.099


3-1033
 
54.100


3-1034
 
54.101


3-1035
 
54.115


3-1036
 
54.115


3-1037
 
54.116


3-1039
 
54.117


3-1041
 
54.118


3-1042
 
54.120


3-1043
 
54.119


3-1048
 
54.130


3-1049
 
54.131


3-1050
 
54.132


3-1051
 
54.133


3-1052
 
54.134


3-1053
 
54.135


3-1054
 
54.136


3-1055
 
54.137


3-1056
 
54.999


3-1101
 
50.99


3-1102
 
50.02


3-1103
 
50.01


3-1201
 
56.01


3-1202
 
56.02


3-1302
 
54.999


4-101
 
35.046


4-102
 
35.047


4-103
 
35.048


4-104
 
35.049


4-201
 
55.01


4-202
 
55.05


4-203
 
55.06


4-205
 
55.08


4-206
 
55.07


4-207
 
55.04


4-301
 
95.01


4-302
 
95.02


4-303
 
95.03


4-304
 
95.04


4-305
 
95.05


4-401
 
95.35


4-401
 
95.99


4-501
 
96.01


4-502
 
96.02


4-503
 
96.03


4-504
 
96.04


4-505
 
96.05


4-506
 
96.06


4-507
 
96.07


4-508
 
96.20


4-509
 
96.21


4-510
 
96.08


4-511
 
96.22


4-512
 
96.23


4-513
 
96.24


4-514
 
96.25


4-515
 
96.26


4-516
 
96.27


4-601
 
95.20


4-602
 
95.21


4-603
 
95.22


4-604
 
95.23


4-605
 
95.24


4-606
 
95.99


4-701
 
95.99


4-702
 
95.99


5-101
 
70.01


5-213
 
70.02


5-306
 
71.01


5-307
 
71.02


5-331
 
71.16


5-401
 
70.15


5-402
 
70.16


5-403
 
70.16


5-404
 
70.17


5-405
 
70.18


5-406
 
70.19


5-407
 
70.20


5-606
 
71.15


5-1001
 
72.02


5-1002
 
72.01


5-1003
 
72.03


5-1004
 
72.03


5-1005
 
72.04


5-1006
 
72.04


5-1007
 
72.04


5-1008
 
72.04


5-1009
 
72.04


5-1010
 
72.04


5-1011
 
72.04


5-1012
 
72.04


5-1013
 
72.16


5-1013.01
 
72.17


5-1013.02
 
72.15


5-1013.03
 
72.18


5-1013.04
 
72.19


5-1013.05
 
72.20


5-1013.06
 
72.21


5-1013.07
 
72.22


5-1013.08
 
72.23


5-1013.09
 
72.24


5-1014
 
72.06


5-1018
 
72.06


5-1019
 
72.09


5-1020
 
72.35


5-1021
 
72.35


5-1022
 
72.35


5-1023
 
72.05


5-1024
 
72.04


5-1025
 
72.37


5-1026
 
72.37


5-1027
 
72.37


5-1028
 
72.08


5-1029
 
72.07


5-1031
 
72.51


5-1032
 
72.51


5-1033
 
72.36


5-1034
 
72.50


5-1101
 
70.99


5-1102
 
70.99


6-101
 
90.20


6-104
 
90.23


6-105
 
90.24


6-107
 
90.26


6-108
 
90.27


6-109
 
90.28


6-110
 
90.29


6-111
 
90.30


6-301
 
90.01


6-302
 
90.02


6-304
 
90.03


6-305
 
90.04


6-306
 
90.05


6-307
 
90.06


6-308
 
90.07


6-402
 
130.30


6-408
 
130.31


6-409
 
130.01


6-409
 
130.99


6-411
 
130.32


6-412
 
130.99


6-413
 
130.99


6-501
 
93.01


6-502
 
93.02


6-503
 
93.03


6-601
 
131.01


6-602
 
131.02


6-603
 
131.03


6-604
 
131.99


6-701
 
54.065


6-702
 
54.066


6-703
 
54.999


6-801
 
118.01


6-802
 
118.02


6-803
 
118.03


6-804
 
118.15


6-804.01
 
118.16


6-805
 
118.30


6-805.01
 
118.31


6-805.02
 
118.31


6-805.03
 
118.32


6-805.04
 
118.33


6-806
 
118.34


6-807
 
118.35


6-807.01
 
118.36


6-808
 
118.37


6-809
 
118.38


6-809.01
 
118.38


6-809.02
 
118.39


6-810
 
118.50


6-810.01
 
118.50


6-811
 
118.51


6-812
 
118.52


6-812.01
 
118.53


6-812.02
 
118.54


6-812.03
 
118.55


6-812.04
 
118.56


6-813
 
118.04


6-901
 
118.99


6-902
 
118.99


7-101
 
91.11


7-102
 
91.14


7-103
 
91.13


7-104
 
91.12


7-105
 
91.15


7-106
 
91.14


7-107
 
91.16


7-108
 
91.17


7-109
 
91.18


7-110
 
91.17


7-111
 
91.19


7-112
 
91.20


7-113
 
91.21


7-114
 
91.22


7-203
 
91.02


7-206
 
91.04


7-207
 
91.04


7-208
 
91.05


7-209
 
91.06


7-210
 
91.10


7-211
 
91.07


7-212
 
91.08


7-213
 
91.09


7-301
 
91.55


7-302
 
91.56


7-401
 
91.35


7-402
 
91.36


7-403
 
91.37


7-404
 
91.38


7-405
 
91.39


7-406
 
91.40


7-407
 
91.41


7-408
 
91.42


7-501
 
91.99


7-502
 
91.99


8-101
 
31.55


8-102
 
31.56


8-103
 
31.57


8-104
 
31.57


8-105
 
31.58


8-106
 
31.59


8-107
 
31.60


8-201
 
94.01


8-202
 
94.02


8-203
 
94.03


8-204
 
94.03


8-205
 
94.04


8-206
 
94.05


8-207
 
94.06


8-208
 
94.07


8-209
 
94.08


8-210
 
94.09


8-211
 
94.09


8-212
 
94.10


8-213
 
94.11


8-214
 
94.12


8-215
 
94.12


8-216
 
94.13


8-301
 
94.25


8-302
 
94.26


8-303
 
94.27


8-304
 
94.28


8-305
 
94.29


8-306
 
94.30


8-307
 
94.31


8-308
 
94.32


8-309
 
94.33


8-310
 
94.34


8-311
 
94.34


8-312
 
94.35


8-313
 
94.36


8-314
 
94.37


8-315
 
94.38


8-316
 
94.39


8-401
 
94.40


8-501
 
94.99


8-502
 
94.99


9-102
 
150.204


9-103
 
150.206


9-106
 
150.212


9-203
 
150.208


9-204
 
150.056


9-402
 
150.382


9-411
 
91.23


9-610
 
92.01


9-611
 
92.02


9-612
 
92.03


9-613
 
92.04


9-614
 
92.05


9-615
 
92.06


9-616
 
92.07


9-617
 
92.08


9-701
 
150.355


9-702
 
150.357


9-703
 
150.359


9-704
 
150.361


9-801
 
150.300


9-802
 
150.302


9-803
 
150.304


9-804
 
150.306


9-805
 
150.308


9-902
 
150.337


9-907
 
150.338


9-1201
 
150.999


9-1202
 
150.999


10-117
 
111.01


10-425
 
111.02


10-601
 
150.335


10-701
 
113.01


10-702
 
113.02


10-706
 
113.02


10-707
 
113.30 - 113.36


10-708
 
113.37


10-709
 
113.38


10-711
 
113.03


10-1001
 
115.01


10-1101
 
114.01


10-1102
 
114.02


10-1103
 
114.03


10-1104
 
114.04


10-1105
 
114.05


10-1106
 
114.06


10-1107
 
114.07


10-1108
 
114.08


10-1109
 
114.09


10-1501
 
36.01


10-1502
 
36.02


10-1503
 
36.03


10-1504
 
36.04


10-1505
 
36.05


10-1506
 
36.05


10-1507
 
36.06


10-1701
 
116.01


10-1702
 
116.02


10-1703
 
116.03


10-1704
 
116.04


10-1705
 
116.05


10-1706
 
116.06


10-1801
 
117.01


10-1802
 
117.01


11-101
 
151.01


11-201
 
152.01


12-101
 
37.01


12-102
 
37.02


12-103
 
37.03


12-104
 
37.03


12-105
 
37.04


12-106
 
37.05


12-107
 
37.06


12-201
 
37.20


12-202
 
37.21


12-203
 
37.21


12-204
 
37.22


12-205
 
37.23


12-206
 
37.24


12-207
 
37.25


12-208
 
37.26


12-209
 
37.24


12-210
 
37.27


12-301
 
37.40


12-302
 
37.41


12-303
 
37.42


12-304
 
37.43


12-305
 
37.44


12-305
 
37.45


12-305
 
37.46


12-306
 
37.47


12-307
 
37.48


2-301
 
35.999, 54.999


1-1201
 
35.999, 54.999


3-1301
 
35.999, 54.999


 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




1179
 
3-22-1983
 
Ch. 38, App. G


1248
 
10-7-1985
 
Ch. 38, App. G


91-07
 
1-6-1992
 
Ch. 38, App. A


93-10
 
11-1-1993
 
Ch. 38, App. A


95-07
 
4-3-1995
 
Ch. 38, App. G


2007-20
 
9-17-2007
 
Ch. 38, App. A


2016-17
 
10-17-2016
 
Ch. 38, App. N


 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




–
 
- -
 
T.S.O. I


–
 
- -
 
T.S.O. I


1662
 
9-20-1981
 
Ch. 38, App. D


1633
 
1-4-1982
 
72.06


1661
 
9-20-1982
 
Ch. 38, App. E


1676
 
2-7-1983
 
90.28


1684
 
3-21-1983
 
35.032; Ch. 38, App. J; 72.36


1679
 
4-4-1983
 
Ch. 38, App. A; 54.046, 54.047, 54.049 - 54.052, 54.054, 54.055


1680
 
4-4-1983
 
30.040, 30.041, 30.045, 30.048, 31.23


1687
 
5-2-1983
 
72.05; Ch. 74, Sch. II


1703
 
9-6-1983
 
Ch. 38, App. E


1704
 
9-6-1983
 
Ch. 38, App. D


1701
 
9-19-1983
 
95.03


1707
 
10-3-1983
 
31.15, 31.18, 31.22


1709
 
10-3-1983
 
30.077


1710
 
10-3-1983
 
50.99


1712
 
10-3-1983
 
94.37


1713
 
10-3-1983
 
94.38


1730
 
5-7-1984
 
72.05; Ch. 74, Sch. II


1748
 
10-1-1984
 
31.02


1750
 
10-1-1984
 
30.022


1752
 
10-1-1984
 
33.02


1754
 
10-1-1984
 
30.077


1756
 
10-1-1984
 
51.110


1758
 
10-1-1984
 
72.16


1759
 
10-1-1984
 
72.50


1760
 
10-1-1984
 
94.39


1763
 
10-1-1984
 
54.065, 54.066, 54.999


1765
 
12-4-1984
 
Ch. 38, App. A; 54.046


1768
 
2-4-1985
 
Ch. 38, App. H; 90.40


1769
 
2-4-1985
 
90.03, 90.06, 90.07


1774
 
6-3-1985
 
91.08


1778
 
9-3-1985
 
Ch. 38, App. B


1781
 
9-16-1985
 
150.382


1800
 
4-7-1986
 
37.01 - 37.06, 37.20 - 37.27, 37.40 - 37.48


1789
 
4-21-1986
 
31.22


1791
 
4-21-1986
 
95.05


1794
 
4-21-1986
 
31.23


1796
 
4-21-1986
 
Ch. 38, App. F


1797
 
4-21-1986
 
30.002


1803
 
5-10-1986
 
111.02


1805
 
5-10-1986
 
91.01


1816
 
1-5-1987
 
32.05


1817
 
2-2-1987
 
30.077


1818
 
2-16-1987
 
36.05; Ch. 38, App. J


1820
 
3-2-1987
 
30.042


1825
 
7-20-1987
 
Ch. 38, App. E


1831
 
11-2-1987
 
72.05; Ch. 74, Sch. II


1835
 
4-18-1988
 
35.033


1871
 
1-15-1989
 
72.35


1863
 
3-6-1989
 
130.30


1876
 
9-5-1989
 
95.35, 95.99


1877
 
9-5-1989
 
71.02


1882
 
11-20-1989
 
72.05; Ch. 74, Sch. II


1885
 
11-20-1989
 
111.02


1888
 
1-2-1990
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


1891
 
1-29-1990
 
52.03


1897
 
4-2-1990
 
91.56


1895
 
4-16-1990
 
33.22


1906
 
4-16-1990
 
72.16


1918
 
7-16-1990
 
Ch. 38, App. J


1932
 
8-20-1990
 
Ch. 38, App. F


1933
 
9-4-1990
 
Ch. 38, App. B


91-1989
 
4-1-1991
 
54.030


91-2010
 
10-21-1991
 
95.35, 95.99


91-2012
 
10-21-1991
 
35.002


91-2018
 
12-2-1991
 
54.046


91-2018
 
12-2-1991
 
54.050


91-2019
 
12-2-1991
 
54.030


91-2020
 
12-2-1991
 
56.01, 56.02


92-2071
 
7-6-1992
 
117.01


92-2085
 
7-6-1992
 
72.03


92-2100
 
7-20-1992
 
Ch. 38, App. F


92-2112
 
9-8-1992
 
Ch. 38, App. D


93-2174
 
8-2-1993
 
Ch. 38, App. F


93-2173
 
8-30-1993
 
118.01 - 118.04, 118.15, 118.16, 118.30 - 118.39, 118.50 - 118.52, 118.54 -
118.56


94-2238
 
7-27-1994
 
Ch. 38, App. F


95-2311
 
4-3-1995
 
72.51


95-2329
 
8-7-1995
 
Ch. 38, App. F


95-2334
 
10-2-1995
 
95.35, 95.99


95-2335
 
10-2-1995
 
Ch. 38, App. M


95-2336
 
10-2-1995
 
Ch. 38, App. J


95-2340
 
11-6-1995
 
72.04


96-2349
 
6-17-1996
 
30.044


96-2350
 
6-17-1996
 
53.01, 54.049, 54.051, 91.03, 91.04, 91.08 - 91.10, 91.19, 91.21, 91.55


96-2351
 
6-17-1996
 
52.12, 91.11, 91.12, 91.14 - 91.17, 91.22


96-2370
 
9-16-1996
 
Ch. 38, App. F


96-2371
 
9-16-1996
 
Ch. 38, App. E


96-2375
 
11-4-1996
 
31.55


97-2376
 
3-17-1997
 
51.055, 51.057


97-2377
 
3-17-1997
 
52.28


97-2382
 
7-7-1997
 
150.304, 150.306, 150.308


97-2386
 
10-20-1997
 
Ch. 38, App. F


98-2476
 
1-18-1999
 
72.16


98-2477
 
1-18-1999
 
72.17


98-2478
 
1-18-1999
 
72.15


98-2479
 
1-18-1999
 
72.18


98-2480
 
1-18-1999
 
72.19


98-2481
 
1-18-1999
 
72.20


98-2482
 
1-18-1999
 
72.21


98-2483
 
1-18-1999
 
72.22


98-2484
 
1-18-1999
 
72.23


98-2485
 
1-18-1999
 
72.24


99-2504
 
3-1-1999
 
31.60


99-2505
 
3-1-1999
 
31.56


99-2503
 
3-11-1999
 
31.59


99-2514
 
4-15-1999
 
35.001


99-2519
 
4-19-1999
 
33.02


99-2531
 
9-7-1999
 
Ch. 38, App. D


2000-2544
 
2-21-2000
 
Ch. 38, App. M


2000-2545
 
3-20-2000
 
35.075 - 35.082


2001-2582
 
10-1-2001
 
Ch. 38, App. F


2001-2583
 
11-19-2001
 
30.044


2001-2584
 
11-19-2001
 
52.12, 91.11, 91.12, 91.14 - 91.17, 91.22


2001-2585
 
11-19-2001
 
53.01, 54.049, 54.051, 91.03, 91.04, 91.08 - 91.10, 91.19, 91.21, 91.55


2001-2589
 
12-3-2001
 
54.080


2001-2590
 
12-3-2001
 
54.081


2001-2591
 
12-3-2001
 
54.084


2001-2593
 
12-3-2001
 
54.088


2001-2594
 
1-21-2002
 
52.03


2001-2596
 
1-21-2002
 
52.46


2001-2597
 
1-21-2002
 
52.47


2001-2598
 
1-21-2002
 
52.47


2001-2599
 
1-21-2002
 
50.02


2001-2601
 
1-21-2002
 
51.072


2001-2602
 
1-21-2002
 
Ch. 38, App. E


2002-2611
 
2-4-2002
 
30.045


2002-2620
 
5-20-2002
 
51.072


2002-2628
 
7-1-2002
 
51.036


2002-2629
 
7-1-2002
 
54.088


2002-2630
 
7-1-2002
 
Ch. 38, App. B


2002-2627
 
8-5-2002
 
51.004


2002-2636
 
11-4-2002
 
91.35 - 91.42


2003-2650
 
1-20-2003
 
150.999


2003-2660
 
6-16-2003
 
96.01 - 96.08, 96.20 - 96.27


2003-2678
 
9-2-2003
 
Ch. 38, App. D


2004-2688
 
3-15-2004
 
Ch. 38, App. M


2004-2689
 
3-15-2004
 
52.60 - 52.62, 52.66, 52.99


2004-2703
 
8-16-2004
 
Ch. 38, App. M


2004-2704
 
8-16-2004
 
92.01 - 92.08


2004-2707
 
9-20-2004
 
30.045, 30.049, 51.005, 52.01, 52.26


2004-2710
 
10-4-2004
 
95.35, 95.99


2004-2716
 
11-1-2004
 
52.63 - 52.65


2004-2713
 
12-6-2004
 
Ch. 38, App. F


2004-2715
 
12-6-2004
 
Ch. 38, App. E


2004-2717
 
1-3-2005
 
30.050, 54.025 - 54.030


2005-2720
 
2-7-2005
 
30.001, 30.003, 30.004


2005-2721
 
2-7-2005
 
31.42


2005-2722
 
2-7-2005
 
31.40


2005-2723
 
2-7-2005
 
31.15 - 31.20, 31.22 - 31.24


2005-2738
 
7-7-2005
 
37.60, 37.61


2005-2733
 
7-18-2005
 
150.010, 150.020, 150.030, 150.080, 150.090


2005-2734
 
7-18-2005
 
150.040, 150.045


2005-2735
 
8-1-2005
 
150.050, 150.055


2005-2736
 
7-18-2005
 
150.070


2005-2739
 
7-18-2005
 
35.034, 150.200, 150.202, 150.210


2005-2746
 
9-6-2005
 
54.135 - 54.137


2006-2764
 
2-20-2006
 
35.015


2006-2762
 
3-24-2006
 
72.21


2006-2770
 
4-17-2006
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


2006-2773
 
7-3-2006
 
31.16, 31.17, 31.22


2006-2771
 
7-17-2006
 
54.115


2006-2772
 
7-17-2006
 
130.15 - 130.17


2006-2782
 
11-6-2006
 
50.01


2006-2784
 
12-4-2006
 
111.01


2006-2785
 
12-18-2006
 
Ch. 38, App. J


2006-2786
 
12-18-2006
 
52.45


2007-2787
 
3-5-2007
 
34.01 - 34.03, 34.15, 34.16, 34.30 - 34.35, 34.50 - 34.52


2007-2789
 
3-5-2007
 
33.54


2007-2794
 
6-4-2007
 
35.031


2007-2795
 
9-6-2007
 
35.076


2007-2799
 
9-17-2007
 
Ch. 38, App. E


2007-2801
 
11-5-2007
 
91.35 - 91.43


2007-2804
 
12-3-2007
 
117.02


2002-2613
 
9-2-2008
 
51.005, 52.01, 52.12, 52.26 - 52.28


2008-2812
 
9-2-2008
 
Ch. 38, App. F


2008-2813
 
9-2-2008
 
Ch. 38, App. D


2008-2814
 
11-3-2008
 
31.05


2009-2822
 
3-16-2009
 
150.300


2009-2823
 
4-6-2009
 
150.304


2009-2825
 
8-3-2009
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


2009-2826
 
8-17-2009
 
90.20 - 90.32, 90.99


2009-2829
 
9-8-2009
 
Ch. 38, App. F


2009-2831
 
9-21-2009
 
150.040


2009-2830
 
10-5-2009
 
90.40 - 90.45


2009-2833
 
11-2-2009
 
91.43


2010-2835
 
4-19-2010
 
52.28


2010-2836
 
5-3-2010
 
54.045 - 54.055


2010-2837
 
5-3-2010
 
Ch. 38, App. A


2010-2840
 
9-20-2010
 
Ch. 38, App. D


2010-2846
 
12-6-2010
 
91.35 - 91.43


2011-2855
 
5-16-2011
 
Adopting Ordinance


2011-2858
 
6-6-2011
 
72.36, 72.37; repealed 32.08


2011-2863
 
9-6-2011
 
Ch. 38, App. E


2011-2864
 
9-6-2011
 
Ch. 38, App. D


2012-2872
 
6-4-2012
 
96.01 - 96.08, 96.20 - 96.28, 96.99


2012-2873
 
5-7-2012
 
34.01 - 34.03, 34.15, 34.16, 34.30 - 34.35, 34.50 - 34.52, 34.99


2012-2875
 
6-18-2012
 
31.60


2012-2882
 
9-17-2012
 
Ch. 38, App. E


2012-2884
 
9-17-2012
 
Ch. 73, Sch. I


2012-2885
 
10-1-2012
 
35.035


2012-2886
 
11-19-2012
 
91.41


2012-2887
 
12-3-2012
 
114.01


2015-2916
 
5-18-2015
 
31.23


2015-2917
 
7-20-2015
 
35.032


2016-2924
 
5-2-2016
 
94.02


2016-2927
 
5-2-2016
 
54.065


2016-2928
 
5-16-2016
 
150.010, 150.020, 150.030, 150.040, 150.045, 150.050, 150.055, 150.056,
150.060, 150.070, 150.080, 150.090, 150.200, 150.202, 150.204, 150.206,
150.208, 150.210, 150.212, 150.220, 150.300, 150.302, 150.304, 150.306,
150.308, 150.335, 150.337, 150.338, 150.355, 150.357, 150.359, 150.361,
150.380, 150.382, 150.400, 150.402, 150.404, 150.406, 150.408, 150.410,
150.412, 150.999


2016-2930
 
5-16-2016
 
91.23


2016-2931
 
5-16-2016
 
151.01


2016-2932
 
5-16-2016
 
152.01


2016-2935
 
8-1-2016
 
Ch. 38, App. J


2016-2936
 
8-15-2016
 
Ch. 38, App. M


2016-2939
 
9-19-2016
 
Ch. 38, App. F


2016-2941
 
10-17-2016
 
Ch. 38, App. D


2016-2942
 
10-17-2016
 
51.072


2017-2948
 
5-1-2017
 
91.24


2017-2949
 
6-5-2017
 
35.030


2017-2950
 
9-5-2017
 
111.01

ZONING ORDINANCE
NO. 2016-2929
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA
Passed - May 2, 2016
(Revisions listed at end of document)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article 1 - Short Title and Purpose. ........................................................................................... 5
Article 2 - Jurisdiction. ............................................................................................................... 6
Article 3 - Definitions. ................................................................................................................ 7
Article 4 - Application of District Regulations. ......................................................................... 24
Article 5 - Establishment of Districts. ...................................................................................... 25
Article 6 - Official Zoning Map and Boundary Interpretation................................................... 26
Article 7 - Agricultural District (AG). ........................................................................................ 28
Article 8 - Residential Low Density District (RL). .................................................................... 31
Article 9 - Residential Medium Density District (RM). ............................................................. 33
Article 10 - Residential Medium Density-Mobile Home District (RM-M). .................................. 36
Article 11 - Residential High Density District (RH).................................................................... 39
Article 12 - Central Business District (CB). ............................................................................... 42
Article 13 - Business Commercial District (BC). ....................................................................... 45
Article 14 - Highway Commercial District (HC). ........................................................................ 48
Article 15 - (Article Reserved for Future Use) .......................................................................... 51
Article 16 - Industrial Light District (IL). ..................................................................................... 52
Article 17 - Industrial Heavy District (IH). .................................................................................. 56
Article 18 - Floodway and Floodway Fringe Districts................................................................ 60
Article 20 - Planned Development. ........................................................................................... 75
Article 21 - Supplementary District Regulations. ...................................................................... 78
Section 2101. Visibility at Intersections. ................................................................ 78
Section 2102. Fences, Walls, Hedges. ................................................................. 78
Section 2103. Accessory Building. ........................................................................ 79
Section 2104. Erection of More than One Principal Structure on a Lot. ............... 79
Section 2105. Exceptions to Height Regulations. ................................................. 80
Section 2106. Structures to Have Access. ............................................................ 80
Section 2107. Parking, Storage or Use of Major Recreational Equipment........... 80
Section 2108. Parking and Storage of Certain Vehicles. ...................................... 80
Section 2109. Mobile Homes................................................................................. 80
Section 2110. Mobile Home Parks. ....................................................................... 80
Section 2111. Minimum Off-Street. ....................................................................... 82
Section 2112. Signs Regulations........................................................................... 84
Section 2113. Manufactured Home Standards. .................................................. 101
Section 2114. Salvage or Junk Yard . ................................................................. 101
Section 2115. Landfills and Sanitary Landfills .................................................... 102
Section 2116. Home Occupations....................................................................... 102
Section 2117. Small and Commercial Wind Energy Conversion Systems......... 103
Article 22 - Non-Conforming Lots, etc..................................................................................... 112
Article 23 - Administrative Procedure and Enforcement......................................................... 116
Article 24 - Special Exceptions................................................................................................ 118
Article 25 - Board of Zoning Adjustment. ................................................................................ 120
Article 26 - (This Article reserved for future use). ................................................................... 123
Article 27 - Amendment........................................................................................................... 124
Article 28 - Complaints, Penalties, Remedies......................................................................... 125
Article 29 - Legal Status Provisions. ....................................................................................... 126
Article 30 - Telecommunications Tower Regulations. ............................................................ 127
Article 31 - Neighborhood and Historical Conservation District (N-HCD) . ............................ 138
Revisions ................................................................................................................................... 140
ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA PROVIDING FOR THE
AMENDMENT OF MCCOOK ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2013-2897; PROVIDING FOR THE
REPEAL OF ANY OTHER CONFLICTING ORDINANCES; AND PROVIDING A TIME AND DATE
FROM AND AFTER WHICH THIS ORDINANCE SHALL TAKE EFFECT AND BE ENFORCED.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF
THE CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA:
SECTION 1. McCook Zoning Ordinance No. 2013-2897 shall be amended to read
as follows:
SECTION 2. This ordinance shall be in full force and take effect from and after its passage,
approval and publication in pamphlet form as required by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED THIS 2nd day of May, 2016.
-s- Michael D. Gonzales, Mayor
ATTEST:
-s- Lea Ann Doak, City Clerk
ARTICLE 1
SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE
Article 1 - Short Title and Purpose
Section 101. This Ordinance may be known and may be cited and referred to as "The Zoning
Ordinance of the City of McCook, Nebraska" to the same effect as if the full title were stated.
Section 102. Purpose. In pursuance of the authority conferred by Chapter 19, Article 9,
Section 19-901 of Nebraska Statutes as amended, this ordinance is enacted for the purpose of
promoting the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity and welfare of the present and future
inhabitants in the City by regulating and restricting the height, number of stories, and size of
buildings and other structures; the percentage of lot that may be occupied; the size of yards, courts
and other open spaces; the density of population; and the location and use of buildings, structures
and land for trade, industry, residence or other purposes. This Ordinance is also intended to lessen
congestion in the streets and roads; secure safety from fire and other dangers; provide adequate
light and air; avoid undue congestion of population; facilitate the adequate provision of
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; to preserve, protect
and enhance historic buildings, places and districts in accordance with the comprehensive plan and
the zoning maps adopted herewith.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 4
ARTICLE 2
JURISDICTION
Article 2 - Jurisdiction
Section 201. Jurisdiction. Pursuant to Section 19-901, Neb. Rev. Stat., 1943 (1969 Supp.), the
provisions of this Ordinance shall apply within the corporate limits of the City of McCook, Nebraska,
and within the territory beyond said corporate limits as now or hereafter fixed, for a distance of
two (2) miles or less in all directions, as established on "The Official Zoning Map of the City of
McCook, Nebraska", as the same may be amended by subsequent annexation.
Section 202. Provisions of Ordinance Declared to be Minimum Requirements. In their
interpretation and applications, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be minimum
requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals or general welfare.
Whenever the provisions of this Ordinance require a greater width or size of yards, courts or other
spaces, or require a lower height of building or less number of stories, or require a greater
percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other higher standards than are required in any
other ordinance, the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern. Wherever the provisions of any
other ordinance require a greater width or size of yards, courts, or other open spaces, or require
a lower height of building or a less number of stories, or require a greater percentage of lot to be
left unoccupied, or impose other higher standards than are required by the provisions of this
Ordinance, the provisions of such ordinance shall govern, or impose other higher standards than
are required in any other ordinance, law, regulations, easement, covenant, or agreement between
parties. (See McCook Airport Zoning Regulations adopted pursuant to Sections 3-301 to 3-333,
Neb. Rev. Stat., 1943, as amended.)
Section 203. Applicability to Activities of the City of McCook. The provisions of this ordinance
shall not apply to oil or gas exploration, drilling, development or related activities on land owned by
the City of McCook, Nebraska carried on with the consent of the City of McCook. (Ref. Ordinance
No. 1826 - 8/17/87)
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 5
ARTICLE 3
DEFINITIONS
Article 3 - Definitions
Section 301. General. For the purpose of this Ordinance, unless otherwise stated, words used
in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the
singular; the word shall is mandatory, not discretionary; the word may is permissive; the word
person includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation, as well
as an individual; the word lot includes the words plot or parcel, and the words used or occupied
include the words intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied.
SECTION 302. For the purposes of this Ordinance, certain terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
Abandonment. To cease or discontinue a use or activity without intent to resume as distinguished
from short term interruptions such as during periods of remodeling, maintenance, or normal periods
of vacation or seasonal closure.
Access or Access Way. A way by which pedestrians and vehicles have adequate and useable
ingress and egress to and from a property or use as required by this title.
Accessory Use or Structure. A use or structure detached from principle structure located on the
same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure.
Administrator (Zoning). The City Manager or his designated representative whose duty it is to
administer this ordinance.
Adult Establishment. Any business which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized
by an emphasis on matters depicting, exposing, describing, discussing or relating to "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," including, but without limitation, to adult
bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult saunas, adult companionship establishments, adult
health clubs, adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling
studios, and adult body painting studios.
Agricultural Farm or Operation. A tract of land or a combination of tracts of land utilized primarily
for agricultural purposes which either singularly or jointly consist of at least twenty (20) acres and
which produces one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more of farm products each year. (Neb. Rev. Stat.
§ 23-114.03)
Agriculture Uses. The use of a tract of land for growing crops in the open, dairying, pasturage,
horticulture, flori-culture, and necessary accessory uses, including the structures necessary for
carrying out farming operations and the residence of the person who owns or operates the farm and
the family thereof.
Alley. A minor right-of-way dedicated to public use which gives a secondary means of vehicular
access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street and which may be used for
public utility purposes.
Animal Hospital. A veterinary hospital where household pets are brought for medical and surgical
treatment and may be held during the time of such treatment. All facilities for holding animals on
the premises shall be housed in a completely enclosed building and used incidental to such medical
and surgical services only.
Auto Salvage Yard. See "Salvage or Junkyard."
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 6
Automobile Impound Yard. Any improved lot, or structure, or the use of any portion of such lot or
structure for the temporary outdoor storage of towed vehicles that are to be claimed by the
titleholders or their agents.
Automobile Repair Facility. An establishment with the primary business function of providing major
service and repair including body and fender work on vehicles such as automobiles, trucks, vans,
recreational vehicles and boats.
Automobile Service Facility. An establishment with the primary business function of providing
service, minor repair, and installation of parts or accessories on private vehicles such as
automobiles, trucks, vans or recreational vehicles.
Automobile Service Station. Buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires and
automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail.
Uses permissible at an automobile service station do not include major mechanical and body work,
straightening of body parts, painting, welding, storage of automobiles not in operating condition, or
other work involving noise, glare, fumes, smoke or other characteristics to an intent greater than
normally found in automobile service stations. An automobile service station is not a repair garage
nor a body shop.
Balcony. A projecting non-enclosed portion of a house located eight feet or more above the
ground.
Bed and Breakfast. Any place of lodging that provides rented rooms to ten or fewer people, that
is the personal residence of the owner, that is occupied by the owner at the time of rental, and in
which the only meal served to renters is breakfast.
Boarding House or Rooming House. A building other than a hotel, café or restaurant, where, for
compensation, directly or indirectly, lodging and/or meals are provided for three (3) or more
boarders, exclusive of the occupant's family.
Brew Pub. A restaurant or hotel which includes the brewing of beer as an accessory use. The
brewing operation processes water, malt, hops, and yeast into beer or ale by mashing, cooking, and
fermenting. By definition, these establishments produce no more than 10,000 barrels of beer or ale
annually. The area, by definition, used for brewing, including bottling and kegging, shall not
exceed 25 percent of the total floor area of the commercial space.
Brewery. An industrial use that brews ales, beers, meads and/or similar beverages on site.
Breweries are classified as a use that manufactures more than 10,000 barrels of beverage (all
beverages combined) annually.
Brewery, Micro. A facility for the production and packaging of malt beverages of low alcoholic
content for distribution, retail or wholesale, on or off premises, with a capacity of not more
than 10,000 barrels per year. The development may include other uses such as standard
restaurant, bar, or live entertainment as otherwise permitted in the zoning district.
Buildable Area. The portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been provided.
Building. An enclosed structure, anchored to permanent foundation, and having exterior or party
walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of persons, animals or property. When divided by other
than common or contiguous walls, each portion or section of such building shall be regarded as a
separate building, except that two buildings connected by a breezeway shall be deemed one
building. The term "Building" includes "structure."
Building Envelope. That area of a lot lying between the front, rear and side yard setback lines and
between ground level and the maximum allowable building height, amounting to the
three-dimensional area available for potential building construction.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 7
Building Height. The vertical distance to the highest point of the roofs; to the deck line of mansard
roofs; and to the average height between eaves and the ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs,
measured from the curb level if the building is not more than 10 feet from the front lot line or from
the grade in all other cases.
Source: A Survey of Zoning Definitions, (American Planning Association, 1989).
Building Line, Front. "Front building line" the line nearest to the front and across a lot establishing
the minimum open space to be provided between the front line of a building and the front lot line.
Building Line, Rear. “Rear building line" the line nearest to the rear and across a lot establishing
the minimum open space to be provided between the rear line of a building and the rear lot line.
Building, Public. "Public building" a building, supported by government funds, to be used in an
official capacity on behalf of the entire community.
Bulk Regulations. Regulations controlling the size of structures and the relationships of structures
and uses to each other and to open areas and lot lines. Bulk regulations include regulations
controlling: (1) maximum height; (2) maximum coverage; (3) minimum size of yard and setback.
Caliper. The diameter of the trunk measured six inches above ground level up to and including
four-inch caliper size, and measured twelve (12) inches above ground level if the measurement
taken at six inches above ground level exceeds four inches. If a tree is of a multitrunk variety, the
caliper of the tree is the average caliper of all of its trunks.
Campground. An area or premises on which space is provided for transient occupancy or use by
tourists occupying camping vehicles, or mobile homes.
Car Wash. A building or structure or an area of land with machine or hand operated facilities for
the cleaning, washing, polishing, or waxing of motor vehicles, not including semi-trailer tractors,
buses, and commercial fleets.
Car Wash, Industrial. A mechanical facility for the washing, waxing and vacuuming of heavy trucks
and buses.
Carport. A structure, open on at least two sides, consisting of a roof and either walls or columns
for the purpose of housing automotive vehicles and other chattels. Said structure shall be
considered as an accessory building when detached from the principal building and as a part of the
principal building when attached to the principal building along one or more sides of the carport or
principal building.
Cellar. A building space having more than one-half (½) of its height below the average adjoining
grade lines.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 8
Cemetery. Land used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including
crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the
boundary of such cemetery.
Certificate of Zoning Compliance. A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator after certification
that such land, use, structure or building is fit for human occupancy and complies with all of the
provisions of the zoning and subdivision regulations and other applicable codes and regulations.
Channel. Shall mean the geographical area within the natural or artificial banks of the watercourse
or drainway.
Child Care Center. A facility which is or should be licensed by the Nebraska Department of Health
and Human Services under the authority of Sections 71-1908 through 71-1918, Revised Statutes
of Nebraska, as provided and defined under the Title 474 of the Nebraska Administrative Code,
Chapter 6, Section 002.
Child Care Home. A private home providing care (for children) for compensation. No person shall
operate a Child Care Home for four (4) or more children without being licensed by the
Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services under the authority of Sections 71-1908
through 71-1918, Revised Statutes of Nebraska.
Club. An association of persons (whether or not incorporated), religious or otherwise, for a
common purpose, but not including groups which are organized primarily to render a service carried
on as a business for profit.
Club, Private. "Private club" a nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members paying
annual dues which owns, hires or leases a building, or a portion thereof; the use of such premises
being restricted to members and their guests.
Coffee Kiosk. A retail food business in a freestanding building that sells coffee, or other beverages,
and remade bakery goods from a drive-through window to customers seated in their automobiles
for consumption off the premises and that provides seating for ten or fewer.
Common area. Any area or space designed for joint use of the tenants or residents in a
development, whether it be residential, commercial or industrial.
Communication Equipment Building. A structure which provides storage for equipment of a
building, housing, electrical and mechanical nature necessary for the conduct of a public
communications business with or without necessary personnel.
Comprehensive Plan. The comprehensive development plan for the City.
Condominium. A building, or group of buildings, in which units are owned individually, and the
structure, common areas and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided
basis. By definition, a condominium has common areas and facilities and there is an association
of owners organized for the purpose of maintaining, administering and operating the common areas
and facilities. It is a legal form of ownership of real estate and not a specific building style. The
purchaser has title to his or her interior space in the building and an undivided interest in parts of
the interior, the exterior, and other common elements. The property is identified in a master deed
and recorded on a plat with the local jurisdiction. The common elements usually include the land
underneath and surrounding the building, certain improvements on the land, and such items as
plumbing, wiring, and major utility systems, the interior areas between walls, the public interior
spaces, exterior walls, streets and recreational facilities.
Deck. A projecting non-enclosed portion of a house.
Density. The number of dwelling units per acre of land devoted to housing and useable open
space.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 9
Detention Facility. A Detention Facility is one of the following:
1. Jail. A facility operated by or for a county or city for the short-term confinement of
persons accused or convicted of an offense, including a county jail.
2. Prison. A facility designed for the incarceration and punishment of persons convicted
of a criminal offense and that provides general education, vocational training and other
rehabilitation programs for prisoners. Also referred to as a penitentiary or correctional
facility.
3. Holding Facility. A public or private facility, other than a jail or prison, that is designed
to physically restrict the movements and activities of persons held in lawful custody in
the facility, including facilities designed to provide civil protective custody or facilities
designed to temporarily house juveniles accused or adjudicated of having committed
an offense, or persons alleged or determined to be mentally incompetent.
District. An area or areas within the City limits for which the regulations and requirements
governing use, lot, bulk of building, and premises are uniform.
Dormitory. Any building, or portion thereof, used and maintained to provide sleeping
accommodations for more than five unrelated persons, whether for compensation or not.
Drainway. Shall mean any depression two feet or more below the surrounding land serving to give
direction to a current of water less than nine (9) months of the year having a bed and well-defined
banks; provided, that in the event of doubt as to whether a depression is a watercourse or drainway
it shall be presumed to be a watercourse.
Drive Access. That area between the curb of a street, or edge of the traveled portion of a street
when no curb exists, and the right-of-way/property line over which the city will permit vehicular
travel from the traveled portion of a street to an individual property, or off-street parking space(s).
Dwelling, Detached. A residential building which is entirely surrounded by open space on the same
lot.
Dwelling, Duplex. A residential building designed for or providing two dwelling units for occupancy
by two families.
Dwelling, Multiple Family. A residential building designed for or occupied by three (3) or more
families living independently of each other and containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
Dwelling, Single Family. A detached residential dwelling unit other than a mobile home, designed
for and occupied by one family.
Dwelling Unit. One room, or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent
housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, or rental or lease on a weekly, monthly or longer
basis, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same
structure, and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities.
Dwelling, Ranch and Farm. Residential dwellings appurtenant to agricultural operations including
living quarters for persons employed on the premises, guest houses not rented or otherwise
conducted as a business and private garages, stables and barns.
Easement. Authorization by property owners for the use by the public, a corporation, or persons,
of any designated part of his property for specific purposes.
Efficiency Unit. A dwelling unit having only one room exclusive of bathroom, water closet
compartment, kitchen, laundry, pantry, foyer, communicating corridor, closets, or any dining alcove.
An efficiency unit shall be permitted only in a multi-family dwelling.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 10
Excavation or Cut. The removal, stripping or disturbance of soil, earth, sand, rock, gravel or other
similar substances from the ground.
External Design Feature. The general arrangement of any portion of a building, sign, landscaping,
or structure and including the kind, color, and texture of the materials of such portion, and the types
of roof, windows, doors, lights, attached or ground signs, or other fixtures appurtenant to such
portions as will be open to public view from any street, place, or way.
Extra Territorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). The area beyond the corporate limits, in which the City has
been granted the powers by the state to exercise zoning and building regulations and is exercising
such powers.
Facade. The exterior wall of a building exposed to public view from the building's exterior.
Factory. A structure or plant within which something is made or manufactured from raw or partly
wrought materials into forms suitable for use.
Family. One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, provided that unless all members
are related by blood or marriage, no such family shall contain over five (5) persons, but provided
further that domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises without
being counted as family or families.
Feedlot. A feedlot shall include, but not be limited to, any permanent, fenced, dry-lot status area
or facility where the principal business or industry is the feeding of more than ten (10) head of
livestock.
Fence. A free-standing structure of metal, masonry, composition, wood or any combination thereof
resting on or partially buried in the ground and rising above ground level, and used for confinement,
screening or partition purposes.
Floor Area. The area included within the outside walls of a building or portion thereof including
habitable tenant houses and attic space, but not including vent shafts, courts or uninhabitable areas
below ground level or in attics.
Garage, Private. An accessory building or accessory portion of the main building designed for the
shelter or storage of motor vehicles owned or operated by occupants of the main building only.
Garage, Public. A garage, other than private garage, used for the housing or care of motor vehicles
or where such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired or kept for remuneration, hire or sale.
Garage, Repair. "Repair garage" any building or premises used for the repair, rebuilding,
reconstruction and servicing of automobiles, trucks, or other vehicles.
Grade elevations. The average elevation of the ground at the corners of the perimeter walls of the
building or structure for the purpose of determining the height requirements of this title.
Grading. Any excavation or filling or combination thereof.
Greenhouse. A building or premises used for growing plants and/or displaying of plants.
Greenway. A parcel or parcels of land, together with the improvements thereon, dedicated as an
easement for access and/or recreation; usually a strip of land set aside for a walkway, bicycle trail,
bridle path, or other similar access-way.
Groundcover. Turf, vines, or any other species of plant generally considered groundcover by the
nursery trade or decorative rock or other decorative landscaping material.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 11
Group Home. A home which is operated under the auspices of an organization which is
responsible for providing social services, administration, direction, and control for the home which
is designed to provide twenty-four hour care for individuals in a residential setting. The facility may
house more than five (5) but less than sixteen (16) persons who are unrelated by blood, marriage
or adoption. Those facilities may offer, in addition to lodging, accommodations, meals, resident
support services, counseling, guidance and varying levels of medical care. Such facility shall be
licensed or approved by the State of Nebraska or other appropriate agency.
Hardscape. Solid, non-permeable surface or façade treatment which includes, but is not limited
to, brick pavers, colored concrete, enhanced pavement, seat walls and retaining walls.
Hazard to Air Navigation. An obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the
safe and efficient utilization of navigable airspace.
Hazardous Waste. Waste products of industrial or chemical process including finished surplus,
used, contaminated, or unwanted fertilizer, herbicide, petroleum products, or other such processed
waste material that requires special handling treatment , and disposal methods.
Height, Maximum. A horizontal plane above and parallel to the average finished grade shown in
the district regulations. No part of any structure shall project through such plane except:
A. Chimneys, flues, stacks, fire escapes, gas holders, elevator enclosures, ventilators,
skylights, water tanks and similar roof structures needed to operate and maintain the
building on which they are located;
B. Flag poles, television aerials, water towers, carillons, monuments, cupolas,
broadcasting and microwave transmitting and relay towers, and electric transmission
line towers, small and commercial wind energy conversion systems.
Home Occupation. An occupation or activity carried on within the dwelling or accessory building
by a member of the family residing on the premises, which occupation or activity is incidental and
secondary to the residential occupancy and does not change the residential character nor infringe
upon the right of neighboring residents to enjoy a peaceful occupancy of their homes.
Impound Yard. A parcel of land and/or a building which is used for the operation of an impound
yard and/or the storage of wrecked and/or abandoned and/or other motor vehicles including, but
not limited to, motor vehicles awaiting insurance adjustment or transport to a repair facility and
motor vehicles legally impounded by the law enforcement agency. There shall be no dismantling
of motor vehicle(s) and/or salvaging of motor vehicle parts for sale or resale.
Indoor Recreational Uses of Indoor Athletic Training Facilities. An establishment with the primary
function of providing a climate-controlled fully-enclosed environment for such indoor activities as,
but not limited to, batting cages, golf driving ranges, swimming natatorium, bicycling velodrome,
gymnastics training facility, shooting range, skateboard facility or roller rink. All activities, including,
but not limited to, spectator seating and participant waiting areas, shall take place within the
building.
Industry, Heavy. "Heavy industry" those industries whose processing of products results in the
emission of any toxic substances, atmospheric pollutants, light flashes, or glare, odor, noise or
vibration which may be heard and/or felt off the premises and those industries which constitute a
fire or explosion hazard.
Industry, Light. Light industry those industries whose processing of products results in none of the
conditions described for heavy industry.
Junk. Any motor vehicle, machinery, appliance, product or merchandise with parts missing, scrap
metal, used building materials, or other scrap materials that are damaged, deteriorated, or are in
a condition which prevents their use for the purpose for which the product was manufactured.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 12
Junk Yard. See “Salvage or Junk Yard.”
Kennel. An establishment where dogs or cats are bred, raised, trained or boarded. To be
considered a kennel, the lot or building must have four or more dogs or cats at least 5 months of
age on the premises. Kennels are not permitted in any residential zoning district.
Landfill. A disposal site employing an engineering method of disposing solid wastes in a manner
that minimizes environmental hazards by spreading, compacting to the smallest volume, and
applying cover material over all exposed waste at the end of each operating day and in
conformance with the requirements of the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Service
System.
Livestock, Confinement Facilities/Operations. Shall mean any building(s), lot(s), pen(s), pool(s) or
pond(s) or other confined spaces, which normally are not used for raising crops or grazing animals,
which are designed and/or used for on-going confined raising, feeding or management of animals
for more than 180 consecutive days.
Landscaping. The provision of planting and related improvements for the purpose of beautifying
and enhancing a property and for the control of erosion and the reduction of glare, dust and noise.
Large Box Retail. A singular retail or wholesale user that occupies no less than 30,000 square feet
of gross floor area. These uses typically include: membership wholesale clubs emphasizing in large
bulk sales, discount stores, pharmacies, grocery stores, especially warehouse style point of sale
concepts and department stores.
Loading Space. An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a main building, or contiguous
to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading,
and which abuts a street, alley, or other appropriate means of ingress and egress.
Loading Space, Off-Street. Space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and
deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used, and accessible to such vehicles when
required off-street parking spaces are filled. Required off-street loading space is not to be used as
off-street parking space in computation of required off-street parking space.
Lot. For purposes of this Ordinance, a lot is a parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet
minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such yards and other
open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public street, or
on an approved private street, and may consist of a single lot of record; a portion of a lot of record;
a combination of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record or of portions of lots of
record; a parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided that in no case of division or
combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of
this Ordinance.
Lot, Corner. Indicated as A in the diagram on the following page, a corner lot is defined as a lot
located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets
shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines
to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. See lots marked
A1 in the diagram on the following page.
Lot Coverage. That percentage of a lot which, when viewed directly from above, would be covered
by a structure or structures, or any part thereof, excluding projecting roof eaves.
Lot Depth. Depth of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between the mid-points of straight
lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side
lot lines in the rear.
Lot Frontage. The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the street.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 13
Lot, Interior. Indicated as B in the above diagram, an interior lot is defined as a lot other than a
corner lot with only one frontage on a street.
Lot of Record. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the County Clerk, or a
lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
Lot, “Out Lot.” Property shown on a subdivision plat outside of the boundaries of the land which
is developed and which is to be excluded from the development of the subdivision.
Lot, Reversed Frontage. Indicated as D in the above diagram, a reversed frontage lot is defined
as a lot on which the frontage is at right angles or approximately right angles, interior angle less
than 135 degrees, to the general pattern in the area. A reverse frontage lot may also be a corner
lot (A-D), an interior lot (B-D), or a through lot (C-D).
Lot, Through. Indicated as C in the above diagram, a through lot is defined as a lot other than a
corner lot with frontage on more than one street. Through lots abutting two (2) streets may be
referred to as a double frontage lot.
Lot Width. Width of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between straight lines connecting
front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the required front yard,
provided however that width between side lot lines at their foremost points where they intersection
with the street lines, shall not be less than eighty (80%) percent of the required lot width except in
the case of lots on the turning circle of cul-de-sac, where the eighty (80%) percent requirement shall
not apply.
Manufactured Home: A factory-built structure which is to be used as a place for human habitation,
which is not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved
other than to a permanent site, which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any
wheels or axles, and which bears a label certifying that it was built to compliance with National
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, 24 C.F.R. 3280 et seq., promulgated by
the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Mining. The extraction of sand, gravel, or other material from the land in the amount of four
hundred (400) cubic yards or more and the removal thereof from the site with or without processing.
Mixed Use. Properties where various uses, such as office, commercial, institutional, and
residential, are combined in a single building or on a single site in an integrated development
project with significant functional interrelationships and a coherent physical design.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 14
Mobile Home. A year-round, transportable structures which is a single family dwelling unit suitable
for permanent, more than thirty (30) days of living quarters, more than eight (8) feet wide and
forty (40) feet in length and built to be towed on its own chassis with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. This portable dwelling may consist of one (1)
or more units that can be telescoped when towed and expanded later for additional capacity, or
two (2) or more units, separately towable but designed to be joined as one (1) integral unit. Nothing
in this definition shall be construed so as to include prefabricated, modular, precut dwelling units
or these manufactured in sections or parts away from the site and transported thereto for assembly.
Mobile Home Park. Any area of land which two (2) or more mobile homes are parked, connected
to utilities and used by one (1) or more persons for living or sleeping purposes. A mobile home
parked in this area can either be placed on permanent foundation or supported only by its wheels,
jacks, blocks, or skirting’s or a combination of these devices. A mobile home park includes any
premises set apart for supplying to the public parking space, either free of charge or for revenue
purposes for one (1) or more mobile homes, connected to utilities and used by one (1) or more
persons living, or sleeping purposes and shall include any building, structure, tent, vehicle or
enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment of such mobile home park.
Modular Home. Any dwelling whose construction consists entirely of or the major portions of its
construction consist of a unit or units not fabricated on the final site for the dwelling units, which
units are movable or portable until placed on a permanent foundation and connected to utilities.
All modular homes shall bear a label or seal indicating that it was built in accordance with the
Nebraska Uniform Standards for Modular Housing Units Act, as established in Section 71-1557 of
the Nebraska revised Statutes.
Net Metering. A utility policy for consumers in which a property owner utilizes one or a combination
of alternative energy sources including Wind, Solar, Geothermal, Biomass, or Methane, to generate
a portion or all of their electrical energy needs for their home or business. If the property owner is
able to generate more power than needed for the home or business, the local utility company is
required by Nebraska Law to purchase the “extra” or excess electrical power from the property
owner.
Non-Conforming Building. A building or portion thereof which was lawful when established but
which does not conform to subsequently established zoning or zoning regulations.
Non-conforming Structure. A structure which does not comply with the lot size requirements or bulk
regulations applicable to new structures in the zoning district in which it is located.
Nonconforming Use. A use of land or building that was permitted by zoning regulations at the time
the use was established but is not now allowed by the zoning ordinance by reason of the
ordinance's adoption or subsequent amendments thereto.
Nursery. The use of a premises for the propagation, cultivation, and growth of trees, shrubs, plants,
vines, and the like from seed or stock, and the sale thereof, and including the sale of trees, shrubs,
plants, vines, and the like purchased elsewhere. In connection with the sale of plants, such
fungicides, insecticides, chemicals, peat moss, humus, mulches, and fertilizers as are intended to
be used in preserving the life and health of the plants may be sold.
Obstruction. Shall mean any structure, dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levy, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, channel rectification, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock,
gravel, refuse, fill, or other analogous structure or matter which may impede, retard, or change the
direction of the flow of the water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such
water, or that is placed where the natural flow of the water would carry the same downstream to the
damage or detriment of either life or property.
Obstruction, Artificial. Shall mean any obstruction which is not a natural obstruction.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 15
Obstruction, Natural. Shall mean any rock, tree, gravel or analogous natural material that is an
obstruction and has been located within the floodway by a non-human cause.
Open Air Business. Any commercial establishment in which products are displayed and/or sold out
of doors.
Open Space. A parcel or parcels of land, together with the improvements thereon, primarily set
aside for recreational use and enjoyment, exclusive of land areas used for streets, alleys, roads,
driveways, parking areas, structures, and buildings.
Owner. Includes, when applied to a building or land, any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by entirety, of the whole or part of such
building or land.
Package Liquor Store. Any establishment where the primary business is the sale of alcoholic
beverages for off-premises consumption. Package liquor stores must hold a full liquor off-sale
license.
Parking Space. A rectangular area with all-weather surface containing not less 162 square feet
with maneuvering and access space required.
Parking Space, Off-Street. For the purpose of this Ordinance, an off-street parking space shall
consist of a space adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides,
together with properly related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room. Required
off-street parking areas for three (3) or more automobiles shall have individual spaces marked, and
shall be so designed, maintained and regulated that no parking or maneuvering incident to parking
shall be on any public street, walk, or alley, and so that any automobile may be parked and
unparked without moving another.
Party Wall. Any wall of a building or structure which is common to two or more buildings.
Patio. An uncovered, unenclosed outdoor hard surfaced area no higher than eighteen (18) inches
above the ground.
Patio, Covered. "Covered patio" a covered but unenclosed patio.
Pawnshop. A shop where a pawnbroker does business.
Pawnbroker. Any person engaged in the business of lending money upon chattel property for
security and requiring possession of the property so mortgaged on condition of returning the same
upon payment of a stipulated amount of money, or purchasing property on condition of selling it
back at a stipulated price.
Person. Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
Personal and Convenience Services. A business offering services such as barber shops, beauty
shop, laundromats, laundry and dry cleaning pickup and delivery stations, and similar uses.
Planned Development Overlay. A project of a single owner or a group of owners acting jointly,
involving a related group of residences, businesses or industries and associated uses, planned as
a single entity and therefore subject to development and regulation as one land use unit rather than
as an aggregation of individual buildings located on separate lots. The planned development
overlay includes useable, functional, open space for the mutual benefit of the entire tract and is
designed to provide variety and diversity through the variance of normal zoning and subdivision
standards so that maximum long-range benefits can be gained and the unique features of the
development or site is preserved and enhanced, while still being in harmony with the surrounding
neighborhood. Approval of a planned development does not eliminate the requirements of
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 16
subdividing. A preliminary plat and a final plat must be submitted and processed through the
subdivision procedures as provided in the subdivision regulations of the City of McCook.
Porch. A covered, but unenclosed, portion of a house, excluding carport.
Principal Structure. A structure in which a principal use of the lot on which the structure is located
or conducted.
Principal Use. The main use of land or structures as distinguished from a subordinance or
accessory use.
Public or Central Sewerage System. A public sewerage system that is used or designed to be used
for collection, treatment (primary and secondary), and discharge of domestic sewage, industrial or
commercial wastes from two or more residential units, two or more mobile home spaces in mobile
home subdivisions or mobile home parks, two or more lots or properties located in platted
subdivisions or two or more industrial or commercial properties.
Public or Central Water Supply System. A public water supply system which serves two or more
residential units; two or more mobile home spaces in mobile home subdivisions or mobile home
parks; two or more lots or properties located in platted subdivisions, or two or more residential or
commercial properties.
Public Hearing. A meeting called by a public body for which public notice has been given and
which is held in a place in which the general public may attend to hear issues and express their
opinions.
Public Park. Any publicly owned land that is predominately open space, primarily used for the
active or passive recreational uses. The park may include other cultural, educational, or aesthetic
uses. For the purposes of this chapter a public park does not include any city trails or McCook
School District property.
Recreational Vehicle. A vehicular type portable structure without permanent foundation, which can
be towed, hauled or driven primarily designed as temporary living accommodation for recreational,
camping and travel use and including but not limited to travel trailers, truck campers, camping
trailers and motor homes.
Recreational Vehicle Park. A plot of ground upon which two or more sites are located, established
or maintained for the placement of recreational vehicles by the general public as temporary living
quarters for recreation, education or vacation purposes.
Recycling Center. An establishment with the primary function of collecting, sorting and distribution
of nonferrous metal products for recycling such as aluminum, glass, paper, plastic and other similar
household waste related items. All operations such as collection, sorting, distributing and storage
shall be conducted totally within an enclosed building and there shall be no outside storage. No
hazardous material as defined by state and federal law is accepted; there is no wrecking or
dismantling of salvage material.
Recycling – Metal. An establishment with the primary functions of receiving, sorting, cleaning,
storage, and transporting/shipping of ferrous and non-ferrous metals, including the crushing of cars.
Operation of facility includes activities both inside buildings and the outside processing and storage
of materials.
Restaurant. A public eating establishment at which the primary function is the preparation and
serving of food to persons seated within the building, for carryout, for “drive-in” or “drive-thru.”
Includes cafes, and fast food restaurants.
Retail. Sale to the ultimate consumer for direct consumption and/or use and not for resale.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 17
Retail Trade. Uses primarily engaged in selling merchandise for personal or household
consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of goods. Uses engaged in retail trade
sell merchandise to the general public or to households for personal consumption.
Right-of-way, Public. All streets, roadways, sidewalks, alleys, and all other areas reserved for
present or future use by the public, as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular or pedestrian
travel.
Runway. A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length.
Runway Protection Zone (Runway Clear Zone). A trapezoidal area at ground level for the purpose
of protecting the safety of approaches and keeping the area clear of the congregation of people.
Salvage or Junk Yard. A place where waste, discarded or salvaged metals, building materials,
paper, textiles, used plumbing fixtures, abandoned or inoperable motor vehicles or parts thereof,
and other used materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled or cleaned; and places or
yards for the storage of salvaged metal, materials and equipment; but not including pawn shops
and establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of used cars or trucks presently in operable
condition, boats or trailers presently in operable condition, and used furniture and household
equipment in usable condition and not including the processing of used, discarded or salvaged
material as part of manufacturing operations.
School. Any primary or grammar, public, parochial or private school, high school, preparatory
school or academy, public or founded, or owned or conducted by or under the sponsorship of a
religious or charitable organization; private preparatory school or academy furnishing courses of
instruction substantially equivalent to the courses offered by public high schools for preparation of
admission to college or universities which award B.A. or B.S. degrees; community college or
university, public or founded or conducted by or under the sponsorship of a religious or charitable
organization; or private school area.
Screening. Decorative fencing, evergreen hedges or earth berms maintained for the purpose of
concealing from view the area behind such screening.
Setbacks. See yard, yard front, yard rear, and yard side.
Setback Line. A line or lines designating the area on a lot outside of which buildings and
projections thereof shall not be erected. Setback lines are determined by yard requirements.
Sight Triangle. Is an area at a street intersection in which nothing shall be erected, placed, planted,
or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision. (Also see Visual Obstruction)
Sign. A presentation or representation, other than a house number, by words, letters, figures,
designs, pictures, or colors publicly displayed so as to give notice relative to a person, a business,
an article of merchandise, a service and assemblage, or solicitation, or a request for aid for other
type of advertising. This includes the board, metal, or surface upon which the sign is painted,
included, or attached. Each display surface of a sign shall be considered to be a sign. (See
Section 2112 of this Ordinance.)
Sign, Off-Site. A sign other than an on-site sign, such as a directional sign or a billboard. (See
Section 2112 of this Ordinance.)
Sign, On-Site. A sign relating in its subject matter to the premises on which it is located, or to
products, accommodations, services, or activities on the premises. (See Section 2112 of this
Ordinance.)
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 18
Site Plan. A drawing to a scale not less than one inch equals one hundred (100) feet showing the
accurate location of all structures, streets, alleys, and parking areas existing and proposed on
subject property or any other information as may be required by this title.
Solid Waste. Waste materials consisting of garbage, trash, refuse, rubble, sewage, offal, dead
animals, or paunch manure.
Special Exception. A special exception is a use that would not be appropriate generally or without
restriction throughout the zoning district, but which, if controlled as to number, area, location or
relation to the neighborhood, would promote the public health, safety, order, comfort, convenience,
appearance, prosperity, or general welfare. Such uses may be permitted in such zoning district as
special exceptions, if specific provision for such special exception is made in this Ordinance.
Storage Container. Includes, but not limited to, sea containers and rail containers. Any container
intended for the purpose of storing or keeping personal property or material of the property owner.
A storage container may only be placed in any zoning district for up to thirty (30) days maximum,
then must be removed to an appropriate industrial zone. These containers may not be used for
long term storage in residential zones.
Street. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way which provides for public use for
the purpose of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and placement of utilities and including the terms
"road", "highway", "place", "avenue", "alley", or other similar designations.
Street Line. The right-of-way line of a street.
Streetscape. The scene as may be observed along a public street or way composed of natural and
man-made components, including buildings, paving, plantings, street hardware, and miscellaneous
structures.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to
something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include but are
not limited to: buildings, mobile homes, walls, fences, billboards and poster panels.
Structural Alteration. Any change to the supporting members of a structure including foundations,
bearing walls partitions, columns, beams, girders, or any structural change in the roof.
Tanning Studio. Any business that uses artificial lighting systems to produce a tan on an
individual’s body. These facilities may be either a stand-alone business or as an accessory use in
spas, gymnasiums, athletic clubs, health clubs, and styling salons. This use is not included with any
type of adult establishment.
Temporary Building. Any building which is established for temporary occupancy and meets the
requirements of this title for a temporary building. Such a building is not International Construction
Code (ICC) approved and may or may not be placed on a permanent foundation.
Townhouse. One of a group or row of not less than two (2) nor more than twelve (12) attached,
single family dwellings designed and built as a single structure facing upon a street in which the
individual townhouse may or may not be owned separately. For the purpose of the side yard
regulations, the structure containing the row or group of townhouses shall be considered as one
building occupying a single lot.
Trail. The linear areas not adjacent to a street that may follow natural features such as washes,
ridge lines, flood control facilities, and utility rights of way designed for and used by cyclists,
pedestrians, and equestrians. A trail may contain but is not limited to, trailheads, walkways,
landscaping, lighting, benches, recreational nodes, dog stations, and trash receptacles.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 19
Transitional Housing. A facility in which individuals live for a short period while receiving physical,
social, or psychological therapy and counseling to assist them in overcoming physical or emotional
problems. This term does not include "lodging house," "nursing home," or "group home."
Transportation Stop. The point or place whereby a public conveyance disperses or receives
passengers.
Transportation Terminal. Either end of, or central to, a carrier line, including railroad, trucking,
airline or bus transportation facilities, for passengers or freight.
Tree, Canopy. "Canopy tree" a species of tree which normally bears crown foliage no lower than
six feet above ground level upon maturity.
Tree, Large Scale. "Large scale tree" a species of tree which normally reaches a mature height of
forty (40) feet or more.
Tree, Moderate Scale. "Moderate scale tree" a tree of a species which normally reaches a mature
height of forty (40) feet or less.
Tree, Ornamental. "Ornamental tree" a tree that normally reaches a height of twenty (20) feet or
less at maturity and produces a showy bloom in the spring or has a leaf color or shape that makes
it unique.
Tree or Shrub, Evergreen. "Evergreen tree or shrub" a tree or shrub of a species which normally
retains its leaves/needles throughout the year.
Tree, Shade. "Shade tree" a canopy tree that spreads to a diameter of fifteen (15) feet or more,
its branching structure and leaf shape and size provide shade to the ground below, and its
branching habit is generally upright and bears no crown foliage lower than six feet upon maturity.
Tree, Small Scale. "Small scale tree" a tree of a species which normally reaches a height of less
than twenty-five (25) feet upon maturity.
Truck Washing Establishment. A building which has its primary purpose as washing semi-tractor
trailers. Such facilities shall be considered incidental to truck service stations if not more than one
semi-tractor trailer may be washed at one time and if the service station is clearly the principal use.
Use. The purpose for which land or a structure is designed.
Use, Accessory. A subordinate use which is customarily incidental to the principal building or to
the principal use of the lot.
Use. Non-conforming. A use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the time this ordinance
or an amendment thereto became effective and which does not now conform with the use
regulations applicable in the zoning district in which it is located.
Use, Principal. The main use of land or structures as distinguished from a subordinance or
accessory use.
Use, Regulations. The provisions of this Ordinance which identify permitted and conditional uses,
impose use limitations, require adherence to performance standards and regulate accessory uses.
Use, Temporary. A use which, by nature and intent, exists for a short time only.
Variance. A variance is a relaxation of the terms of the zoning ordinance where such variance will
not be contrary to the public interest, and where owing to conditions peculiar to the property and
not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in
unnecessary and undue hardship. As used in this Ordinance, a variance is authorized only for
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 20
height, area and size of structure or size of yards and open spaces; establishment of expansion of
a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted
because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning district or uses in an adjoining zoning
district.
Visual Obstruction. Any fence, hedge, tree, shrub, wall or structure exceeding three feet in height
measured from the curb of the intersecting streets, alleys or driveways, which limit the visibility of
persons in motor vehicles on said streets, alleys or driveways. This does not include trees kept
trimmed of branches below the minimum height as specified in this title. (Also see Sight Triangle)
Wall, Retaining. A structure designed and constructed to contain and/or support the content of the
soil and to withstand the lateral earth and hydrostatic pressures and surcharge loads where the
grade on one side is higher than the grade on the opposite side. For the purposes of this title, a
"retaining wall" shall not be considered when incorporated as an integral part of any required
drainage structure.
Warehouse. An enclosed building designed and used primarily for the storage of goods and
materials.
Watercourse. Shall mean any depression two feet or more below the surrounding land serving to
give direction to a current of water at least nine months of the year, having a bed and well defined
banks; provided that it shall, upon order of the Nebraska Natural Resources Commission, also
include any particular depression which would not otherwise be within the definition of a
watercourse.
Wholesale Trade. A use primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial,
commercial, institutional, farm or professional business users; or to other wholesalers; or acting as
agents or brokers in buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or companies.
The principal types of establishments included are: Merchant wholesalers; sales branches and
sales offices (but not retail stores) maintained by manufacturing enterprises apart from their plants
for the purpose of marketing their products; agents, merchandise or commodity brokers, and
commission merchants; petroleum bulk storage, assemblers, buyers, and associations engaged
in cooperative marketing of farm products. The chief functions of uses in wholesale trade are
selling goods to trading establishments, or to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm and
professional; and bringing buyer and seller together.
In additional to selling, functions frequently performed by wholesale establishments include
maintaining inventories of goods; extending credit; physically assembling, sorting and grading
goods in large lots, breaking bulk and redistribution in smaller lots; delivery; refrigeration; and
various types of promotion such as advertising and label designing.
Wind Energy Conversion System (Commercial). A wind energy conversion system under common
or aggregated ownership or operating control that includes substations, MET towers, cables/wires
and other building accessories, whose main purpose is to supply electricity to off-site customers.
(See Section 2117 of this Ordinance.)
Wind Energy Conversion System (Small). A wind energy conversion system which has a rated
capacity of up to Twenty-Five (25) kilowatts and which is incidental and subordinated to another
use of the same parcel. A system is considered a small wind energy system only if it supplies
electrical power for site use, except that when a parcel on which the system is installed also
received electrical power supplied by a utility company, access electrical power generated and not
presently needed for onsite use may be sold back to the utility company. (25 Kilowatt limit
approved by the McCook Planning Commission and City Council may be increased to a maximum
of 100 Kilowatts with Nebraska State Legislature authorization by future amendment) (See
Section 2117 of this Ordinance.)
Yard. A required open space.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 21
Yard, Front. A yard extending between side lot lines across the front of a lot adjoining a public
street.
Yard, Rear. A yard extending across the rear of the lot between inner side yard lines. In the case
of through lots and corner lots, there will be no rear yards, but only front and side yards.
Yard, Side. A yard extending from the rear line of the required front yard to the rear lot line, or in
the absence of any clearly defined rear lot line to the point on the lot farthest from the intersection
of the lot line involved with the public street. In the case of through lots, side yards shall extend
from the rear lines of front yards required. In the case of corner lots, yards remaining after front
yards have been established shall be considered side yards.
Yard, Special. A yard adjacent to a lot line so placed or oriented that neither the term side yard nor
the term rear yard clearly applies. In such cases, the administrative official shall require a yard with
minimum dimensions as generally required for a side yard or a rear yard in the district, determining
which shall apply by the relation of the portion of the lot on which the yard is to be located to the
adjoining lot or lots, with due regard to the orientation and location of structures and buildable areas
thereon.
Zoning Map. The term "Zoning Map" means a map or maps officially enacted by the governing
body as part of this ordinance showing the boundaries of a zoning district or districts, a copy or
copies of which, certified to have been enacted as provided by law, is filed in the office of the City
Clerk as an official record of the City.
Zoning Regulations. The whole body of regulations, text, charts, tables, diagrams, maps, notations,
references and symbols contained in this title or to which reference is made.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 22
ARTICLE 4
APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Article 4 - Application of District Regulations
Section 401. General. The regulations set forth by this Ordinance within each District shall be
minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land within the
district, except as hereinafter provided.
Section 402. Zoning Affects Every Building and Use. No building or structure or land shall
hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with all of
the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
Section 403. Performance Standards. No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected
or altered:
1. To exceed the height of bulk;
2. To occupy a greater percentage of lot area;
3. To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or other open spaces, than
herein required; or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 404. Open Space, Off-Street Parking or Loading Space. No part of a yard or other
open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building
for the purpose of complying with this Ordinance, shall be included as part of a yard, open space
or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building.
Section 405. Yard and Lot Reduction Prohibited. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage
of this Ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth
herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Ordinance shall meet at least the
minimum requirements established by this Ordinance.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 23
ARTICLE 5
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
Article 5 - Establishment of Districts
Section 501. Districts Created. For the purpose of this Ordinance there are hereby created
fourteen (14) types of districts by which the jurisdictional area defined in Section 201 may be
divided:
AG -- Agricultural
RL – Residential Low Density
RM -- Residential Medium Density
RM-M -- Residential Medium Density-Mobile Home
RH -- Residential High Density
CB -- Central Business
BC -- Business Commercial
HC – Highway Commercial
IL -- Industrial Light
IH – Industrial Heavy
F -- Floodway
SF -- Selected Floodway
PD -- Planned Development Overlay
N-HCD -- Neighborhood and Historical Conservation District Overlay
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 24
ARTICLE 6
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP AND BOUNDARY INTERPRETATION
Article 6 - Official Zoning Map and Boundary Interpretation
Section 601. General. The City of and the outlying two mile jurisdiction is hereby divided into
zones, or districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map, which together with all explanatory matter
thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance. The Official
Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, and bearing
the seal of the City by the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map
referred to in Section 601 of Ordinance Number 1580 of the City of McCook, Nebraska" together
with the date of the adoption of this Ordinance.
Section 602. Zoning Map Changes. If, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance,
changes are made in the district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map,
such changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been
approved by the City Council, with an entry on the Official Zoning Map as follows: "On date, by
official action of the City Council, the following changes were made in the Official Zoning Map:"
brief description of nature of change, which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the
City Clerk. No amendment to this Ordinance which involves matters portrayed on the Official
Zoning Map shall become effective until after such change and entry have been made on said map.
No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning Map or matter shown thereon except
in conformity with the procedures set forth in this Ordinance.
An unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation
of this Ordinance and punishable under Section 2702.
Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning Map which may, from time
to time, be made or published, the Official Zoning Map which shall be located in the office of the
City Clerk shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and other areas,
buildings, and other structures in the City. The City shall not be required to publish the zoning map
after each amendment thereto.
Section 603. Zoning Map Replacement. In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes
damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature of number of changes and
additions, the City Council may, by resolution, adopt a new Official Zoning Map which shall
supersede the prior Official Zoning Map. The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other
errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such correction shall have the effect of
amending the original Official Zoning Map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new Official
Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, and bearing
the seal of the City under the following words: "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map
replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced) as part of
Ordinance No. ___ of the City of McCook, Nebraska."
Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or
any significant parts thereof remaining, shall be preserved, together with all available records
pertaining to its adoption or amendment.
Section 604. Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries. Where uncertainty exists as to
the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
1. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of streets, highways, or alleys
shall be construed to follow such center lines;
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 25
2. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following
such lot lines;
3. Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following such
city limits;
4. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the
main tracks;
5. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of streams, rivers, canals, lakes
or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines;
6. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections 1 through
5 above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map
shall be determined by the scale of the map;
7. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on
the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections 1 through 6
above, the Board of Zoning Adjustment shall interpret the district boundaries;
8. Where a district divides a land parcel under a single ownership into two districts, the entire
parcel shall be zoned for the less restrictive use by the adjustment of the boundaries, provided
the boundary adjustment is a distance of less than twenty-five (25) feet. If the adjustment
involves a distance of more than twenty-five (25) feet, the procedures for a district change shall
be followed.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 26
ARTICLE 7
AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT (AG)
Article 7 - Agricultural District (AG)
Section 701. Intent. The intent of an Agricultural District (AG) is to protect agricultural lands from
incompatible land uses in order to preserve land best suited to agricultural uses and land in which
the natural environment should be continued, and to limit residential, commercial and industrial
development to those areas where they are best suited for reasons of practicality and municipal
fiscal integrity.
It is further intended that building permits are not required for normal livestock fences and land and
water conservation measures such as those recommended by the Soil Conservation Service.
Although this district is intended to provide for the agricultural use of land, it is recognized that
certain areas within the district may have the capability in terms of proximity to urban development
and accessibility to facilities, services, and utilities of accommodating residential expansion in the
future through orderly annexation consistent with the adopted Comprehensive Plan.
Section 702. Permitted Principal Uses and Structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted in Agricultural Districts (AG):
1. General farming and ranching activities, excluding any expansion of existing or development
of livestock confinement facilities/operations in excess of (10) animals.
2. Single family farm or ranch dwellings, and non-farm single family dwellings.
3. Individual mobile homes under the prescribed conditions of Section 2109 of this Ordinance.
4. Public parks and public recreation areas, including but not limited to playgrounds, golf courses
campgrounds and rest areas.
5. Railroad track right-of-way.
6. Public facilities, utility substations and distribution systems.
7. Churches, places of worship and cemeteries.
8. Public and parochial, nursery, primary, intermediate and secondary schools.
9. Publicly owned Detention Facilities.
Section 703. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted in Agricultural Districts (AG):
1. Roadside stands.
2. Home occupations, under the prescribed conditions of Section 2116 of this Ordinance.
3. Mobile homes under the prescribed conditions of Section 2109 of this Ordinance.
4. Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures when
established within the space limits of this district.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 27
Section 704. Special Exceptions. After the provisions of this ordinance relating to special
exceptions have been fulfilled, the City Council may permit as special exceptions in Agricultural
Districts (AG) not contiguous to the city limits:
1. Sanitary sewage disposal and water systems, including agricultural irrigation wells, in
conformance with the requirements of the Nebraska Departments of Environmental Quality
(NEDEQ) and Health and Human Services (NEDHHS).
2. Mobile home parks, under the prescribed conditions of Section 2110 of this Ordinance.
3. Airports.
4. Bed and breakfast establishments.
5. Fairgrounds, race tracks and amusement parks.
6. Private golf courses, country clubs and golf driving ranges.
7. Amphitheaters, stadiums, drive-in movies, arenas and field houses.
8. Private or commercially owned go-cart tracks, riding stables, playing fields, athletic fields,
bowling, swimming pools, automobile parking.
9. The following uses must be located one mile or further from the nearest occupied residential
(excluding residence of owner or operator) structure or public school as measured from the
nearest edge of the lot lines:
A. Commercial auction yards and barns.
B. Commercial production and husbandry of poultry, fish and small animals.
C. Feed mills, packing plants, fertilizer plants and anhydrous ammonia storage tank facilities
or plants.
10. Kennels.
11. Veterinarian services.
12. Telecommunication Towers, under the prescribed conditions of Article 30.
13. Sales, service, and storage of mobile homes, campers, boats, motor vehicles, motorized
equipment and accessories for such vehicles, not including salvage junk yards.
14. Commercial uses (excluding retail stores) including, but not limited to the following: lumber
yards, nurseries, yard equipment, transportation centers, service garages, wholesale
operations, household equipment and appliances repair, rental establishments, car washes and
truck washes.
15. Mining, storage and sales of gravel and sand.
16. Alternative energy systems utilizing Biomass, Geothermal, Hydropower, Solar and/or Wind
sources in conformance with “Net Metering” per Nebraska State Statutes §70-2001 to 2005
(August 30, 2009, as amended). Individual or “Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems
(SWECS) shall also be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2117 of this Ordinance.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 28
17. Commercial Wind Energy Conversion Systems (CWECS) utilizing a single or multiple tower
applications, or “Wind Farm” held in single ownership or in an association of multiple owners,
in conformance with the provisions of Section 2117 of this Ordinance.
18. Rural subdivisions, in which all dwellings within the subdivision utilize a shared or “community
style” water well or sanitary sewer lagoon in accordance with all restrictions of the Nebraska
Department of Environmental Quality (NEDEQ) and the Department of Health and Human
Services. In which case, minimum lot sizes may be reduced to one (1) acre in area.
Section 705. Prohibited Uses and Structures. All other uses and structures which are not
specifically permitted or not permissible as special exceptions shall be prohibited from Agricultural
Districts (AG).
Section 706. Minimum Lot Requirements. The minimum lot area and lot area per dwelling unit
shall be three (3) acres, except that the minimum lot area and lot area per dwelling unit shall be
two (2) acres for a single family dwelling erected prior to July 1, 2004, with a minimum lot width or
road frontage of two hundred (200') feet.
Section 707. Minimum Yard Requirements.
(A) Front Yard: There shall be a minimum front yard of not less than a depth of forty (40)
feet, measured from the existing road way right-of-way line.
Rear Yard: There shall be a minimum rear yard of not less than a depth of fifty (50)
feet, measured from the property line.
Side Yard: Each side yard shall not be less than twenty (20) feet measured from the
property line.
Any accessory use structures, which are not a continuous part of the principal structure,
may be located in the rear yard with a side and rear yard of not less than twenty (20’) feet.
(B) Residential platted lots in existence as of the effective date of this 2013 update shall have
Minimum Yard Requirements as follows:
Front Yard: There shall be a minimum front yard of not less than a depth of twentyfive
(25) feet, measured from the existing road way right-of-way line.
Rear Yard: There shall be a minimum rear yard of not less than a depth of twentyfive
(25) feet, measured from the property line.
Side Yard: Each side yard shall not be less than ten (10) feet measured from the
property line.
Section 708. Maximum Height. No limitation, except when located within the designated
approach path or zones of the McCook Ben Nelson Regional Airport, all Agricultural District (AG)
properties shall be in conformance with the provisions of Article 26 of this Ordinance.
Section 709. Parking Regulations. Parking within the Agricultural District (AG) shall be in
conformance with the provisions of Section 2111 of this Ordinance.
Section 710. Fence Regulations. Fences, walls and hedges within the Agricultural District (AG)
shall be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2102 of this Ordinance.
Section 711. Sign Regulations. Signs within the Agricultural District (AG) shall be in
conformance with the provisions of Section 2112 of this Ordinance.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 29
ARTICLE 8
RESIDENTIAL LOW DENSITY DISTRICT (RL)
Article 8 - Residential Low Density District (RL)
Section 801. Intent. The intent of a Residential - Low Density District (RL) is to provide low
density residential areas together with some compatible uses.
Section 802. Permitted Principal Uses and Structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted in a Residential - Low Density District (RL):
1. Dwelling, single-family.
2. Manufactured homes under the prescribed conditions of Section 2113 of this Ordinance.
3. Churches and places of worship.
4. Public uses: including but not limited to parks, playgrounds, recreational uses, fire stations,
public utilities and utility distribution systems.
5. Child care homes.
Section 803. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted in Residential - Low Density Districts (RL):
1. Mobile homes under the prescribed conditions of Section 2109 of this Ordinance.
2. Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures when
established within the space limits of this district, and under the prescribed conditions of
Section 2103 of this Ordinance.
3. Home occupations under prescribed conditions of Section 2116 of this Ordinance.
Section 804. Special Exceptions. After the provisions of this ordinance relating to special
exceptions have been fulfilled, the City Council may permit as special exceptions in Residential -
Low Density Districts (RL):
1. Dwelling, duplex.
2. Mobile Home Parks and under the prescribed conditions of Section 2110 of this Ordinance.
3. Bed and breakfast homes.
4. Public and parochial nursery, primary, intermediate and secondary schools.
5. Group homes.
6. Golf courses and country clubs.
7. Cemeteries.
8. Medical clinics.
9. Professional offices.
10. Hospitals, nursing homes, retirement and elderly housing facilities.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 30
Lot Area
(Sq. Ft.) Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
Height
Principle/Acces.
Single Family
Dwelling
9,000 70’, or 45’
when on a
curved
Street.
25’ 10’ 20’ 35’ / 35’
Duplex Dwelling 4,500 per
unit
70’, or 45’
when on a
curved
Street.
25 10 20 35’ / 35’
T o w n h o u s e
dwelling
4,500 per
unit
70’, or 45’
when on a
curved
Street.
25 10 20 35’ / 35’
Other Permitted
Uses
9,000 70’ 25’ 10’ 20’ 35’
11. Dwellings, Townhouses.
12. Telecommunication Towers, under the prescribed conditions of Article 30.
13. Alternative energy systems utilizing Biomass, Geothermal, Hydropower, Solar and/or Wind
sources in conformance with “Net Metering” per Nebraska State Statutes §70-2001 to 2005
(August 30, 2009, as amended). Individual or “Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems
(SWECS) shall also be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2117 of this Ordinance.
Section 805. Prohibited Uses and Structures. All other uses and structures which are not
specifically permitted or not permissible as special exceptions shall be prohibited from Residential
Low Density Districts (RL).
Section 806. Height and Area Regulations. The minimum lot and maximum height provisions
shall be as follows:
Section 807. Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage for all buildings shall not be
more than forty (40) percent of the total area.
Section 808. Parking Regulations. Parking within the Residential Low Density District (RL) shall
be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2111 of this Ordinance.
Section 809. Fence Regulations. Fences, walls and hedges within the Residential Low Density
District (RL) shall be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2102 of this Ordinance.
Section 810. Sign Regulations. Signs within the Residential Low Density District (RL) shall be
in conformance with the provisions of Section 2112 of this Ordinance.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 31
ARTICLE 9
RESIDENTIAL MEDIUM DENSITY DISTRICT (RM)
Article 9 - Residential Medium Density District (RM)
Section 901. Intent. The intent of a Residential - Medium Density District (RM) is to provide for
medium density residential use areas together with certain prescribed compatible uses.
Section 902. Permitted Principal Uses and Structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted in Residential - Medium Density Districts (RM):
1. Dwellings, single family.
2. Manufactured homes under the prescribed conditions of Section 2113 of this Ordinance.
3. Dwellings, duplex.
4. Churches, places of worship and cemeteries.
5. Public uses: including but not limited to parks, playgrounds, recreational uses, fire stations,
public utilities and utility distribution systems.
6. Child care homes.
7. Group Homes.
Section 903. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted in Residential - Medium Density Districts (RM):
1. Home occupations under the prescribed conditions of Section 2116 of this Ordinance.
2. Mobile homes under the prescribed conditions of Section 2109 of this Ordinance.
3. Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures when
established within the space limits of this district, and under the prescribed conditions of
Section 2103 of this Ordinance.
Section 904. Special Exceptions. After the provisions of this Ordinance relating to special
exceptions have been fulfilled, the City Council may permit as special exceptions in Residential -
Medium Density Districts (RM):
1. Dwellings, multiple-family
2. Professional offices.
3. Colleges and universities.
4. Dwellings, Townhouses.
5. Public and parochial nursery, primary, intermediate and secondary schools.
6. Alternative energy systems utilizing Biomass, Geothermal, Hydropower, Solar and/or Wind
sources in conformance with “Net Metering” per Nebraska State Statutes §70-2001 to 2005
(August 30, 2009, as amended). Individual or “Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems
(SWECS) shall also be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2117 of this Ordinance.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 32
Lot Area
(Sq. Ft.) Lot Width
Front
Yard Side Yard
Rear
Yard
Height
Principle/Acces.
Single Family
Dwelling
5,000 50’ interior
lots, or 60’ for
corner lots, or
45’ on cul-desac
curve.(4)
20’ (1) 8’ on 1 side
& 5’ on 2nd
side of
interior lots.
(2) (3)
15’ 35’ / 35’
Duplex Dwelling 2,500 per
dwelling
unit
50’ interior
lots, or 60’ for
corner lots, or
45’ on cul-desac
curve.(4)
20’ (1) 8’ on 1 side
& 5’ on 2nd
side of
interior lots.
(2) (3)
15’ 35’ / 35’
Multifamily
Dwelling
2,500 per
dwelling
unit
50’ interior
lots, or 60’ for
corner lots, or
45’ on cul-desac
curve.(4)
20’ (1) 8’ on 1 side
& 5’ on 2nd
side of
interior lots.
(2) (3)
15’ 45’/ 35’
Townhouse
dwelling
2,500 per
dwelling
unit
50’ interior
lots, or 60’ for
corner lots, or
45’ on cul-desac
curve.(4)
20’ (1) 8’ on 1 side
& 5’ on 2nd
side of
interior lots.
(2) (3)
15’ 45’ / 35’
Other Permitted
Uses
5,000 50’ interior
lots, or 60’ for
corner lots, or
45’ on cul-desac
curve.(4)
20’ (1) 8’ on 1 side
& 5’ on 2nd
side of
interior lots.
(2) (3)
15’ 35’
7. Private golf courses and country clubs.
8. Child care center.
9. Hospitals, nursing homes, retirement and elderly housing facilities.
10. Medical clinics and other health facilities.
11. Funeral homes and funeral chapels.
12. Mobile home parks under the prescribed conditions of Section 2110 of this Ordinance.
13. Museums; historic and monument sites.
14. Telecommunication Towers under the prescribed conditions of Article 30 of this Ordinance.
15. Boarding House, Rooming House, or Bed and Breakfast.
16. Timeshare and Vacation Rental.
Section 905. Prohibited Uses and Structures. All other uses and structures which are not
specifically permitted or not permissible as special exceptions shall be prohibited from Residential
Medium Density Districts (RM).
Section 906. Height and Area Regulations. The minimum lot and maximum height provisions
shall be as follows:
Notes: (1) In the case of structures erected on lots adjacent to lots which have structures
existing at the effective date of this Ordinance, the required front yard may be the
average of the front yards existing on the adjacent lots.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 33
(2) Side yards for corner lots facing the street shall be one-half of the front yard setback
minimum requirements.
(3) A non-combustible carport may be constructed with a minimum side yard clearance
of three feet (3') feet and shall be attached to an existing structure.
(4) Platted lots in existence as of the 2013 update of this Ordinance may have a lot
width of fifty (50) feet or less, as long as the lot meets the front, side and rear yard
setback requirements. (See Section 2202 of this Ordinance.
Section 907. Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage for all buildings shall not be
more than fifty-five (55) percent of the total lot area.
Section 909. Parking Regulations. Parking within the Residential Medium Density District (RM)
shall be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2111 of this Ordinance.
Section 910. Fence Regulations. Fences, walls and hedges within the Residential Medium
Density District (RM) shall be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2102 of this Ordinance.
Section 911. Sign Regulations. Signs within the Residential Medium Density District (RM) shall
be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2112 of this Ordinance.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 34
ARTICLE 10
RESIDENTIAL MEDIUM DENSITY
MOBILE HOME DISTRICT
(RM-M)
Article 10 - Residential Medium Density-Mobile Home District (RM-M)
Section 1001. Intent. The intent of a Residential Medium Density, Mobile Home District (RM-M)
is to provide for medium density residential use including mobile homes on individual lots together
with certain prescribed compatible uses.
Section 1002. Permitted Principal Uses and Structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted in Residential Medium Density, Mobile Home Districts (RM-M):
1. Dwellings, single family.
2. Manufactured homes under the prescribed conditions of Section 2113 of this Ordinance.
3. Dwellings, duplex.
4. Individual mobile homes under the prescribed conditions of Section 2109 of this Ordinance.
5. Public uses: including but not limited to parks, playgrounds, recreational uses, fire stations,
public utilities and utility distribution systems.
6. Churches, places of worship and cemeteries.
7. Child care homes.
8. Group Homes.
Section 1003. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted in Residential Medium Density, Mobile Home Districts (RM-M):
1. Home occupations under the prescribed conditions of Section 2116 of this Ordinance.
2. Mobile homes, under the prescribed conditions of Section 2109 of this Ordinance.
3. Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures when
established within the space limits of this district, and under the prescribed conditions of
Section 2103 of this Ordinance.
Section 1004. Special Exceptions. After the provisions of this Ordinance relating to special
exceptions have been fulfilled, the City Council may permit as special exceptions in Residential
Medium Density, Mobile Home Districts (RM-M):
1. Dwellings, multiple family.
2. Mobile home parks, under the prescribed conditions of Section 2110 of this Ordinance.
3. Colleges and universities.
4. Dwellings, Townhouses.
5. Public and parochial nursery, primary, intermediate and secondary schools.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 35
Lot Area
(Sq. Ft.) Lot Width
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Height3
Principle/Acces.
Single Family
Dwelling
3,000 30’ interior
lots, or 30’ for
corner lots, or
45’ on cul-desac
curve.
20’ (1) 8’ on 1 side
& 5’ on 2nd
side of
interior lots.
(2) (3)
15’ 35’ / 35’
Duplex Dwelling 2,500 per
dwelling
unit
30’ interior
lots, or 30’ for
corner lots, or
45’ on cul-desac
curve.
20’ (1) 8’ on 1 side
& 5’ on 2nd
side of
interior lots.
(2) (3)
15’ 35’ / 35’
Multifamily
Dwelling
2,500 per
dwelling
unit
30’ interior
lots, or 30’ for
corner lots, or
45’ on cul-desac
curve.
20’ (1) 8’ on 1 side
& 5’ on 2nd
side of
interior lots.
(2) (3)
15’ 55’/ 35’
Townhouse
dwelling
2,500 per
dwelling
unit
30’ interior
lots, or 30’ for
corner lots, or
45’ on cul-desac
curve.
20’ (1) 8’ on 1 side
& 5’ on 2nd
side of
interior lots.
(2) (3)
15’ 55’ / 35’
Other Permitted
Uses
3,000 30’ interior
lots, or 30’ for
corner lots, or
45’ on cul-de-
20’ (1) 8’ on 1 side
& 5’ on 2nd
side of
interior lots.
15’ 35’
6. Child care center.
7. Private Golf courses and country clubs.
8. Alternative energy systems utilizing Biomass, Geothermal, Hydropower, Solar and/or Wind
sources in conformance with “Net Metering” per Nebraska State Statutes §70-2001 to 2005
(August 30, 2009, as amended). Individual or “Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems
(SWECS) shall also be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2117 of this Ordinance.
9. Hospitals, nursing homes, retirement and elderly housing facilities.
10. Medical clinics and other health facilities.
11. Governmental services.
12. Funeral homes and funeral chapels.
13. Professional offices.
14. Telecommunication Towers under the prescribed conditions of Article 30 of this Ordinance.
Section 1005. Prohibited Uses and Structures. All other uses and structures which are not
specifically permitted or not permissible as special exceptions shall be prohibited from Residential
Medium Density, Mobile Home Districts (RM-M).
Section 1006. Height and Area Regulations. The minimum lot and maximum height provisions
shall be as follows:
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 36
Table Notes: (1) In the case of structures erected on lots adjacent to lots which have structures
existing at the effective date of this Ordinance, the required front yard may be
the average of the front yards existing on the adjacent lots.
(2) Side yards for corner lots facing the street shall be one-half of the front yard
setback minimum requirements.
(3) A non-combustible carport may be constructed with a minimum side yard
clearance of three feet (3') feet and shall be attached to an existing structure.
Section 1007. Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage for all buildings shall not be
more than fifty five (55%) percent of the total lot area.
Section 1008. Parking Regulations. Parking within the Residential Medium Density Mobile Home
Districts (RM-M) shall be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2111 of this Ordinance.
Section 1009. Fence Regulations. Fences, walls and hedges within the Residential Medium
Density Mobile Home Districts (RM-M) shall be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2102
of this Ordinance.
Section 1010. Sign Regulations. Signs within the Residential Medium Density Mobile Home
Districts (RM-M) shall be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2112 of this Ordinance.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 37
ARTICLE 11
RESIDENTIAL HIGH DENSITY DISTRICT (RH)
Article 11 - Residential High Density District (RH)
Section 1101. Intent. The intent of a Residential High Density District is to provide for high density
residential use areas together with certain prescribed compatible uses.
Section 1102. Permitted Principal Uses and Structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted in Residential High Density Districts (RH):
1. Dwellings, single family.
2. Manufactured homes under the prescribed conditions of Section 2113 of this Ordinance.
3. Dwellings, duplex.
4. Dwellings, multiple family.
5. Dwellings, townhouse.
6. Public uses: including but not limited to parks, playgrounds, recreational uses, fire stations,
public utilities and utility distribution systems.
7. Child care homes.
8. Churches, places of worship and cemeteries.
9. Group Homes.
Section 1103. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted in Residential High Density Districts (RH):
1. Mobile homes under the prescribed conditions of Section 2109 of this Ordinance.
2. Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures when
established within the space limits of this district and under the prescribed conditions of
Section 2103 of this Ordinance.
3. Home occupations under the prescribed conditions of Section 2116 of this Ordinance.
Section 1104. Special Exceptions. After the provisions of this Ordinance relating to special
exceptions have been fulfilled, the City Council may permit as special exceptions in Residential
High Density Districts (RH):
1. Professional offices.
2. Funeral homes and funeral chapels.
3. Child care centers.
4. Public and parochial nursery, primary, intermediate and secondary schools.
5. Hospitals, nursing homes, retirement and elderly housing facilities.
6. Medical clinics and other health facilities.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 38
Lot Area
(Sq. Ft.) Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard
Rear
Yard
Height3
Principle/Acces.
Single Family
Dwelling
4,000 40’ interior
lots, or 50’
for corner
lots. (4)
20’ (1) 5’ (2) (3) 10’ 35’ / 35’
Duplex Dwelling 2,000 per
dwelling
unit
40’ interior
lots, or 50’
for corner
lots. (4)
20’ (1) 5’ (2) (3) 10’ 35’ / 35’
Multifamily
Dwelling
2,000 per
dwelling
unit.
Efficiency
units
1,200
40’ interior
lots, or 50’
for corner
lots. (4)
20’ (1) 5’ (2) (3) 10’ 75’/ 35’
Townhouse
dwelling
2,000 per
dwelling
unit
40’ interior
lots, or 50’
for corner
lots. (4)
20’ (1) 5’ (2) (3) 10’ 75’ / 35’
Other Permitted
Uses
4,000 40’ interior
lots, or 50’
for corner
lots. (4)
20’ (1) 5’ (2) (3) 10’ 35’
7. Alternative energy systems utilizing Biomass, Geothermal, Hydropower, Solar and/or Wind
sources in conformance with “Net Metering” per Nebraska State Statutes §70-2001 to 2005
(August 30, 2009, as amended). Individual or “Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems
(SWECS) shall also be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2117 of this Ordinance.
8. Private golf courses and country clubs.
9. Governmental services.
10. Colleges and universities.
11. Museums; historic and monument sites.
12. Telecommunication Towers under the prescribed conditions of Article 30 of this Ordinance.
13. Boarding House, Rooming House, or Bed and Breakfast.
14. Timeshare and Vacation Rental.
Section 1105. Prohibited Uses and Structures. All other uses and structures which are
specifically permitted or not permissible as special exceptions shall be prohibited from Residential
High Density Districts (RH).
Section 1106. Height and Area Regulations. The minimum lot and maximum height provisions
shall be as follows:
Notes: (1) In the case of structures erected on lots adjacent to lots which have structures existing
at the effective date of this Ordinance, the required front yard may be the average of
the front yards existing on the adjacent lots.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 39
(2) Side yards for corner lots facing the street shall be one-half of the front yard setback
minimum requirements.
(3) A non-combustible carport may be constructed with a minimum side yard clearance
of three (3') feet and shall be attached to an existing structure.
(4) Platted lots in existence as of the 2013 update of this Ordinance may have a lot width
of forty (40) feet or less, as long as the lot meets the front, side and rear yard setback
requirements. (See Section 2202 of this Ordinance.
Section 1107. Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage for all buildings shall not be
more than sixty (60%) percent of the total lot area.
Section 1108. Parking Regulations. Parking within the Residential High Density Districts (RH)
shall be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2111 of this Ordinance.
Section 1109. Fence Regulations. Fences, walls and hedges within the Residential High Density
Districts (RH) shall be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2102 of this Ordinance.
Section 1110. Sign Regulations. Signs within the Residential High Density Districts (RH) shall
be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2112 of this Ordinance.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 40
ARTICLE 12
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (CB)
Article 12 - Central Business District (CB)
Section 1201. Intent. The intent of the Central Business District (CB) is to provide commercial
areas for those establishments serving the general shopping needs of the trade area and in
particular, those establishments customarily oriented to the pedestrian shopper. The grouping of
uses is intended to strengthen the central business areas as the urban centers of trade, service,
governmental and cultural activities.
Section 1202. Permitted Principal Uses and Structures.1 The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted in the Central Business District (CB):
1. Retail sales, store or business.
2. Finance, insurance and real estate services.
3. Personal and Professional offices or services.
4. Business offices and services, excluding any warehousing and storage services.
5. Electrical repair; radio and television repair; watch, clock and jewelry repair.
6. Residential uses within upper floors, reserving ground floor for commercial uses only.
7. Governmental services.
8. Educational services.
9. Bus passenger terminals and taxicab transportation
10. Churches and places of worship, welfare and charitable services; business associations;
professional membership organizations; labor unions and similar organizations; and civic, social
and fraternal organizations.
11. Restaurants and taverns.
12. Communications and utility uses.
13. Public buildings and grounds.
14. Convenience stores or filling stations.
15. Automobile service stations.
16. Hotels and motels.
17. Automobile parking lots and structures.
1Revised December 21, 2016 - Ordinance No. 2015-2925
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 41
18. Libraries, museums, art galleries and planetaria; aquariums; historic and monument sites;
motion picture theaters; legitimate theaters, auditoriums, exhibition halls, gymnasiums and
athletic clubs; ice skating, roller skating and bowling.
19. Public uses of an administrative, public service or cultural type including city, county, state, or
federal administrative centers and courts, libraries, parks, police and fire stations and other
public buildings, structures and facilities.
20. Financial including institutions such as banks, savings and loan associations, credit unions and
finance companies.
21. Detached banking facilities (ATM).
22. Medical and dental clinics.
23. Private schools, including but not limited to business or commercial schools, dance or music
academies.
24. Sales and showrooms, including service facilities and rental of equipment, provided all displays
and merchandise are within the enclosure walls of the buildings.
25. Apartments on floors other than the first floor.
26. Business and professional offices.
27. Existing single family dwellings.
28. Funeral homes, funeral chapels, and funeral services.
Section 1203. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted in the Central Business District (CB):
1. Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures when
established in conformance within the space limits of this district and under the prescribed
conditions of Section 2103 of this Ordinance.
Section 1204. Special Exceptions. After the provisions of this Ordinance relating to special
exceptions have been fulfilled, the City Council may permit as special exceptions in the Central
Business District (CB):
1. Other trade and service uses which are similar to the permitted principal uses and which are
in harmony with the intent of this district.
2. Structures containing only residential uses.
3. Telecommunication Towers under the prescribed conditions of Article 30 of this Ordinance.
4. Alternative energy systems utilizing Biomass, Geothermal, Hydropower, Solar and/or Wind
sources in conformance with “Net Metering” per Nebraska State Statutes §70-2001 to 2005
(August 30, 2009, as amended). Individual or “Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems
(SWECS) shall also be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2117 of this Ordinance.
Section 1205. Prohibited Uses and Structures. All other uses and structures which are not
specifically permitted or not permissible as special exceptions shall be prohibited from the Central
Business District (CB).
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 42
Lot Area
(Sq. Ft.) Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
Height
Principle/Acces.
Permitted
Principal Uses
and Structures
2,400 25’ 0’ 0’ (1) 0’ 75’
Single Family
Dwelling
4,000 50’ 20’ (1) 5’ (1) 10’ 35’ / 35’
Duplex Dwelling 2,400 per
dwelling
unit
50’ 20’ (1) 5’ (1) 10’ 35’ / 35’
Multifamily
Dwelling
2,400 per
dwelling
unit.
Efficiency
units
1,200
75’ 20’ (1) 5’ (1) 10’ 75’/ 35’
Townhouse
dwelling
2,400 per
dwelling
unit
50’ 20’ (1) 5’ (1) 10’ 75’ / 35’
Other Permitted
Uses
4,000 50’ 20’ (1) 5’ (1) 10’ 35’
Section 1206. Height and Area Regulations. The minimum lot and maximum height provisions
shall be as follows:
Notes: (1) All buildings located on lots adjacent to a residential district shall be located so as to
conform on the adjacent side with the side yard requirements to the adjacent
residential district.
Section 1207. Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage for all buildings may be one
hundred (100%) percent of the total lot area.
Section 1208. Fence Regulations. Fences, walls and hedges within the Central Business
Districts (CB) shall be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2102 of this Ordinance.
Section 1209. Sign Regulations. Signs within the Central Business Districts (CB) shall be in
conformance with the provisions of Section 2112 of this Ordinance.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 43
ARTICLE 13
BUSINESS COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (BC)
Article 13 - Business Commercial District (BC)
Section 1301. Intent. The intent of the Business Commercial District (BC) is to provide general
commercial areas serving the general needs of both those establishments oriented toward the
pedestrian as well as those oriented toward the patrons transported by motor vehicles; to provide
for those establishments which are not directly dependent on a major vehicular circulation route or
primarily oriented toward travelers on the highway; and may include those establishments which,
due to the nature of the merchandise handled, require expansive display areas and large parking
lots, such as motor vehicles, trailers, lumber yards and farm implements.
Section 1302. Permitted Principal Uses and Structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted in the Business Commercial District (BC):
1. Retail sales, store or business.
2. Finance, insurance and real estate services.
3. Personal and Professional offices or services.
4. Business offices and services, excluding any warehousing and storage services.
5. Electrical repair; radio and television repair; watch, clock and jewelry repair.
6. Residential uses within upper floors, reserving ground floor for commercial uses only.
7. Public and Parochial nursery, primary, intermediate and secondary schools.
8. Educational services.
9. Bus passenger terminals and taxicab transportation.
10. Churches and places of worship, welfare and charitable services; business associations;
professional membership organizations; labor unions and similar organizations; and civic, social
and fraternal organizations.
11. Restaurants and Taverns.
12. Communications and utility uses.
13. Public buildings and grounds.
14. Convenience stores or filling stations.
15. Hotels and motels.
16. Automobile parking lots and structures.
17. Automobile repair and services.
18. Public uses of an administrative, public service or cultural type including city, county, state, or
federal administrative centers and courts, libraries, parks, police and fire stations and other
public buildings, structures and facilities.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 44
19. Funeral and cemetery services.
20. Farm products warehousing and storage, excluding stockyards.
21. Refrigerated warehousing.
22. Household goods warehousing and storage.
23. General warehousing and storage.
24. Automobile service stations.
25. Libraries; museums, art galleries and planetaria; aquariums; historic and monument sites;
motion picture theaters; legitimate theaters; auditoriums, exhibition halls, gymnasiums and
athletic clubs; ice skating, roller skating and bowling.
26. Car Wash Facilities.
27. Existing single family dwellings.
28. Financial including institutions such as banks, savings and loan associations, credit unions and
finance companies.
29. Detached banking facilities (ATM).
30. Sales and showrooms, including service facilities and rental of equipment, provided all displays
and merchandise are within the enclosure walls of the buildings.
31. Apartments on floors other than the first floor.
Section 1303. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted in the Business Commercial District (BC):
1. Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures when
established in conformance within the space limits of this district.
Section 1304. Special Exceptions. After the provisions of this Ordinance relating to special
exceptions have been fulfilled, the City Council may permit as special exceptions in the Business
Commercial District (BC):
1. Veterinarian facilities and animal hospitals.
2. Other trade, service and light industrial uses which are similar to the permitted principal uses
and which are in harmony with the intent of this district.
3. Telecommunication Towers under the prescribed conditions of Article 30 of this Ordinance.
4. Alternative energy systems utilizing Biomass, Geothermal, Hydropower, Solar and/or Wind
sources in conformance with “Net Metering” per Nebraska State Statutes §70-2001 to 2005
(August 30, 2009, as amended). Individual or “Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems
(SWECS) shall also be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2117 of this Ordinance.
Section 1305. Prohibited Uses and Structures. All other uses and structures which are not
specifically permitted or not permissible as special exceptions shall be prohibited from the Business
Commercial District (BC).
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 45
Lot Area
(Sq. Ft.) Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
Height1
Principle/Acces.
Permitted
Principal Uses
and Structures
4,500 40’ for
interior lots
and 50’ for
corner lots.
25’ (1) 10’ (2) 15’ 75’ (3)
Single Family
Dwelling
(existing and
replacement
only)
5,000 40’ for
interior lots
and 50’ for
corner lots.
20’ (1) 8’ on 1
side & 5’
on 2nd side
of interior
lots. (2) (3)
15’ 35’ / 35’
Other Permitted
Uses
4,500 40’ for
interior lots
and 50’ for
corner lots.
20’ (1) 5’ (1) 10’ 35’
Section 1306. Height and Area Regulations. The minimum lot and maximum height provisions
shall be as follows:
Notes: (1) Property zoned Business Commercial (BC) adjacent to "B" Street from West 11th
Street to East 13th Street shall have a front yard of not less than a depth of 15 feet;
provided further that any front yard less than 25 feet shall not be utilized for the
parking of vehicles nor be included in space calculations for computing parking
requirements. This provision for reduced front yard requirement shall not supersede
any other provision of the zoning ordinance, including the requirement for adequate
vision triangle at all street intersections.
(2) All buildings located on lots adjacent to a residential district shall be located so as to
conform on the adjacent side with the side yard requirements to the adjacent
residential district.
(3) The height of all buildings and structures shall not exceed seventy-five feet (75'),
except that within one hundred feet (100') of the RL, RM, or RM-M Districts, no
structure shall exceed thirty-five feet (35'). Telecommunication towers, allowed by
special exception, shall not exceed one hundred sixty feet (160').
Section 1307. Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage for all buildings shall not be
more than seventy (70%) percent of the total lot area.
Section 1308. Parking Regulations. Parking within the Business Commercial Districts (BC) shall
be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2111 of this Ordinance.
Section 1309. Fence Regulations. Fences, walls and hedges within the Business Commercial
Districts (BC) shall be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2102 of this Ordinance.
Section 1310. Sign Regulations. Signs within the Business Commercial Districts (BC) shall be
in conformance with the provisions of Section 2112 of this Ordinance.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 46
ARTICLE 14
HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (HC)
Article 14 - Highway Commercial District (HC)
Section 1401. Intent. The intent of the Highway Commercial District (HC) is to provide
commercial areas for those establishments which can function most satisfactorily in an area directly
related to a major vehicular circulation route due to the nature of the merchandise handled and the
display space required, such as motor vehicles, trailers and farm implements; the method of
transport required of the purchaser for the merchandise handled, particularly goods customarily
traded in bulk such as lumber or feed requiring access for the customer to the sales area; primarily
depends upon vehicular, as opposed to pedestrian, access such as drive-in facilities and all types
of automotive and farm implement service; or the clientele toward which the establishment is
primarily oriented, particularly travelers on the highway.
Section 1402. Permitted Principal Uses and Structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted in Highway Commercial Districts (HC):
1. Retail and wholesale sales.
2. Funeral and cemetery services.
3. Farm products warehousing and storage, excluding stockyards.
4. Refrigerated warehousing.
5. Food lockers, provided, that any slaughtering, killing, eviscerating, skinning or plucking be done
indoors.
6. Household goods warehousing and storage.
7. General warehousing and storage.
8. Automobile repair and services.
9. Re-upholstery and furniture repair services.
10. Contract construction services.
11. Bus garaging and equipment maintenance.
12. Motor freight terminals.
13. Motor freight garaging and equipment maintenance.
14. Automobile parking lots and structures.
15. Libraries; museums, art galleries; planetaria; aquariums; historic and monument sites;
auditoriums, exhibition halls and penny arcades.
16. Miniature golf, gymnasiums and athletic clubs, swimming pools, tennis courts; ice skating, roller
skating; bowling.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 47
17. Public parks buildings and grounds.
18. Amphitheaters, stadiums, drive-in movies, arenas and field houses; race tracks; fairgrounds;
amusement parks; golf driving ranges; go-cart tracks; golf courses and country clubs, riding
stables; playfields and athletic fields; bowling; and swimming pools.
19. Communication and utility uses.
20. Restaurants and taverns.
21. Automobile service stations and repair facilities.
22. Motels and Hotels.
23. Mini malls, strip malls, commercial malls, discount and big box retail stores.
24. Drive-in theaters.
25. Veterinarian facilities and animal hospitals.
26. Car washes.
27. Business and professional offices.
28. Automotive dealerships and used car sales lots.
29. Detached banking facilities (ATM).
30. Transportation warehousing, trucking and freight terminals.
31. Public utilities, including offices, shops and substations.
Section 1403. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted in Highway Commercial Districts (HC):
1. Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted principal uses and
structures when established in conformance within the space limits of this district, and under
the prescribed conditions of Section 2103 of this Ordinance.
Section 1404. Special Exceptions. After the provisions of this Ordinance relating to special
exceptions have been fulfilled, the City Council may permit as special exceptions in Highway
Commercial Districts (HC):
1. Other trade, service and light industrial uses which are similar to the permitted principal uses
and which are in harmony with the intent of this district.
2. Churches, places of worship and cemeteries.
3. Telecommunication Towers under the prescribed conditions of Article 30 of this Ordinance.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 48
Lot Area
(Sq. Ft.) Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
Height
Principle/Acces.
Permitted
Principal Uses
and Structures
7,500 75’ for interior
lots and 85’
for corner lots.
(3)
40’ (1) 10’ (2) 20’ 75’ (2)
4. Alternative energy systems utilizing Biomass, Geothermal, Hydropower, Solar and/or Wind
sources in conformance with “Net Metering” per Nebraska State Statutes §70-2001 to 2005
(August 30, 2009, as amended). Individual or “Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems
(SWECS) shall also be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2117 of this Ordinance.
Section 1405. Prohibited Uses and Structures. All other uses and structures which are not
specifically permitted or not permissible as special exceptions shall be prohibited from Highway
Commercial Districts (HC).
Section 1406. Height and Area Regulations. The minimum lot and maximum height provisions
shall be as follows:
Notes: (1) Side yards on corner lots, wherein the side yard facing the street shall be one-half of
the front yard setback minimum requirements.
(2) Height of buildings within one-hundred (100) feet of the RL, RM or RM-M Residential
Districts shall have a maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet.
(3) Platted lots in existence as of the 2013 update of this Ordinance may have a lot width
of seventy-five (75) feet or less, as long as the lot meets the front, side and rear yard
setback requirements. (See Section 2202 of this Ordinance.)
Section 1407. Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage for all buildings shall not be
more than fifty (50%) percent of the total area.
Section 1408. Parking Regulations. Parking within the Highway Commercial Districts (HC) shall
be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2111 of this Ordinance.
Section 1409. Fence Regulations. Fences, walls and hedges within the Highway Commercial
Districts (HC) shall be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2102 of this Ordinance.
Section 1410. Sign Regulations. Signs within the Highway Commercial Districts (HC) shall be
in conformance with the provisions of Section 2112 of this Ordinance.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 49
ARTICLE 15
(This Article is reserved for future use.)
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 50
ARTICLE 16
INDUSTRIAL LIGHT DISTRICT (IL)
Article 16 - Industrial Light District (IL)
Section 1601. Intent. The intent of an Industrial Light District (IL) is to provide space for certain
commercial and a wide range of industrial uses and structures which are able to meet certain
performance standards to protect nearby non-commercial and non-industrial uses from undesirable
environmental conditions. Residential and other similar uses are prohibited from this district in
order to limit environmental effects associated with certain commercial and industrial uses,
irrespective of their meeting performance standards.
Section 1602. Permitted Principal Uses and Structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted in Industrial Light Districts (IL):
1. Wholesale, storage and warehouse uses.
2. Garaging and equipment maintenance.
3. Automobile service stations.
4. Freight terminals.
5. Any light industrial, trade, or service use which can meet the performance standards for
Section 1606 set forth below, provided, such is not specifically prohibited.
6. Existing single family homes.
Section 1603. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted in the Industrial Light District (IL):
1. Caretaker and watchmen quarters.
2. Medical facilities accessory to an industrial use.
3. Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures when
established in conformance within the space limits of this district and under the prescribed
conditions of Section 2103 of this Ordinance.
Section 1604. Special Exceptions. After the provisions of the Ordinance relating to special
exceptions have been fulfilled, the City Council may permit as special exceptions in the Industrial
Light Districts (IL) any use which is consistent with the intent of this district and which is not
prohibited and the following.
1. Alternative energy systems utilizing Biomass, Geothermal, Hydropower, Solar and/or Wind
sources in conformance with “Net Metering” per Nebraska State Statutes §70-2001 to 2005
(August 30, 2009, as amended). Individual or “Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems
(SWECS) shall also be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2117 of this Ordinance.
2. Telecommunication Towers under the prescribed conditions of Article 30 of this Ordinance.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 51
Section 1605. Prohibited Uses and Structures. All residential dwellings of any kind, and all
other uses which are not specifically permitted, or cannot meet the performance standards for
industry, or are not permissible as special exceptions, shall be prohibited.
Section 1606. Performance Standards. To be a permitted industrial use in an Industrial Light
District (IL), whether as a permitted use or as a special exception, such use must meet the following
performance standards:
1. Physical Appearance. All operations shall be carried on within an enclosed building except that
new materials or equipment in operable condition may be stored in the open. Normal daily
wastes of an inorganic nature may be stored in containers not in a building when such
containers are not readily visible from the street.
2. Fire Hazard. No operation shall involve the uses of highly flammable gases, acid, liquids,
grinding processes or other inherent fire hazard. This provision shall not be construed to
prohibit the use of normal fuels, motor fuels and welding gases when handled in accordance
with other City ordinances.
3. Noise. No operation shall be carried on which involves noise in excess of the normal traffic
noise of the adjacent street at the time of the daily peak hour of traffic volume. Noise shall be
measured at the property line and when the level of such noise cannot be determined by
observation with the natural sense, a suitable instrument may be used and measurement may
include breakdowns into a reasonable number of frequency ranges. All noises shall be muffled
so as not to be objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency or shrillness.
4. Sewage and Liquid Wastes. No operation shall be carried on which involves the discharge into
a sewer, water course or ground of liquid wastes of any radioactive nature, or liquid wastes of
a chemical nature which are detrimental to normal sewage plant operation or corrosive and
damage to sewer pipes and installations.
5. Air Contaminants. Air contaminants and smoke shall be less dark than designed Number One
on the Ringleman Chart as published by the United States Bureau of Mines, except that smoke
of a density designated as Number One shall be permitted for one (1) four (4) minutes period
in each one-half (½) hour. Light colored contaminants of such opacity as to obscure an
observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than the aforesaid shall not be permitted.
Particulate matter of dust as measured at the point of emission by any generally accepted
method shall not be emitted in excess of two-tenth (.2) grains per cubic foot as corrected to a
temperature of five hundred (500) degrees Fahrenheit, except for a period of four (4) minutes
in any one-half (½) hour, at which time it may equal but not exceed six tenths (.6) grains per
cubic foot as corrected to a temperature of five hundred (500) degrees Fahrenheit.
Due to the fact that the possibilities of air contamination cannot reasonably be comprehensively
covered in this section there shall be applied the general rule that there shall not be discharged
from any sources whatsoever such quantities of air contaminant or other material in such
quantity as to cause injury, detriment, nuisance or annoyance to any considerable number of
persons or to the public in general or to endanger the comfort, repose, health or safety of any
such considerable number of persons or to the public in general or to cause or have a natural
tendency to cause injury or damage to business, vegetation or property.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 52
6. Odor. The emissions of odors that are generally agreed to be obnoxious, shall be prohibited.
Observations of odor shall be made at the property line of the establishment causing the odor.
As a guide to classification of odor it shall be deemed that strong odors of putrefaction and
fermentation tend to be obnoxious and that such odors as associated with baking or the
roasting of nuts and coffee shall not normally be considered obnoxious within the meaning of
this Ordinance.
7. Gases. The gases sulphur dioxide and hydrogen sulphide shall not exceed five (5) parts per
million. All nitrous fumes shall not exceed one (1) part per million. Measurements shall be
taken at the property line of the particular establishment involved.
8. Vibration. All machines including punch presses and stamping machines shall be so mounted
as to minimize vibration and in no case shall such vibration exceed a displacement of three
thousandths (3/1000) of an inch measured at the property line. The use of steam or broad
hammers shall not be permitted in this District.
9. Glare and Heat. All glare, such as welding arcs and open furnaces, shall be shielded so that
they shall not be visible from the property line. No heat from furnaces or processing equipment
shall be sensed at the property line to the extent of raising the temperature of air or materials
more than five (5) degrees Fahrenheit.
Section 1607. Height and Area Regulations. The minimum lot and maximum height provisions
shall be as follows:
Lot Area
(Sq. Ft.) Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
Height
Principle/Acces.
Permitted
Principal Uses
and Structures
10,000 80' (2) 20' 10' (1) 15' none
Notes: (1) Lots adjacent to any residential district, the side yard shall not be less than
twenty-five (25) feet along that portion of the lot abutting the residential district.
(2) Platted lots in existence as of the 2013 update of this Ordinance may have a lot width
of eighty (80) feet or less, as long as the lot meets the front, side and rear yard
setback requirements. (See Section 2202 of this Ordinance.
Section 1608. Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage for all buildings shall be not
more than sixty (60) percent of the total lot area.
Section 1609. Use Limitations. All uses within the Industrial Light District (IL) are subject to the
following restrictions:
1. All operations, activities and storage shall be conducted entirely inside of a building, or
buildings, unless the nearest point of such operation or activity is more than 200 feet from the
boundary of any other zoning district other than an IH district and except that storage may be
maintained outside the building and side yards or rear yards if such storage area is separated
from public streets and other property (except property located in an IL or IH district) by
screening of not less than six (6) feet in height.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 53
2. Servicing and maintenance of vehicles shall be permitted only when such is necessary to the
conduct of a permitted use.
3. If a lot in an IL district adjoins a residential district, screening shall be provided at the lot lines
sufficient to protect, on a year around basis, the privacy of adjoining residential uses.
Section 1610. Parking Regulations. Parking within the Industrial Light District (IL) shall be in
conformance with the provisions of Section 2111 of this Ordinance.
Section 1611. Fence Regulations. Fences, walls and hedges within the Industrial Light District
(IL) shall be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2102 of this Ordinance.
Section 1612. Sign Regulations. Signs within the Industrial Light District (IL) shall be in
conformance with the provisions of Section 2112 of this Ordinance.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 54
ARTICLE 17
INDUSTRIAL HEAVY DISTRICT (IH)
Article 17 - Industrial Heavy District (IH)
Section 1701. Intent. It is the intent of Industrial Heavy Districts (IH) to provide land for the widest
range of industrial operations permitted in the planning jurisdiction area, for those industrial uses
which are unable to meet the performance standards designated for the Industrial Light Districts
(IL) so as to be nuisance-free in operation of construction.
Section 1702. Permitted Principal Uses and Structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted in Industrial Heavy Districts (IH):
1. Wholesale, storage and warehouse uses.
2. Garaging and equipment maintenance.
3. Automobile service stations.
4. Freight terminals.
5. Any light industrial, trade, or service use which can meet the “light industrial” performance
standards for the IL Industrial Light District set forth in Section 1606, provided, such is not
specifically prohibited.
6. Existing single family dwellings.
7. Any industrial or manufacturing use which can meet the performance standards for this district
set forth below, except as herein modified, but which is not prohibited.
8. General research facilities.
9. Indoor eating and drinking establishments on the same lot as, and incidental to, any use
allowed by right or special review.
10. Automobile parking lots.
11. Sales, service and storage of mobile homes, campers, boats, bicycles, motor vehicles,
motorized equipment and accessories for such vehicles, not including salvage junk yards.
12. Commercial uses (excluding retail stores) including, but not limited to the following: lumber
yards, nurseries, stock production and sales, yard equipment, transportation centers, service
garages, wholesale operations, household equipment and appliance repair, rental
establishments, car washes, bulk cleaning and laundry plants, cold storage lockers, and printing
services -- provided adequate safeguards be taken to protect adjoining properties from
objectionable or harmful substances, conditions or operations.
13. Feed mixing plants.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 55
Section 1703. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted in the Industrial Heavy Districts (IH):
1. Caretaker and watchmen quarters.
2. Medical facilities accessory to an industrial use.
3. Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures when
established in conformance within the space limits of this district and under the prescribed
conditions of Section 2103 of this Ordinance.
Section 1704. Special Exceptions. After the provisions of this Ordinance relating to special
exceptions have been fulfilled, the City Council may permit as special exceptions in the Industrial
Heavy District (IH):
1. The storage above ground of liquid petroleum products or chemicals of flammable or noxious
nature when more than one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) gallons are stored on one (1) lot
of less than one (1) acre in size or when more than twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons are
stored in one (1) tank.
2. The storage of flammable of noxious gases above or below ground in excess of five million
(5,000,000) cubic feet on any one (1) lot of less than one (1) acre or two million (2,000,000)
cubic feet in any one (1) tank.
3. Meat and poultry packing, slaughtering, eviscerating and skinning; and the rendering of byproducts
of slaughtering and killing animals or poultry.
4. Livestock confinement facilities/operation and yards for the sale, transfer and temporary holding
of livestock.
5. Veterinarian services.
6. Telecommunication Towers under the prescribed conditions of Article 30 of this Ordinance.
7. Alternative energy systems utilizing Biomass, Geothermal, Hydropower, Solar and/or Wind
sources in conformance with “Net Metering” per Nebraska State Statutes §70-2001 to 2005
(August 30, 2009, as amended). Individual or “Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems
(SWECS) shall also be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2117 of this Ordinance.
8. Adult establishment, when located a distance of at least 1,000 feet from an additional adult
establishment, residence, school, church or place of worship, or eating and drinking
establishment.
9. Public Recycling centers and household waste transfer stations.
10. Salvage or Junk Yard.
Section 1705. Prohibited Uses and Structures. All residential dwellings of any kind and all other
uses which are not specifically permitted, cannot meet the performance standards for industry or
are not permissible as special exceptions, shall be prohibited.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 56
Section 1706. Performance Standards. To be a permitted industrial use in Industrial Heavy
Districts (IH) whether as a permitted use or as a special exception, such uses must meet the
following performance standards:
1. Appearance. Junk, salvage, auto wrecking and similar operations shall be shielded from view
from streets and from adjacent properties in another district by means of a sturdy, sightobscuring
fence in good repair, or two rows of alternate planted evergreen or red cedar trees.
2. Fire Hazard. All flammable substances involved in any activity established in this district shall
be handled in conformance with the latest edition of the Fire Prevention Code published by the
American Insurance Association and other City ordinances.
3. Noise. All noises and noise-causing activities shall be muffled so that they will not create a
disturbance greater than normal peak hour traffic noise on a major street when observed from
any area Residential District. Major street noise for comparison purposes shall be measured
at the property line.
4. Sewage and Liquid Waste. No operation shall be carried on which involves the discharge into
a sewer, water course or the ground of liquid wastes of any radioactive nature, or liquid waste
of a chemical nature which are detrimental to normal sewage plant operation or corrosive and
damaging to sewer pipes and installations.
5. Air Contaminants. Air contaminants and smoke shall be less dark than designated Number
Two on the Ringleman Charts as published by the United States Bureau of Mines, except that
smoke of a density designated as Number Two shall be permitted for one (1) four (4) minute
period in each one half (½) hour. Light-colored contaminants of such opacity as to obscure an
observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than the aforesaid shall not be permitted.
Particulate matter of dust as measured at the point of emission by any generally accepted
method shall not be emitted in excess of two-tenth (.2) grains per cubic foot as corrected to a
temperature of five hundred (500) degrees Fahrenheit.
Due to the fact that the possibilities of air contaminants cannot be comprehensively covered in
this section there shall be applied the general rule that there shall not be discharged from any
source whatsoever such quantities of air contaminants or other material in such quantity as to
cause injury, detriment, nuisance or annoyance to any considerable number of persons or to
the public in general, or to endanger the comfort, repose, health or safety of any such
considerable number of persons or the general public, or to cause or have a natural tendency
to cause injury or damage to business, vegetation or property.
6. Odor. Odor causing operations shall be controlled so as to reduce escape of odors to the
minimum practical within the limits of technology and economics.
7. Gases. All noxious gases shall be controlled to the extent that they will not be injurious to life
and property. The gases sulphur dioxide and hydrogen sulphide shall not exceed five (5) parts
per million, carbon monoxide shall not exceed twenty-five (25) parts per million, and nitrous
fumes shall not exceed five (5) parts per million. All measurements shall be made at the
property line.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 57
Lot Area
(Sq. Ft.) Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
Height
Principle/Acces.
Permitted
Principal Uses
and Structures
10,000 80’ (2) 25’ 10’ (1) 20’ none
8. Vibration. All machines including punch presses and stamping machines shall be mounted so
as to minimize vibration. Vibration shall not be so excessive that it interferes with industrial
operations on nearby lots.
Section 1707. Height and Area Regulations. The minimum lot and maximum height provisions
shall be as follows:
Notes: (1) Lots adjacent to any residential district, the side yard shall not be less than twenty-five
(25) feet along that portion of the lot adjacent the residential district.
(2) Platted lots in existence as of the 2013 update of this Ordinance may have a lot width
of eighty (80) feet or less, as long as the lot meets the front, side and rear yard
setback requirements. (See Section 2202 of this Ordinance).
Section 1708. Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage for all buildings shall not be
more than sixty (60) percent of the total lot area.
Section 1709. Use Limitations. All uses within the Industrial Heavy District (IL) are subject to the
following restrictions:
1. All operations, activities and storage shall be conducted wholly inside of a building or buildings,
unless the nearest point of such operation or activity if more than 200 feet from the boundary
of any other zoning district other than an IH District and except that storage may be maintained
outside the building and side yards or rear yards if such storage area is separated from public
streets and other property (except property located in an IH District) by screening of not less
than six (6) feet in height.
2. Servicing and maintenance of vehicles shall be permitted only when such is necessary to the
conduct of a permitted use.
3. If a lot in an IH District adjoins a residential district, screening shall be provided at the lot lines
sufficient to project, on a year around basis, the privacy of adjoining residential uses.
Section 1710. Parking Regulations. Parking within the Industrial Heavy Districts (IL) shall be in
conformance with the provisions of Section 2111 of this Ordinance.
Section 1711. Fence Regulations. Fences, walls and hedges within the Industrial Heavy District
(IL) shall be in conformance with the provisions of Section 2102 of this Ordinance.
Section 1712. Sign Regulations. Signs within the Industrial Heavy District (IL) shall be in
conformance with the provisions of Section 2112 of this Ordinance.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 58
ARTICLE 18
FLOODWAY AND FLOODWAY FRINGE DISTRICTS
(Ref. Ordinance No. 2009-2821 - 03/16/09)
Section 1801. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common
usage and so as to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.
Actuarial Rates - or "risk premium rates" are those rates established by the Federal Insurance
Administrator pursuant to individual community studies and investigations which are undertaken
to provide flood insurance in accordance with 42 U.S.C. 4014 and the accepted actuarial principles.
Actuarial rates include provisions for operating costs and allowances.
Appeal - a request for a review of the Building Official's interpretation of any provision of this
ordinance or a request for a variance.
Area of Shallow Flooding - a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) or greater annual change of flooding to an average depth of
one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel is unpredictable and where velocity flow
may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of Special Flood Hazard - the land in the flood plain within a community subject to one
percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
Base Flood - means the flood having one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
Base Flood Elevation - elevation indicated in the official flood plain study as the elevation of the
100-year flood.
Base Flood Protection Elevation - an elevation two feet (2') higher than the water surface elevation
of the base flood.
Basement - means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all
sides.
Channel - a natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with a definite bed and banks to
confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water. Channel flow, thus, is that water
which is flowing within the limits of a defined channel.
Community - any state, area or political subdivision thereof which has authority to adopt and
enforce flood plain management regulations for the areas within its jurisdiction.
Development - any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not
limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 59
Existing Construction - (for the purposes of determining rates) structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for
FIRM's effective before that date. "Existing Construction" may also be referred to as "existing
structures".
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - a manufactured home park or subdivision for
which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is complete before the effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - the preparation of additional
sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood or Flooding - a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally
dry land areas from:
(1) the overflow of inland or tidal waters
(2) the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Fringe - is that area of the floodplain, outside of the floodway, that on the average is likely
to be flooded once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one percent chance of flood occurrence in any
one year).
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - an official map of a community, on which the Flood Insurance
Study has delineated the Flood Hazard Boundaries and the zones establishing insurance rates
applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study - the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
Floodplain - any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition
of "flooding").
Floodplain Management - the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plan,
flood control works, and flood management regulations.
Flood Protection System - those physical structural works constructed specifically to modify flooding
in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard".
Such a system typically includes levees or dikes. These specialized modifying works are those
constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Flood Proofing - any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes or adjustments
to structures, including utility and sanitary facilities, which would preclude the entry of water.
Structural components shall have the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and the effect of buoyancy.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 60
Floodway or Regulatory Floodway - the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
portion of the flood plain that must be reserved in order to discharge the 100-year flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot (1') at any point assuming
equal conveyance reduction outside the channel from the two sides of the flood plain.
Freeboard - a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of flood
plain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could
contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway
conditions, such as wave action, clogged bridge openings and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the water shed.
Highest Adjacent Grade - the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction
next to the proposed walls of a structure.
Historic Structure - any structure that is: (a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) Individually listed on a state inventory of
historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or (d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: (1) By an
approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) Directly by the
Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Lowest Floor - the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished
or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an
area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design
requirements of this ordinance.
Manufactured Home - a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected
to the required utilities. For flood plain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also
includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180
consecutive days. For insurance purposes the term "manufactured home" does not include park
trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - a parcel (or contiguous parcels of land) divided into two
or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
New Construction - For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for
which the "start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - a manufactured home park or subdivision for which
the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of
floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 61
Overlay District - a district in which additional requirements act in conjunction with the underlying
zoning district(s). The original zoning district designation does not change.
Principally Above Ground - that at least 51 percent of the actual cash value of the structure is above
ground.
Recreational Vehicle - a vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) 400 square feet or less
when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or
permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Special Flood Hazard Area - the land in the floodplain within a community subject to one percent
or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
Start of Construction - [for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the
coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)] includes substantial improvement, and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure - a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home, and a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
Substantial Damage - damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring
the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement - any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before
"start of construction" of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred
"substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however,
include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state
or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2)
any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a "historic structure."
Variance - a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this ordinance which permits
construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance where specific enforcement would
result in unnecessary hardship.
Violation - a failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s
floodplain management regulations.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 62
100-Year Flood (Base Flood Elevation) - the base flood having a percent (1%) chance of annual
occurrence.
Section 1802. Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact and Purposes.
1. Statutory Authorization. The Legislature of the State of Nebraska has delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt zoning regulations designed to protect the
public health, safety and general welfare. The Legislature, in Sections 31-1001 to 31-1022,
R.R.S. 1943 (as amended), has further assigned the responsibility to adopt, administer, and
enforce floodplain management regulations to the county, city or village with zoning jurisdiction
over the flood-prone area. Therefore, the City Council of the City of McCook, Red Willow
County, Nebraska, ordains as follows:
2. Findings of Fact:
A. Flood Losses Resulting from Periodic Inundation. The flood hazard areas of the City of
McCook, Red Willow County, Nebraska, are subject to inundation which results in loss of
life and property, health, and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment
of the tax base all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
B. General Causes of these Flood Losses. These flood losses are caused by (1) the
cumulative effect of obstruction in floodways causing increases in flood heights and
velocities; and (2) the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or
hazardous to others which are inadequately elevated or otherwise protected from flood
damages.
C. Methods used to Analyze Flood Hazards. This ordinance uses a reasonable method of
analyzing flood hazards which consists of a series of interrelated steps:
(1) Selection of a regulatory flood which is based upon engineering calculations which
permit a consideration of such flood factors as its expected frequency of occurrence, the
area inundated, and the depth of inundation. The base flood is selected for this
ordinance. It is representative of large floods which are reasonably characteristic of
what can be expected to occur on the particular streams subject to this ordinance. It is
in the general order of a flood which could be expected to have a one percent (1%)
chance of occurrence in any one year, as delineated on the Federal Insurance
Administration's Flood Insurance Study, and illustrative materials dated February 4,
2009, as amended.
(2) Calculation of water surface profiles based upon a hydraulic engineering analysis of the
capacity of the stream channel and overbank areas to convey the base flood.
(3) Computation of the floodway required to convey this flood without increasing flood
heights more than one foot (1') at any point.
(4) Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no obstruction is permitted
which would cause any water surface increase along the floodway profile in flood height.
(5) Delineation of floodway fringe, i.e., that area outside the floodway encroachment lines
but which still is subject to inundation by the base flood.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 63
3. Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare and to minimize those losses described in Section 1802 (2)(A), by applying
the provisions of this ordinance to:
A. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of
flooding or cause undue increases in flood heights or velocities.
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities which serve such uses, be
provided with flood protection at the time of initial construction.
C. Protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuited for intended purposes because of
flood hazard.
D. Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the community to purchase flood
insurance in the National Flood Insurance Program.
Section 1803. General Provisions.
1. Lands to Which Ordinance Applies. This ordinance shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction
of the City of McCook, Red Willow County, Nebraska identified on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) dated February 4, 2009, as numbered and unnumbered A Zones (including AE,
AO and AH Zones) and within the Zoning Districts FW and FF established in Section 1805 of
this ordinance. In all areas covered by this ordinance no development shall be permitted except
upon the issuance of a floodplain permit to develop, granted by the City of McCook or its duly
designated representative under such safeguards and restrictions as the City of McCook or the
designated representative may reasonably impose for the promotion and maintenance of the
general welfare, health of the inhabitants of the community and where specifically noted in
Sections 1806, 1807, and 1808.
2. The Enforcement Officer. The City Manager who serves as the Zoning Administrator of the City
of McCook, is hereby designated as the Council’s duly designated Enforcement Officer for
Article 18, of the City of McCook Zoning Ordinance.
3. Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries. The boundaries of the floodway and floodway
fringe districts shall be determined by scaling distances on the official zoning map. Where
interpretation is needed to the exact location of the boundaries of the districts as shown on the
official zoning map, as for example where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions, the Zoning Administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation. In such cases where the interpretation is contested, the Board of Zoning
Adjustment will resolve the dispute. The regulatory flood elevation for the point in question shall
be the governing factor in locating the district boundary on the land. The person contesting the
location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to
the Board of Zoning Adjustment and to submit his own technical evidence, if he so desires.
4. Compliance. No development located within known flood hazard areas of the community shall
be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms
of this ordinance and other applicable regulations.
5. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this ordinance to repeal, abrogate
or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this
ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this ordinance shall prevail.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 64
6. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be
held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body
and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by State Statutes.
7. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific
methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood height may be
increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by
debris. This ordinance does not imply that areas outside floodway and floodway fringe district
boundaries or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of McCook or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that may result from reliance on this
ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
8. Severability. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this ordinance is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this ordinance
shall not be affected thereby.
9. Appeal. Where a request for a permit to develop or a variance is denied by the City Manager,
the applicant may apply for such permit or variance directly to the Board of Zoning Adjustment.
Section 1804. Development Permit.
1. Permit Required. No person, firm or corporation shall initiate any development or substantial
improvement or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate permit for
development for each such building or structure.
2. Administration.
A. The Zoning Administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions
of this ordinance.
B. Duties of the Zoning Administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Review all development permit applications to assure that sites are reasonably safe
from flooding and that the permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied.
(2) Review development permit applications for proposed development to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, state or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including
manufactured home parks or subdivisions, to determine whether such proposals will be
reasonably safe from flooding.
(4) Notify adjacent communities and the Nebraska Department of Natural Resources prior
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification
to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(5) Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said
watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 65
(6) Verify, record, and maintain the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures in
special flood hazard areas.
(7) Verify, record, and maintain the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which
the new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed.
(8) When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, the Zoning Administrator (City
Manager) shall be presented certification from a registered professional engineer or
architect.
3. Application for Permit.
A. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished
for that purpose. Every such application shall:
(1) Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit.
(2) Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot, block, tract and
house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and definitely
locate the proposed building or development.
(3) Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed development is intended.
(4) Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed construction.
(5) Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent who may be required to submit
evidence to indicate such authority.
(6) Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the Zoning Administrator.
Section 1805. Establishment of Zoning Districts. Along watercourses where a floodway has
been established, the mapped floodplain areas are hereby divided into the two following districts:
A floodway overlay district (FW) and a flood fringe overlay district (FF) as identified in the Flood
Insurance Study [and accompanying map(s)]. Within these districts all uses not meeting the
standards of this ordinance and those standards of the underlying zoning district shall be prohibited.
Section 1806. Standards for Floodplain Development.
1. No permit for development shall be granted for new construction, substantial improvements and
other development(s) including the placement of manufactured homes within all numbered and
unnumbered A zones (including AE, AO, and AH zones) unless the conditions of this Section
are satisfied.
2. All areas identified as unnumbered A zones on the FIRM are subject to inundation of the base
flood; however, the water surface elevation was not provided. The unnumbered A zones shall
be subject to all development provisions of Section 1807. If Flood Insurance Study data is not
available, the community shall utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data currently
available from Federal, State or other sources.
3. Until a floodway has been designated, no development or substantial improvement may be
permitted within special flood hazard areas unless the applicant has demonstrated that the
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 66
proposed development or substantial improvement, when combined with all other existing and
reasonably anticipated developments or substantial improvements, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any location as shown on the
Flood Insurance Study.
4. New construction, subdivision proposals, substantial improvement, prefabricated buildings,
placement of manufactured homes and other developments shall require:
A. Design or anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads including the effects of buoyancy;
B. New or replacement water supply system and/or sanitary sewage systems be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into flood waters, and on-site waste disposal systems be located so as to avoid
impairment or contamination.
C. Construction with materials resistant to flood damage, utilizing methods and practices that
minimize flood damages, and with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
D. All utility and sanitary facilities shall be floodproofed up to the regulatory flood protection
elevation so that any space below the regulatory flood protection elevation is water tight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water with structural components having
the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
E. That until a floodway has been designated, no development including landfill, may be
permitted within the identified flood plain unless the applicant for the land use has
demonstrated that the proposed use, when combined with all other existing and reasonably
anticipated uses, will not increase the water surface elevation of the 100-year flood more
than one foot (1') on the average cross-section of the reach in which the development or
landfill is located as shown in the official flood plain study incorporated by reference;
Section 1802(2)(C) of this ordinance.
F. Storage of Material and Equipment:
(1) The storage or processing of materials that are in time of flooding buoyant, flammable,
explosive or could be injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited.
(2) Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage
by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if readily removable from the area
within which the time available after flood warning.
H. Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home
parks or subdivisions, be required to assure that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are
located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 67
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards;
(4) Proposals for development (including proposals for manufactured home parks and
subdivisions) of five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots, whichever is lesser, include within such
proposals the regulatory flood elevation.
Section 1807. Floodway Fringe Overlay District - (Including AO and AH Zones).
1. Permitted Uses. Any use permitted in Section 1808(1) shall be permitted in the Floodway
Fringe Overlay District. No use shall be permitted in the district unless the standards of
Section 1806 are met.
2. Standards for the Floodway Fringe Overlay District
A. Require new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures to have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above one (1) foot above the base flood
elevation.
B. Require new construction or substantial improvements of non-residential structures to have
the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above one (1) foot above the base flood
elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, to be floodproofed so that
below that level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional
engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such
certification shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator as set forth in
Section 1804(2)(B)(8).
C. Require for all new construction and substantial improvements that fully enclosed areas
below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for
the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may
be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Within AH Zones adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be required
in order to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
3. Manufactured Homes.
A. All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
Manufactured homes must be anchored in accordance with local building codes or FEMA
guidelines. In the event that over-the-top frame ties to ground anchors are used, the
following specific requirements (or their equivalent) shall be met:
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 68
(1) Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the manufactured homes
with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations, and manufactured homes less
than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side.
(2) Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at
intermediate points, and manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring four
additional ties per side.
(3) All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds.
(4) Any additions to manufactured homes be similarly anchored.
B. Require that all manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within special
flood hazard areas on the community's FIRM on sites:
(1) Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision,
(2) In a new manufactured home park or subdivision,
(3) In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or
(4) In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home
has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood,
be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured
home is at or above one (1) foot above the base flood elevation; and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the
provisions of Section 1807(3)(A).
C. Require that manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision within special flood hazard areas on the
community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of Section 1807(3)B) be elevated
so that either:
(1) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above one (1) foot above the base
flood elevation, or
(2) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation
elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above
grade; and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in
accordance with the provisions of Section 1807(3)(A).
4. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within the special flood hazard areas on the community's
official map shall either (i) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, (ii) be fully
licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit requirements and the elevation and
anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" of this ordinance. A recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
5. Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Section 1803(1) are areas
designated as AO Zones. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood
depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 69
flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply within AO
Zones:
A. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the
lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high
as one (1) foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least
two feet if no depth number is specified).
B. All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as
one (1) foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least
two feet if no depth number is specified), or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed to or
above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in Section 1804(2)(B).
C. Adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be required in order to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
Section 1808. Floodway Overlay Districts.
1. Permitted Principal Uses. Only uses having a low flood-damage potential and not obstructing
flood flows shall be permitted within the Floodway District to the extent that they are not
prohibited by any other ordinance and provided they do not require structures, fill, or storage
of materials or equipment. No use shall increase the flood levels of the base flood elevation.
These uses are subject to the standards of Sections 1806 and 1807.
A. Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, nurseries, forestry.
B. Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking and play areas.
C. Non-residential areas such as loading areas, parking, airport landing strips.
D. Public and private recreational uses such as golf courses, archery ranges, picnic grounds,
parks, wildlife and nature preserves.
E. Railroads, streets, bridges and public utility wire and pipe lines for transmission and local
distribution.
F. Fences (especially wire fences for agricultural purposes), walls or other appurtenances may
be constructed which would not constitute an obstruction or debris-catching obstacle for the
passage of flood water.
G. Storage yards for equipment and material properly anchored to prevent moving into bridges
or other debris-catching areas or removable within limited time available after flood warning
or are not subject to major damage.
H. Replacement of manufactured homes in existing manufactured home parks and
subdivisions is prohibited unless the conditions of Section 1807(2)(A) and Section 1808 are
met.
I. In Zone A unnumbered, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any floodway data available
through Federal, State or other sources or Section 1806(3)(H)(4) of this ordinance, in
meeting the standards of this section.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 70
2. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The following accessory uses and structures shall
be permitted in the Floodway District (FW):
A. Temporary building and uses incidental to construction work, to be removed upon
completion or abandonment of the construction work.
B. Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures
when established in conformance with the intent and terms of this district.
3. Prohibited Uses and Structures. The following uses and structures shall be prohibited from the
Floodway District (FW):
A. All residential dwellings of any kind.
B. All mobile home structures for any use.
C. All other uses and structures which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as
special exceptions.
4. Standards for the Floodway Overlay District. New structures for human habitation are
prohibited. All encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and
other development must be prohibited unless certification by a registered professional engineer
or architect is provided demonstrating that the development shall not result in any increase in
water surface elevations along the floodway profile during occurrence of the base flood
discharge. These uses are subject to the standards of Section 1806 and 1807. In Zone A
unnumbered, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any flood elevation and floodway data
available through Federal, State or other sources or Section 1806(4)(H)(4) of this ordinance,
in meeting the standards of this section.
Section 1809. Variance.
1. The Board of Zoning Adjustment as established by the McCook City Council shall hear and
decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance.
2. The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is
an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the City Manager in the
enforcement or administration of this ordinance.
3. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Zoning Adjustment or any taxpayer may
appeal such decision to the District Court as provided in Section 19-912, R.R.S. 1943.
4. In passing upon such applications, the Board of Zoning Adjustment shall consider all technical
evaluation, all relevant factors, standards specified in Section 2504 of the Zoning Ordinance of
the City of McCook, Nebraska.
A. the danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
B. the danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
C. the susceptibility of proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such
damage on the individual owner;
D. the importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
E. the necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
F. the availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use;
G. the compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 71
H. the relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and flood plain
management program for that area;
I. the safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinance and emergency vehicles;
J. the expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood
waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
K. the costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems, and streets and bridges.
5. Conditions for Variances.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to
be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items B through F have
been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary
to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
C. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result.
D. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a
determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the
applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws
or ordinances.
F. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given a written notice that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced
lowest floor elevation. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance
actions as required by this ordinance.
Section 1810. Nonconforming Use.
1. A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the passage or
amendment of the ordinance, but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance
may be continued subject to the following conditions:
A. If such use is discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive months, any future use of the
building premises shall conform to this ordinance. The Utility Department shall notify the
City Manager in writing of instances of nonconforming uses where utility services have been
discontinued for a period of twelve (12) months.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 72
B. Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be entitled to continue as
nonconforming uses.
2. If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including flood, it shall not
be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50 percent of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred except that if it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this
ordinance. This limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, building, or safety codes or regulations or the cost of any
alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory
of Historic Places, provided that the alteration shall not preclude its continued designation.
Section 1811. Penalties for Violations. Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to
comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any
person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon
conviction thereof be fined not more than $500.00, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses
involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City Manager or other appropriate authority from taking
such other lawful action is as necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
Section 1812. Amendments. The regulations, restrictions and boundaries set forth in this
ordinance may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed or appealed to reflect any
and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973, provided however, that no
such action may be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest
and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Any amendments to this article shall be made
in compliance with the procedures provided in Article 26 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
McCook, Nebraska. A copy of such amendments will be provided to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. The regulations of this ordinance are in compliance with the National Flood
Insurance Program Regulations as published in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations and
the 1983 Nebraska Flood Plain Management Act.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 73
ARTICLE 20
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT – OVERLAY DISTRICT
Article 20 - Planned Development
Section 2001. The provisions of this article are to be applied in instances where tracts of land of
considerable size are developed, redeveloped or renewed as integrated and harmonious units, and
where the overall design of such units is so outstanding as to warrant modification of the standards
contained elsewhere in this Ordinance. Planned Development Overlay Districts utilize the existing
residential, commercial or industrial zoning district and supplement the base district by allowing
combinations of other zones to increase the density of development, while allowing multiple districts
to be used on the same parcel of land. A planned development to be eligible under this Article must
be:
1. In accordance with the comprehensive plans of the City, including all plans for redevelopment
and renewal;
2. Composed of such uses, and in such proportions, as are most appropriate and necessary for
the integrated functioning of the planned development and for the City;
3. So designed in its space allocation, orientation, texture, materials, landscaping and other
features as to produce an environment of stable and desirable character, complementing the
design and values of the surrounding neighborhood, and showing such unusual merit as to
reflect credit upon the developer and upon the City; and
4. So arranged as to provide a minimum of three hundred (300) square feet of usable open space
per dwelling unit on the tract.
Section 2002. The tract for which application is made must have the following minimum area:
1. For a Planned Development Unit under subsection 2004(1) below, no minimum area in the case
of dwellings only, and one (1) acre in all other cases.
2. For a Planned Development District under subsection 2004(2) below, one (1) acre in the case
of dwellings only, and two (2) acres in all other cases.
Section 2003. Who May Apply. An application may be filed by (1) the owner or owners or lessee
or lessees of all land and structures included within the tract, or (2) any governmental agency. The
holder of a written option or contract to purchase or lease land and/or structures shall, for the
purposes of such Application, be deemed the owner or lessee of the land and/or structures covered
by such option or contract.
Section 2004. Application and General Plans. Each Application shall state the proposed
modification of existing zoning, and shall be accompanied by General Plans, including contoured
site plans. The General Plans shall show the improvements to be erected upon the tract, the open
spaces to be provided, the nature and location of the proposed use or uses, the relationship of the
proposed development to surrounding properties, and other pertinent information. The Application
and General Plans shall be sufficient in scope and character to determine that the intent of this
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 74
Article stated in Section 2001 above will be met. Any proposed division of the tract into separately
owned and operated units shall be indicated. The Application and General Plans shall be filed and
acted upon in the following manner:
1. Where the proposed modifications of existing zoning concern only the bulk and placement of
structures and the size and shape of lots, regulation of lot area, average lot width, distance
between buildings, size of courts, yards, gross floor area, building height, and/or building
coverage, or involve a reduction of lot area per dwelling unit of no more than thirty-three percent
(33%), such Application and General Plans shall be filed with the City Council and acted upon
as a special exception. If such Application and General Plans are approved by the City Council,
upon specific findings that the intent stated in Section 2001 above will be met, such approval
shall be construed to modify provisions contained elsewhere in this Ordinance, insofar, and only
insofar, as specific deletions, additions and changes are made which are related to land and
structures in the tract, and the tract shall be designated a Planned Development Unit within the
existing zoning district, provided that the requirements of Section 2005 below are met.
2. In any other case, the Application and General Plans shall be filed with the City Council and
acted upon as a proposed amendment to this Ordinance. If such Application and General Plans
are approved by the City Council, following a favorable recommendation by the City Planning
Commission, upon specific finding that the intent stated in Section 2001 above will be met, such
approval shall be construed to amend this Ordinance insofar, and only insofar, as specific
deletions, additions and changes are made which are related to the land and structures in the
tract and the tract shall be designated as a separate Planned Development District, provided
that the requirements of Section 2005 below are met.
Section 2005. Subsequent Performance. The Official Zoning Map shall carry a notation of the
location and boundaries of any Planned Development Unit or Planned Development District
approved as above, giving reference to a file in which full information concerning the provisions
applying to the same may be found.
1. After the approval of the Application and General Plans, the applicant shall file Detailed Plans
for review by the City Planning Commission, showing the details of the proposed development
as fully as possible and including elevations and perspectives of proposed construction. If the
applicant later wishes to change any of the details of the proposed development, further
Detailed Plans shall be filed for review by the City Planning Commission. No building permit
for the proposed development or any part thereof shall be issued until the City Planning
Commission has determined that the pertinent Detailed Plans are in accordance with the
Application and General Plans are approved and with the intent stated in Section 2001 above
if any Detailed Plans are not acted upon by the City Planning Commission within sixty (60) days
after they are submitted to it, they shall be deemed to be approved.
2. Within three (3) months after the approval of the Application and General Plans, a certified copy
of such Application and General Plans shall be filed by the applicant at his or its own expense
in the office of the City Clerk.
3. If construction of improvements is not begun and diligently prosecuted to completion within a
reasonable time established by the City Planning Commission at the time of approval of
Detailed Plans, and if an extension of time is not given by the City Planning Commission for
good cause shown, then the modifications or amendments of this Ordinance provided for in
Section 2004 above shall become null and void, and the tract shall revert to all the requirements
of its previous zoning. No certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued until a detailed report
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 75
is submitted by the applicant to the City Planning Commission showing the outcome of
construction and the City Planning Commission certifies that all requirements of this Article 20
relating to planned developments have been met.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 76
ARTICLE 21
SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Article 21 - Supplementary District Regulations
Section 2101. Visibility at Intersections. On a corner lot in all districts except Central Business,
nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to
impede vision between a height of two and one-half (2½) and ten (10) feet above the center line
grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street lines of such corner lots and a
line joining points along said street lines fifty (50) feet from the point of the intersection. In case of
alleys, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to
materially impede vision between a height of two and one-half (2½) and ten (10) feet above the
center line grades of the intersecting street and alley in the area bounded by the street line, alley
line, and a line joining points along said lines ten (10) feet from the point of the intersection.
Section 2102. Fences, Walls, Hedges. At the rear of lots abutting on alleys and on the lot line
between two (2) lots, solid fences or walls may be erected to a maximum height of seven (7') feet,
provided, that the total height of that portion of such fence between the front yard setback line and
the street line shall not exceed three and one-half (3½) feet. The use of barbed wire is prohibited
from all types of districts, except, Agricultural (AG), Industrial Light (IL), Industrial Heavy (IH), Flood
Plain (F) and Selected Flood Plain (SF).
In no instance shall a fence, wall or hedge be constructed or planted outside a property line into the
public right-of-way. Such violation shall be punishable under the provisions of Section 2702 of this
Ordinance.
Additionally:
1. No fence erected in a required front yard shall materially obstruct public view. Permitted types
of fences shall include split rail, chain link, or other similar material. No component of a front
yard fence shall exceed three and one half (3 ½) feet in height, nor shall any structural member
exceed thirty-six (36) inches in cross-sectional area.
2. No fence shall be constructed which will constitute a traffic hazard as identified in the site
triangle of a corner lot (see Section 2101, above).
3. No fence shall be constructed within the Corporate Limits of McCook in such a manner or be
of such design as to be hazardous or dangerous to persons or animals by intent of its
construction or by inadequate maintenance.
4. No component of a fence within Residential Districts, except fences erected upon public or
parochial school grounds or in public parks and in public playgrounds, shall be constructed of
a height greater than seven (7) feet, except for the provisions of item number "9", below.
5. All fences shall conform to the construction standards of the building code and other applicable
ordinances and resolutions.
6. In commercial and industrial districts, maximum height of fences shall be eight (8) feet. When
industry standards for certain types of businesses require fences of greater heights, the Zoning
Administrator at his direction, may allow greater heights.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 77
7. All fences constructed in the City of McCook shall comply with the provision of this section and
obtain a building permit.
8. The good side of fence shall face to the outside of the property.
9. All outdoor swimming pools shall be enclosed by a fence or wall at least six (6) feet, but not
more than eight (8) feet in height with a gate or gates which can be securely locked.
Construction of a fence or wall or planting of a hedge shall require a fence permit to be issued by
the City Building Official or designated representative. Such permit shall not be issued unless and
until a sketch plan of the property involved showing the location of said fence, wall, or hedge in
relation to said property lines is submitted to the building official. The sketch plan shall be
dimensioned to fully illustrate the location of said fence, wall or hedge within five (5) days after
receipt of such sketch plan, the Building Official shall approve construction or planting of the fence,
wall, or hedge by issuing the fence permit or shall disapprove the construction or planting and
indicate on the sketch plat in writing the reasons for denial. The applicant may then resubmit the
sketch plan incorporating the changes suggested by the Building Official. Said fence or hedge shall
then be constructed or planted consistent with the approved sketch plan.
In the event that an existing fence violates the public right-of-way and the City deem it necessary
to remove the fence for reasons of street and utility work, said fence, wall, or hedge shall be
removed at the property owner's expense. Said fence, wall or hedge shall not be allowed to be
reconstructed or replanted in the former position. The property owner must then follow the
procedures for a fence permit. Failure to comply with these regulations shall subject the property
owner to the penalties set forth in Section 2702 of this Ordinance.
Section 2103. Accessory.2 Buildings and structures may be erected and land may be used for
purposes which are clearly incidental to, and customarily and commonly associated with the main
permitted use of the premises. Such accessory buildings and uses shall be so constructed,
maintained and conducted as to not produce noise, vibration, concussion, dust, dirt, fly ash, odor,
noxious gases, heat or glare which is injurious, damaging, unhealthful or disturbing to adjacent
property, or the users thereof, and shall be on the premises of the main use.
Any accessory building shall have a minimum setback of six (6) feet on interior lots and fifteen (15)
on comer lots and all garage entrances must have a minimum ten (10) feet long drive when garage
opening is perpendicular to the access alley or twenty (20) feet perpendicular to the access street,
but must meet the front yard setback if more restrictive. Garages can be located three (3) feet from
rear property line when garage doors do not open onto the alley. Attached garages are considered
part of principal building. Accessory buildings shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height, or the
height of the principal permitted building, whichever is greater. No accessory building shall be
erected within five (5) feet of any other building.
Section 2104. Erection of More than One Principal Structure on a Lot. In any district where
a lot is used for a multi-family dwelling, business or industrial purpose, more than one principal
structure may be located upon the lot, but only when each principal structure complies with all yard
and other requirements as though it were on an individual lot.
2Revised May 2, 2016 - Ordinance No. 2014-2906
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 78
Section 2105. Exceptions to Height Regulations. The height limitations contained in this
Ordinance shall apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, ventilators, domes, chimneys or other
appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level.
Section 2106. Structures to Have Access. Every principal building hereafter erected or moved
shall be located on a lot adjacent to a public street and all structures shall be so located on lots so
as to provide safe and convenient access from the adjacent public street to said lot for servicing,
fire protection and required off-street parking. The word "street" in this context shall not be
construed to mean "alley".
Section 2107. Parking, Storage or Use of Major Recreational Equipment. For purposes of this
Ordinance, major recreational equipment is defined as including boats and boat trailers, travel
trailers, pickup campers or coaches designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles, motorized
dwellings, tent trailers and the like, and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational
equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not. No major recreational equipment shall be
parked or stored except in a carport or enclosed building or behind the nearest portion of a building
to a street. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when
parked or stored on a residential lot, or in any location not approved for such use, provided,
however, that such equipment may be parked or used for living, sleeping, loading or housekeeping
purposes anywhere on residential premises for a period of time not to exceed seventy-two (72)
hours.
Section 2108. Parking and Storage of Certain Vehicles. Automobile vehicles or trailers of any
kind or type without current license plates shall not be parked or stored on any residential zoned
property other than in completely enclosed buildings. The parking and storage of commercial
vehicles in any of the residential districts shall be prohibited.
Section 2109. Mobile Homes. No individual mobile home shall be parked for residential purposes
in any district outside an approved mobile home park for more than seventy-two (72) hours, except,
within the Agricultural Districts (AG) and the Residential Medium Density Mobile Home
Districts (RM-M) when established within the space limits of these districts. Provided, however, a
permit may be issued for parking and occupying a mobile home on land owned by the occupant or
occupants, during the construction of a house thereon, or for a period not exceeding one hundred
eighty (180) days. However, if material progress with house construction is not made within fortyfive
(45) days from the issuance of a permit, or if construction work ceases for a consecutive period
of forty-five (45) days, said permit shall become void.
Section 2110. Mobile Home Parks. A mobile home park may be established in specified districts
according to the procedures for granting a special exception, provided, that the proposed mobile
home park meets all of the requirements of Ordinances of the City of McCook, Nebraska and the
following guidelines:
1. Individual mobile home lots shall have an area of not less than four thousand (4,000) square
feet per single wide mobile home and six thousand (6,000) square feet for double wide mobile
homes, and the total number of lots per gross acre shall not exceed six (6).
2. Mobile homes shall be situated on individual lots so there will be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet
between mobile homes and that each mobile home will be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from
the nearest service road. Mobile homes parked end-to-end shall have an end-to-end clearance
of not less than ten (10) feet. Enclosed additions shall be considered a part of the mobile home
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 79
in measuring required yard distance. The required area for each mobile home space shall not
include area required for access or service roads, service buildings, recreation areas, office,
and other similar mobile home park needs.
3. The mobile home park shall have direct access to a public street or highway by a right-of-way
at least fifty - (50) feet in width and a minimum length of one hundred (100) feet to permit the
easy entrance and exit from the mobile home park. Service roads shall be provided to each
mobile home space. Each service road shall provide for continuous forward movement, shall
connect with a street or highway, and shall a minimum clear width of twenty (20) feet paved with
a suitable dustless material.
4. Walks and Lighting. Walkways not less than four (4) feet wide shall be provided from mobile
home spaces to the service buildings. All walkways within the park shall be hard surfaced and
lighted at night with a minimum illumination of twenty-five (25) watt lamps spaced at intervals
of not more than one hundred (100) feet.
5. Off-Street Parking. Two off-street parking spaces for each mobile home space shall be
provided at each mobile home space or in group parking. Each off-street parking space shall
be at least one hundred sixty two (162) square feet.
6. The area of the mobile home stand shall be improved to provide an adequate and approved
foundation for the placement and tie-down of the mobile home, thereby securing the superstructure
against uplift, sliding, rotation, or overturning. The mobile home or trailer stand shall
be on incombustible materials and shall not shift or settle unevenly under the weight of the
mobile home or trailer due to frost action, inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces acting
upon the super-structure. The mobile home or trailer stand may be provided by means of a
solid concrete footer block (16" x 16" x 4" Minimum) placed on solid uniform soil with at least
two (2) standard concrete blocks with cells placed vertically beside each other on the footer
block. A solid 4" concrete cap covering the two (2) concrete blocks shall be provided as the
bearing area to be positioned directly beneath the steel frame of the mobile home or trailer.
Such blocking shall be provided along the full length of the mobile home or trailer unit, spaced
not more than ten (10) feet apart, and not more than five (5) feet from the ends of the unit.
7. The mobile home or trailer stand shall be provided with anchors and the tie downs such as castin-
lace concrete "dead men", eyelets imbedded in concrete foundations or runways, screw
augers, arrowhead anchors or other devices securing the stability of the mobile home or trailer.
The tie-down devices shall be compatible with the foundation system provided for the mobile
home or trailer such that the tie-downs are designated to resist the action of frost in the same
manner as the foundation system.
8. The skirting of all mobile homes and trailers is required. Such skirting shall not attach a mobile
home or trailer permanently to the ground, but shall be sufficient to withstand wind load
requirements and shall not provide a harborage for junk or rodents, nor create a fire hazard.
Such skirting shall be provided with removable access panels sufficient to provide easy access
to all utility connection points of the mobile home or trailer and its subsequent connection to the
utility raisers if they are located within the skirted area.
Permit the Creation of Mobile Home Parks in Which the Individual Mobile Home Lots Are
Available For Sale. Wherever a mobile home park is permitted by this Ordinance to be created
through the granting of conditional uses, or otherwise, said mobile home park may be designed to
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 80
permit the sale of the individual mobile home lots within said park. A proposed mobile home park
in which the individual mobile home lots will be offered for sale must meet all of the following
requirements:
1. The individual mobile home lots shall, for the distinct within which such mobile home park is
located, meet the minimum lot requirements, minimum yard requirements, maximum lot
coverage, and maximum height requirements of such districts.
2. Each such mobile home lot shall be individually serviced with all utilities and shall be individually
metered for all utilities and treated in all respects by the City as a separate user of utilities.
3. The developer of such mobile home park shall be required to secure a preliminary and final plat
as per the subdivision process outlined in the City of McCook Subdivision Regulations.
4. At the time of an application for a special use permit, or at the time of the application for
subdivision in a mobile home park where the lots are to be offered for sale, the developer shall
submit all legal documents necessary for the creation of an association having the purpose of
maintaining, controlling, and covering all expenses, taxes and costs incurred on common areas
within the mobile home park.
Such association shall require that all property owners within the mobile home park be
members thereof and pledge the lots owned within the mobile home park as security for the
association performing such obligations. Covenants shall be placed on the property by the
developer and owners thereof so as to ensure this obligation. These documents shall be
submitted by the proper officials to the City Council for its approval and no subdivision permit
or special use permit may be issued without the approval of these documents by the City
Council.
Section 2111. Minimum Off-Street. Off-street motor vehicle parking and loading space shall be
provided on any lot on which any of the indicated structures and uses are hereafter established.
Such space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or any alley. For the purpose of
computing the number of parking spaces available in a given area, the formula of one hundred sixty
two (162) square feet per parking space shall be required. Minimum off-street parking and loading
requirements, which shall be applicable to the indicated structures and uses in all the zoned
districts, except, in the Central Business District (CB) shall be set forth in the Schedule of Minimum
Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements, in the Table below. If minimum off-street parking
and loading space, required in said schedule, cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on
which the principal structure or use is conducted in the opinion of the Board of Zoning Adjustment,
the Board may permit such space to be provided on other off-street property, provided, that such
space lies within four hundred (400) feet of the entrance to each principal structure or use.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 81
Schedule of Minimum Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
Minimum Number of Parking Spaces Minimum Off-Street Loading
Spaces
Residential:
Single family, two-family dwellings
Multifamily:
Efficiency and one-bedroom
Two-bedrooms
Three or more bedrooms
Mobile home park
2 per dwelling unit
1 per dwelling unit
1 ½ per dwelling unit
2 per dwelling unit
2 per mobile home
None required.
“““““
Hotel and motels 1 per rental unit plus 1 for every 4
employees.
1 space per establishment.
Hospitals, Nursing Homes, Rest
Homes or similar Uses
1 for every 2½ patient beds and 1 for each
staff and employee on the largest shift.
3 spaces per establishment.
Medical Clinics 5 spaces per staff doctor or dentist. None required.
Educational:
Nursery and Primary
All other types
Parking spaces = 30% of capacity in
students.
Parking spaces = 20% of capacity in
students.
2 spaces per structure.
Funeral Homes and Chapels 8 spaces per reposing room. 2 spaces per structure.
Eating and drinking establishments Parking spaces = 30% of capacity in
persons.
2 spaces per structure.
Places of public assembly such as
auditoriums, theaters, stadiums,
community halls, churches, etc.
1 for every 4 seats None for churches, all other
facilities shall have at least 1.
Bowling alley 4 spaces per alley. 1 space per establishment
Libraries 1 space per 500 square feet of floor area. 1 space per structure.
Private clubs and lodges 1 space per 500 square feet of floor area. 1 space per establishment.
Retail sales department stores,
taverns, grocery stores, etc.
1 per 500 square feet of floor area as
determined by exterior wall dimensions.
Professional office establishments. 1 per 500 square feet of floor area as
determined by exterior wall dimensions.
1 space per establishment.
Manufacturing, Industrial Uses. 1 space for every 2 employees on the
largest shift.
2 spaces per establishment.
Veterinary Establishments 3 spaces per staff doctor. None required.
Wholesale and Distributing
Operations.
1 space per 2 employees on largest shift. 2 spaces per establishment.
Automobile Service Stations 1 space per 2 employees on largest shift. 1 space per establishment.
Manufacturing, Storage,
Warehouse and Transportation
Terminals
1 space per 1 employee on largest shift. 2 spaces per establishment.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 82
Section 2112. Sign Regulations.
On and Off-Site Signs (such as Billboards or directional signs) on Federal Aid Primary Highways.
The erection or maintenance of any advertising sign, display or device beyond the Corporate Limits
but within the Two-Mile Planning Jurisdiction of the City of McCook, which is visible to the traveled
way of the National System of Interstate and Defense Highways, and the system of federal-aid
primary roads of the State of Nebraska as defined by the Nebraska Department of Roads, is hereby
prohibited unless in compliance with the regulations set forth in Rules and Regulations Relating to
the Control of Advertising in areas adjacent Federal Aid Primary Highways, as amended, adopted
and published by the Nebraska Department of Roads. Primary Highways within the zoning
jurisdiction of the City of McCook are Highways 6/34 and 81.
1. Purpose of Sign Regulations
The purpose of this sign Regulations is to assist the City of McCook in regulating on-premise signs
in manner that promotes economic vitality, public safety and ensures compliance with
constitutionally protected First Amendment rights. The Regulations seeks to reduce subjectivity
often encountered in the regulation of signage that is either based on aesthetics or lacking in
substantiation by providing a set of quantitative and researched-based criteria to support restriction
on signage that take into account minimum scientific requirements for providing signage that meets
generally accepted safety standards for visibility, legibility and conspicuity.
2. Application
The Sign Regulations apply to the construction and use of all on-premise signs, as defined in
Section 3 below.
3. Prohibited and Exempt Signs
A. The following signs shall not be allowed pursuant to the terms of this Sign Regulations:
1. Abandoned signs;
2. Snipe signs or signs attached to trees, telephone poles, streetlights, or placed on any public
property or public right-of-way; and
3. Signs placed on vehicles or trailers which are parked or located for the primary purpose of
displaying that sign.
B. The following signs shall be exempt from the provisions of this Sign Regulations and
construction will be permitted without a permit:
1. Holiday or special events signs;
2. Nameplates of two square feet or less;
3. Political signs;
4. Public signs or notices; and
5. Sign face changes of legally conforming signs.
6. Community banners, or light pole signs.
4. Definitions
Abandoned Sign: A sign whose message describes the availability of goods or services at a
location where such goods and services are no longer available and have ceased to be available
for a period of at least 60 days or, in the alternative, a sign which is non-commercial in nature and
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 83
the content of the sign pertains to a time, event or purpose which has elapsed or expired in the
preceding 60 days. Such abandonment should include intentional conduct, such as failure to pay
taxes or permit fees, or to maintain the sign, or a negligent failure to do so.
Animated Sign: A sign depicting action, motion, light, or color changes through electrical or
mechanical means. Although technologically similar to flashing signs, the animated sign
emphasizes graphics and artistic display
Awning Sign: A building mounted sign that provides additional functionality as shelter.
Banner: A sign made of fabric or other non-rigid material with no enclosing framework.
Changeable-Copy Sign: A sign or portion thereof on which the copy or symbols change either
automatically though electrical or electronic means (for example, time and temperature units), or
manually though placement of letters or symbols on a panel mounted in or on a track system.
Channel Letter: A fabricated or formed three-dimensional letter that may accommodate a light
source.
Cone of Vision: The area that is clearly visible to a driver, generally described as a "fan-shaped
envelope" preceding the driver which allows the driver to safely see and observe moving objects
and persons in front of and to the immediate left and right of the driver.
Complying Sign: A sign that is legally installed in accordance with federal, state, and local permit
requirements and laws.
Conspicuity: The capacity of a sign to stand out or be distinguishable from its surroundings and
thus be readily discovered by the eye. It is the noticeable contrast between a sign and its
background, with the display having features that attract attention to the sign.
Contrast: The difference or degree of difference in the appearance of adjacent surfaces, such as
light and dark areas, different colors, or typefaces, and graphics appearing on various backgrounds.
Copy: The words and/or message displayed on a sign.
Copy Area: That area which displays the actual copy on a sign.
Development Sign: A temporary construction sign denoting the architect, engineer, contractor,
subcontractor, financier or sponsor of a residential or commercial development which may also
designate the future occupant or use of the development.
Directional Sign: Signs designed to provide direction to pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
Dissolve/Appear: A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Center accomplished
by varying the light intensity or pattern, where the first message gradually appears to dissipate and
lose legibility simultaneously with the gradual appearance and legibility of the second message.
Electronic Message Display: A sign capable of displaying words, symbols, figures or images that
can be electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic means.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 84
Event Sign: A temporary sign, other than a commercial sign, posted to advertise an event
sponsored by a public agency school, church or religious institution, civic-fraternal or other
organization.
Fade/Appear: A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Center accomplished by
varying the light intensity where the first message gradually reduces intensity to the point of not
being legible and the subsequent message gradually increases intensity to the point of legibility.
Fascia Sign: A building mounted sign.
Freestanding Sign: A sign that is not attached to a building, including pole, pylon and ground
signs.
Ground Sign: A freestanding sign with a visible support structure.
Inflatable Device: A sign that is a cold air inflated object, which may be of various shapes, made
of flexible fabric, resting on the ground or structure and equipped with a portable blower motor that
provides a constant flow of air into the device. Inflatable devices are restrained, attached, or held
in place by a cord, rope, cable or similar method.
Internally illuminated Sign: A sign that has the light source enclosed within it so the source is not
visible to the eye.
Illuminated Sign: A sign with electrical equipment installed for illumination, either internally
illuminated through its sign face by a light source contained inside the sign or externally illuminated
by reflection of a light source aimed at its surface.
Legibility: The physical attributes of a sign that allow for differentiation of its letters, words,
numbers, or graphics, which directly relate to an observer's visual acuity.
Luminance: An objective measurement of the brightness of illumination, including illumination
emitted by an electronic sign, measured in candles per square foot (cd/sq.ft).
Marquee Sign: A sign mounted on a permanent canopy.
Multi-Tenant Sign: A freestanding sign used to advertise businesses that occupy a shopping
center or complex with multiple tenants.
Noncomplying Sign: A sign that was legally erected and maintained but does not currently
comply with sign restrictions because such restrictions were enacted after the sign was originally
permitted and installed.
Off-Premise Sign: An outdoor sign, whose message directs attention to a specific business,
product, service, entertainment event or activity, or other commercial or noncommercial activity, or
non-commercial message about something that is not sold, produced, manufactured, furnished, or
conducted at the property upon which the sign is located. Also known as a third party sign,
billboard, or outdoor advertising.
On-Premise Sign: A sign whose message and design relates to an individual business,
profession, product, service, event, point of view, or other commercial or non-commercial activity
sold, offered, or conducted on the same property where the sign is located.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 85
Organization: An entity, including a natural person, which owns or operates the premises where
an on-premise sign is displayed.
Pennant: A triangular or irregular piece of fabric or other material, commonly attached in strings
or strands, or supported on small poles intended to flap in the wind.
Permanent Sign: A sign attached to a building or structure, or to the ground in a manner that
enables the sign to resist environmental loads, such as wind, and that precludes ready removal or
movement of the sign and whose intended use appears to be indefinite.
Pole Sign: A freestanding sign with visible support structure.
Primary Copy: The words or message on a sign meant to be read by passersby travelling at the
posted speed limit.
Projecting Sign: A building mounted sign with the faces of the sign projecting 12 inches or more
from and generally perpendicular to the building fascia, excepting signs located on a canopy,
awning, or marquee.
Pylon Sign: A freestanding sign with a visible support structure, which may or may not be
enclosed by a pole cover.
Readability: That which enables the observer to correctly perceive that information content of
letters, numbers or symbols grouped together in words, sentences, or other meaningful
relationships on the sign. Readability is the character of a sign which leads to the observer's
comprehension of its intended message, and depends on legibility and other considerations of
contents and time restraints.
Real Estate Sign: A temporary sign advertising the real property upon which the sign is located
for rent, for lease, or for sale and providing the name and location of the owner or his agent.
Roof Sign: A building-mounted sign erected upon, against, or over the roof of the building.
Rotating Sign: Sign faces or portions of a sign face which mechanically revolves around a central
axis as opposed to revolving around an imaginary axis created by a pattern of alternating lights
which convey an appearance of rotation.
Scroll: A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Center where the message
appears to move vertically across the display surface.
Secondary Copy: The words or messages on a sign which are meant to be read by automobiles
that are idling or parked along a road way.
Sign: Any device, structure, fixture, painting, or visual image using words, graphics, symbols,
numbers, or letters designed and uses for the purpose of communicating a message or attracting
attention.
Signage: A community's inventory of signs used to communicate information or attract attention,
including signature building, product displays, and dispensers, as well as traditional projecting, wall,
roof, and freestanding signs. (See signature building.)
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 86
Signature Building: A building architecturally designed and/or painted or decorated to reinforce
individual recognition of a traditional sign's message, the identify of its speaker or sponsor of a
display; it also reinforces major media advertising programs.
Snipe Sign: A temporary or permanent sign tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued, or otherwise
attached to trees, poles, stakes, fences, or other objects.
Temporary Sign: Any sign intended to remain in use for a short period of time which is not
permanently installed.
Transition: A visual effect used on an Electronic Message Center to allow one message to
disappear while it is simultaneously being replaced by another.
Visibility: The physical attributes of a sign and its contents that allow for detection at a given
distance, although legibility may be uncertain.
Wall Sign: A building-mounted sign which is either attached to, displayed, or painted on an exterior
wall in a manner parallel with the wall surface, and not projecting more than 16 inches from such
surface (See fascia sign).
Window Sign: A sign that is painted on, attached to, or suspended directly behind or in front of
a window or the glass portion of a door.
Note: The majority of the definitions provided in this section are from the Signage Foundation for
Communication Excellence, October 2003 publication, “The Signage Sourcebook.”
5. Permitting
A. Applicants who wish to erect new on-premise Permanent, or Temporary, signs or those seeking
to significantly modify (exceeds costs of 50% or more than the replacement cost of the original
sign) existing signs must obtain permission from the City of McCook prior to
installation/modification of the signs.
B. In order to apply for a Sign Permit, the applicant must provide the following information, in
writing, to the City of McCook:
1. Name of organization and location.
2. Contact person.
3. Address and phone number for contact person.
4. Description of the activities occurring on the site where the sign will be installed.
5. Description of any existing signage that will remain on the site.
6. Identification of the type of sign/signs to be erected by the applicant.
7. Site plan depicting the locations of proposed signage and existing remaining signage.
8. Scale drawings of the proposed signage.
9. Written description explaining the drawing of the proposed signage, including a detailed
description of materials, colors, and letter height, type and style.
C. Upon submission of the written application, the City of McCook shall have 20 business days to
review the application for a sign permit.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 87
D. A permit shall be issued on or before the end of the 20 business day review period if the
application for a new sign or renewal complies with the regulations contained in this Sign
Regulations.
E. If the City of McCook does not issue a determination within the 20 business day period, the sign
permit is deemed approved.
F. An application for a sign permit may be denied by the City of McCook within the 20 business
day review period if the application fails to comply with the standards contained in this
ordinance. The City of McCook shall inform the applicant of the reasons for denying the
application for sign permit by certified mail.
G. Upon denial of an application for a sign permit, the applicant has 15 business days to revise
and resubmit the application for review by the City of McCook. In the alternative, the applicant
may also appeal the decision of the City of McCook to the Zoning Board of Adjustment within
the 15 business day time period. The Board of Adjustment, at its next regularly scheduled
meeting, shall review the City of McCook's denial of said application.
H. The Board of Adjustment shall review the application on its face with no deference to the final
determination made by the City of McCook and it will make independent findings in assessing
the adherence of the application to the provisions of the ordinance. If the Board of Adjustment
finds the application meets the requirements of this Ordinance, it will direct the City of McCook
to promptly issue the permit.
I. Upon a final determination by the Board of Adjustment, unsuccessful applicants may seek to
appeal to the courts.
J. The application fee for each sign permit sought is available from the City Clerk within the Fee
Schedule for City services.
K. These permits shall not expire providing that such signs are not abandoned or destroyed. In the
instance that substantial repair or replacement becomes necessary (i.e., repairs that cost more
than 50% of the replacement cost of the damaged sign), the organization must apply for a new
sign permit.
6. Sign Size Regulations
A. Permanent signs include, but are not limited to the following types of signs: wall signs, roof
signs, projecting signs, ground and pole signs, multi-tenant signs, awning signs, electronic
message centers, and monument signs. Additionally, temporary signs including political signs,
garage sale signs, real estate signs, construction signs, and grand opening signs, are all
controlled by the following:
1. Number of Signs: Each business is entitled to display two permanent signs.
2. Sign size shall be determined as follows:
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 88
Function of Sign Nature of Sign Area per
sign (sq.
ft.)
Number of Signs Total
Sign Area
(sq. ft.)
Front
Line
setback
(ft.)
Side and
Rear
Setback
(ft.)
Height (ft.)
(Freestanding
Sign)
Height
(ft.) (Wall
Sign)
Permit
Required?
Residential identification and/or
identification of a permitted
home occupation in a singlefamily
house or mobile home
permanent 5 1 2/lot 15 15 5 10 no
Residential identification and/or
identification of a permitted
home occupation in a duplex
(2-family) house
permanent 2 1/dwelling unit,
2/building
2/sign 15 15 6 10 no
Apartment complex or mobile
home park identification sign,
3-12 units
permanent 12 1/complex 12 15 15 6 10 yes
Apartment complex or mobile
home park identification sign,
over 12 units
permanent 32 1/entrance, maximum
of 2/parcel
64 15 15 6 10 yes
Public or private schools, houses
of worship, meeting halls, fire
stations, private clubs or other
similar uses
permanent 32 2, 1 on which may be
freestanding
32 15 15 15 10 yes
Cemetery identification permanent 32 1/entrance 32 15 15 6 not
permitted
yes
Not-for-profit organizations
(fundraising events, such as
bazaars)
temporary, not
to exceed
30 days
32 1 32 15 15 6 10 no
Political signs (must be removed
within 20 days after election):
Campaign headquarters temporary, must
be removed with
30 days after
election
80 1/political party, plus
1/candidate
80 15 15 20 15 yes
Lawn signs temporary 4.5 Unlimited 4.5 private
property
private
property
3 10 no
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 89
Function of Sign Nature of Sign Area per
sign (sq.
ft.)
Number of Signs Total
Sign Area
(sq. ft.)
Front
Line
setback
(ft.)
Side and
Rear
Setback
(ft.)
Height (ft.)
(Freestanding
Sign)
Height
(ft.) (Wall
Sign)
Permit
Required?
Political signs continued:
Vehicle and trailer signs
temporary, must
be removed
within 30 days
after election
32 unlimited NA 30 NA NA no
Garage sales signs temporary 4 1 4 15 15 4 not
permitted
no
Real estate for sales or for rent
signs:
Residential use, 1- and 2-
family homes
temporary, must
be removed 5 days
after property
transfer or no
longer for sale
6 1/parcel 6 10 15 6 10 no
Commercial property,
including apartment
complexes
temporary, same
as above
32 1/parcel 16 15 15 6 10 yes
Construction project
identification
temporary, 1
year, renewable
48 2/parcel 48 15 15 10 10 yes
Grand opening identification temporary, 30
days maximum
32 1 32 15 15 6 10 yes
Commercial use, single or
double tenant site:
Freestanding sign permanent 80 1 freestanding/site 80 15 15 20 - yes
Wall sign permanent 80 1 wall/tenant 80 - - - 20 yes
Projecting sign permanent 12 1 projecting/site 6 - - - - yes
Awning sign permanent 80 1 awning sign/business 80 - - - - yes
Roof sign permanent 80 1 roof sign/building 80 - - 6 foot above
room
- yes
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 90
Function of Sign Nature of Sign Area per
sign (sq.
ft.)
Number of Signs Total
Sign Area
(sq. ft.)
Front
Line
setback
(ft.)
Side and
Rear
Setback
(ft.)
Height (ft.)
(Freestanding
Sign)
Height
(ft.) (Wall
Sign)
Permit
Required?
Commercial complex, 1or more
parcels occupied by more than 2
tenants or at least 2 tenants and
the owner or any combination
thereof:
Freestanding sign, primary
complex
permanent 80 1 80 15 15 20 - yes
Freestanding sign,
secondary complex
permanent 20 1/each secondary
frontage, provided that 600
feet exists between signs,
measured in a straight line,
and frontage on which sign
is located includes direct
vehicle access from the
complex to the street
20 15 15 20 - yes
Wall sign permanent 80 1/tenant having direct
customer access to the out
of doors, must be placed
on storefront of the tenant
identified by the sign
80 NA NA NA 20 yes
Awing sign permanent 80 1 awning sign/business 80 - - - - yes
Roof sign permanent 80 1 roof sign/building 80 - - 6 foot above
roof
- yes
Gas station or vehicle service
station:
Freestanding sign, single or
double tenant site
permanent 80 1 freestanding/site 80 15 15 20 - yes
Wall sign, single or double
tenant site
permanent 80 1 wall/tenant 80 - - - 20 yes
Wall sign, in complex permanent 80 1 80 - - - 20 yes
Awning sign permanent 80 1 awning sign/business 80 - - - - yes
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 91
Function of Sign Nature of Sign Area per
sign (sq.
ft.)
Number of Signs Total
Sign Area
(sq. ft.)
Front
Line
setback
(ft.)
Side and
Rear
Setback
(ft.)
Height (ft.)
(Freestanding
Sign)
Height
(ft.) (Wall
Sign)
Permit
Required?
Office, research, development,
manufacturing and industrial
warehousing, single or double:
Freestanding sign permanent 80 1/site 80 15 15 20 - yes
Wall sign permanent 80 1/tenant having direct
customer access to the out
of doors, must be placed
by the primary entrance
80 - - - 20 yes
Awning sign permanent 80 1 awing sign/business 80 - - - - yes
Office, research, development,
manufacturing and industrial
warehousing complex:
Complex identification permanent 80 1 80 15 15 20 - yes
Freestanding sign, individual
building identification
permanent 80 1 freestanding/site 80 15 15 20 - yes
Wall sign, individual building
identification
permanent 80 1 wall/tenant having direct
customer access to the out
of doors, must be placed
by the primary entrance
80 - - - 20 yes
Awning sign permanent 80 1 awning sign/building 80 - - - - yes
Complex identification
*** Not more than 4 sq. ft. for
header, plus 1.5 sq ft. per
tenant. The total directory
signage within a complex shall
not exceed the allowable area
of primary complex
identification sign.
permanent *** See
Function
of Sign
1/building see Area
per sign
45 20 8 10 yes
Farm stand:
Freestanding sign permanent 16 1 freestanding sign or 1
wall sign, or both, provided
that the total sign area or
16 15 15 20 - yes
Wall sign permanent 16 - - - 10 yes
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 92
Function of Sign Nature of Sign Area per
sign (sq.
ft.)
Number of Signs Total
Sign Area
(sq. ft.)
Front
Line
setback
(ft.)
Side and
Rear
Setback
(ft.)
Height (ft.)
(Freestanding
Sign)
Height
(ft.) (Wall
Sign)
Permit
Required?
Sports and recreation center:
Freestanding sign, single or
double tenant
permanent 80 1 freestanding/site 80 15 15 20 - yes
Wall sign, single or double
tenant
permanent 80 1 wall/tenant 80 - - - 20 yes
Awning sign permanent 80 1 awning sign, business 80 - - - - yes
On site directional signs permanent 2 per Planning Commission
approval
NA per
administrative
approval
per
administrative
approval
per
administrative
approval
per
administrative
approval
yes
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 93
B. Wall Signs
1. A permit may be obtained to erect multiple wall signs on each wall facing a street or public
right-of-way, excluding those walls abutting single or multifamily residential land uses. Such
wall signs shall meet the letter height and sign size requirements defined in subsection 6a
based on the speed of the facing roadway The total area of all wall signs on such a wall
shall occupy no more than 50 percent of the total wall area.
2. Wall signs may be internally or externally illuminated.
C. Projecting signs
1. One projecting sign shall be permitted for each structure with accessible street frontage in
lieu of a ground or roof sign.
2. Projecting signs may be illuminated. Those projecting over a parkway must be internally
illuminated.
3. Projecting signs may revolve.
4. Projecting signs must have a minimum clearance of 8 feet from the bottom of the sign to the
grade below.
5. Projecting signs may be located no closer than 10 feet to each other.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 94
D. Freestanding Ground (Pole or Pylon) signs
1. One ground (pole or pylon) sign is permitted for each structure with accessible street
frontage.
2. Ground (pole or pylon) signs are permitted in lieu of roof and projecting signs.
3. Ground (pole or pylon) signs may be internally or externally illuminated.
4. Ground signs may revolve.
E. Roof signs
1. An organization which inhabits a structure with accessible street frontage shall be permitted
to erect one roof sign as a permanent sign.
2. Roof signs may not be displayed on properties displaying ground or projecting signs.
3. Roof signs may be internally or externally illuminated.
4. Roof signs shall be setback a minimum of three feet from the edge of the exterior wall on
which the sign is located.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 95
F. Freestanding Multi-tenant Signs
1. One multi-tenant commercial sign shall be permitted per business complex.
2. A minimum separation of fifty (50) feet shall be maintained between all other pole signs,
multi-tenant commercial signs and off premise signs.
3. Multi-tenant commercial signs shall be located within the business complex for which they
advertise and only tenants of that business complex may advertise on the sign. Any
business advertising on a multi-tenant commercial sign may not have a pole sign on its
property located within the associated business complex.
4. The maximum area expressed in square feet for a sign shall be calculated by multiplying
the frontage by two (2).
5. Organizations advertising on a multi-tenant sign may erect a second sign on the premises
with the exception of a pole sign.
G. Electronic Message Centers (EMCs)
1. Such displays may include messages that are static, messages that appear or disappear
from the display through dissolve, fade, travel or scroll modes, or similar transitions and
frame effects that have text, animated graphics or images that appear to move or change
in size, or be revealed sequentially rather than all at once.
2. Zoning: Only static electronic message centers may be erected in residential areas. All
types of electronic message centers shall be permitted in areas designated for commercial
and industrial activities.
3. All electronic message centers shall be equipped with automatic dimming capabilities.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 96
H. Awning signs
1. An organization which inhabits a structure with accessible street frontage shall be permitted
to erect one awning sign.
2. Awning signs may be illuminated.
3. The size of the awning shall be determined by applicable zoning regulations.
4. The size of the text on the awning sign shall be based on the requirements set forth in this
Sign Regulations.
I. Monument Signs
1. Signs located outside the “cone of vision” are only permitted by the application for and grant
of a variance.
Note: Given modern complex nature of messages conveyed by on premise signs, the Sign
Regulations distinguishes between primary and secondary copy. It is important to note, however,
that this distinction is not scientific. Rather, it reflects a public policy modification. The secondary
copy requirements are not designed to produce copy that may be read by automobiles passing at
the posted speed limit. Rather, such copy will likely only be readable to pedestrians, and idling or
parked cars. Given the limited value of secondary copy, the City of McCook encourages sign
owners to use it sparingly.
Note: Electronic message centers are a relatively new sign type that has not fully been explored
by the scientific community. Given the rising popularity of this sign type as well as efforts by some
Municipalities to block their installation, the aforementioned EMC requirements have been drafted
to permit the use of the sign type while seeking to lessen the potential impacts or perceived impacts
they cause. The choice to allow the construction of static EMCs in residential areas only is a public
policy decision. Communities must explore their own needs in making decisions regarding the
appropriate location and type of EMCs which will be permitted.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 97
7. Temporary Sign Regulations
A. Temporary signs not specifically listed in the Table included in Section 6, may be displayed
without obtaining a sign permit for a period of time not to exceed fourteen (14) days within any
six (6) month period. After the fourteen (14) day period, the owner must obtain a permanent
sign permit to display the sign any further within the same six (6) month period.
B. Temporary signs are signs not intended for permanent installation which are to be used for a
limited amount of time. Types of temporary signs not listed in Section 6 include, but are not
limited to: banners, pennants, flags, and streamers, inflatable displays, special event signs,
advertising vehicles and development signs.
C. Temporary signs shall be setback at least three feet from the public right-of-way and comply
with all of the applicable regulations pertaining to size set forth in Section 6.
D. The number of Temporary signs shall not exceed three at any given period of time.
8. Variances
A variance may be sought for the construction of a sign, Permanent or Temporary, which does not
comply with the requirements established in Sections 5 and 6 of this Sign Regulations. A variance
will be granted if the applicant can demonstrate the following criteria:
A. The application of the Sign Regulations would substantially limit the applicant's ability to put the
property to its highest and best use;
B. Neighboring property owners would not be detrimentally harmed by the grant of the variance;
and
C. The hardship suffered is unique to the property and was not created by the applicant for the
variance.
The City of McCook Zoning Board of Adjustment may impose conditions on the variance, as
necessary, to further the purpose of the Sign Regulations.
9. Sign Maintenance
All signs, including noncomplying and abandoned signs, must be maintained in a condition which
is safe and appears as originally permitted. The City of McCook shall issue a notice of violation for
all signs violating the provisions of the ordinance. The organization shall have 10 business days
to correct the violation. Organizations may seek an extension of time from the City of McCook to
correct the violation. Such extensions will be granted if there is evidence that the organization is
working to correct the violation. If the organization fails to correct the violation within the 10 day
period or to obtain an extension, the City of McCook may, upon inspection, issue a notice
compelling the removal of those signs which continue to be in violation of this provision of the Sign
Regulations. The owner or agent may challenge the notice compelling the removal of the sign by:
A. Filing an Zoning Administrator’s report stating the condition of the sign with the City of McCook
within 30 business days of receipt of the written notice of the violation, or
B. Appealing to the Board of Adjustment in the manner described in Section 5.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 98
Upon review of a favorable report by the Zoning Administrator, the City of McCook shall work with
the organization to repair its sign. In the case where the Zoning Administrator’s report confirms the
City of McCook's inspection report, the building inspector shall serve a second written notice
compelling removal of the sign at owner's expense within 30 business days receipt of said notice.
Failure to remove the sign in a timely fashion shall result in a fine, in accordance with the City Fee
Schedule, per day for each and every day the sign remains. Upon the issuance of a third citation,
the City of McCook may revoke the organization's permit to maintain the sign. Once a permit has
been revoked, the organization must apply for a permit to reinstate the use of its signs or to install
a complying replacement signs in the case of noncomplying signs.
10. Non-complying Signs
Any sign that is not in compliance with the provisions of the Sign Regulations upon its enactment
shall be deemed a noncomplying sign. All noncomplying signs shall be allowed to continue until
such time that the organization owning the property where the sign is located no longer owns or
operates the noncomplying signs. All signs, including noncomplying signs, must be maintained in
accordance with all state and local ordinances. If structural alteration or replacement is deemed
necessary by the organization, the organization shall be required to obtain a permit to perform any
type of maintenance, excluding normal replacement of sign faces, lamps, ballasts, and timers.
Noncomplying sign faces shall be changed as needed so long as size and configuration remain as
originally permitted.
Sign structures may be repainted as needed. Permits will be required for all maintenance work with
the exception of normal replacement of lamps, ballasts, timers and damaged sign faces. Any
structure being structurally modified at a cost exceeding 50% of the replacement cost of the sign
as to size, additions or configuration must be immediately brought into compliance with local
ordinances.
Note: In an effort to encourage municipalities to regard signs as speech rather than land uses, the
common term, nonconforming use, is replaced with the term, noncomplying sign. A noncomplying
sign is one that does not conform to sign regulations at the time such regulations are enacted.
Noncomplying signs, similar to nonconforming uses, shall be allowed to continue operation until
such time that the sign is no longer owned or operated by the organization controlling the sign at
the time it became noncomplying. Substantial modifications to size or sign configuration will trigger
the need to bring the noncomplying sign into conformity with existing regulations.
11. Indemnification
The City of McCook, its officers, agents, and employees shall be held harmless against any and
all claims resulting from the erection, alternation, relocation, construction, or maintenance of onpremise
commercial signs legally allowed as a result of this Sign Regulations.
12. Violations
The placement of any Permanent or Specially Permitted sign without a sign permit shall be
unlawful. Violations of this ordinance shall be treated as strict liability offences regardless of intent.
Violators will be fined minimum per day amount as per Section 2802, per sign displayed in violation
of this ordinance.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 99
13. Severability
If any section or subsection of this Sign Regulations is found to be invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, all remaining provision shall be deemed valid.
Section 2113. Manufactured Home Standards. All “manufactured homes” located outside
mobile home parks shall be installed according to the same standards for foundation system,
permanent utility connections, setback, and minimum square footage which would apply to a sitebuilt,
single family dwelling on the same lot. The City also requires all manufactured homes to
meet the following standards.
1. The home shall have no less than nine hundred (900) square feet of floor area.
2. The home shall have no less than an eighteen (18) foot exterior width.
3. The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of two and one-half (2-½) inches for each
twelve (12) inches of horizontal run.
4. The exterior material shall be of a color, material and scale comparable with those existing in
residential site-built, single-family construction.
5. The home shall have a non-reflective roof material which is or simulates asphalt or wood
shingles, tile or rock.
6. The home shall have wheels, axles, transporting lights and removable towing apparatus
removed.
7. The City may not require additional standards unless such standards are uniformly applied to
all single family dwellings in the same zoning district.
8. Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to supersede any valid restrictive covenants of record.
9. The home must meet building code requirements adopted by the City.
Section 2114. Salvage or Junk Yard. Salvage or junkyard operations and related facilities shall
only be allowed by special permit in the AG and IH Zoning Districts under the following conditions,
meeting IH performance standards and the following:
1. When located on a tract of land in the “AG District” at least one-fourth (1/4) mile from a
residential or agricultural farm residence.
2. The operation shall be conducted wholly within a noncombustible building or within an area
completely surrounded on all sides by a visual obscuring fence, wall or hedge. The fence, wall
or hedge shall be of uniform height (at least eight (8) feet high) and uniform texture and color
shall be so maintained by the proprietor as to insure maximum safety to the public and preserve
the general welfare of the neighborhood. The fence, wall or hedge shall be installed in such a
manner as to retain all scrap; junk or other material within the yard and no scrap, junk or other
material shall protrude above the fence.
3. No junk shall be loaded, unloaded or otherwise placed, either temporarily or permanently,
outside the enclosed building, hedge fence or wall, or within the public right-of-way.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 100
4. Any other requirement deemed appropriate and necessary by the City Council for the protection
of the general health and welfare.
In making any decision granting a special use permit, the City Council shall impose such
restrictions, terms, time limitations, landscaping, improvement of off-street parking lots, and other
appropriate safeguards as required protecting adjoining property.
Section 2115. Landfills and Sanitary Landfills. Private landfill operations shall only be allowed
by special permit in the AG Agriculture District upon prior approval of the Nebraska Department of
Health and Human Services System and with conformance to the following conditions:
1. Located on a tract of land at least ¼ mile or (1,320) feet from a residential or agricultural farm
residence.
2. The operation shall be conducted wholly within an area completely surrounded on all sides by
a fence, wall or hedge. The fence, wall or hedge shall be of uniform height (at least eight (8)
feet high) and uniform texture and color shall be so maintained by the proprietor as to insure
maximum safety to the public and preserve the general welfare of the neighborhood. The
fence, wall or hedge shall be installed in such a manner as to retain all material within the yard
and no material shall protrude above the fence.
3. No material shall be loaded, unloaded or otherwise placed, either temporarily or permanently,
outside the enclosed building, hedge fence or wall, or within the public right-of-way.
4. Any other requirement deemed appropriate and necessary by the City Council for the protection
of the general health and welfare.
5. Special use permits granted under this section shall be subject to annual review and renewal
by the City Council.
In making any decision granting a special use permit, the City Council shall impose such
restrictions, terms, time limitations, landscaping, improvement of off-street parking lots, and other
appropriate safeguards as required protecting adjoining property.
Section 2116. Home Occupations. The following conditions and restrictions shall apply to such
customary home occupations:
1. No more than one other person in addition to members of the family, residing on the premises,
shall be engaged in such occupation.
2. The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate
to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than thirty (30) percent of the
floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation.
3. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible
evidence of the conduct of such home occupation other than one sign, not exceeding three (3)
square feet in area, non-illuminated and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building.
4. No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building.
5. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally
be expected in a residential neighborhood.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 101
6. No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration,
glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot. In the
case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or
audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations
in line voltage off the premises.
Section 2117. Small and Commercial Wind Energy Conversion Systems.
Intent: In order to balance the need for clean, renewable energy resources with the protection of
the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of McCook, Nebraska, finds these regulations are
necessary in order to ensure that all wind energy conversion systems (CWECS) are appropriately
designed, sited, and installed.
These regulations pertaining to all wind energy conversion systems are intended to respond to
equipment available at the time of adoption. The City of McCook recognizes that this is an
emerging technology and that new means of collecting wind energy, including but not limited to
vertical axis wind turbine generators are under development. Accordingly, these standards will be
reviewed and may be amended as technology advances.
Types of Wind Energy Systems:
1. Small Wind Energy Conversion System - (SWECS) – A wind energy conversion system
which has a rated capacity of up to Twenty-Five (25) kilowatts and which is incidental and
subordinated to another use of the same parcel. A system is considered a small wind energy
system only if it supplies electrical power for site use, except that when a parcel on which the
system is installed also received electrical power supplied by a utility company, access
electrical power generated and not presently needed for onsite use may be sold back to the
utility company. (25 Kilowatt limit approved by the McCook Planning Commission to increase
to a maximum of 100 Kilowatts with Nebraska State Legislature authorization by future
amendment)
2. Commercial Wind Energy Conversion System – (CWECS) A wind energy conversion system
under common or aggregated ownership or operating control that includes substations, MET
towers, cables/wires and other building accessories, who’s main purpose is to supply electricity
to off-site customers.
Definitions:
Aggregated Project. Those projects that are developed and operated in a coordinated fashion,
but which have multiple entities separately owning one or more of the individual CWECS within a
larger project. Associated infrastructure such as power lines and transformers that service the
facility may be owned by a separate entity but are also included as part of the aggregated project.
Fall Zone. The area, defined as the furthest distance from the tower base, in which a tower will
collapse in the event of a structural failure.
Feeder Line. Any power line that carries electrical power from one or more wind turbines or
individual transformers associated with individual wind turbines to the point of interconnection with
the electric power grid, in the case of interconnection with the high voltage transmission systems
the point of the interconnection shall be the substation serving the WECS.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 102
Height, hub. The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower, including the generation
unit, measured to the hub or center point of the rotor blade diameter.
Height, total system. The height above grade of the system,
including the generating unit and measured the highest vertical
extension of any rotor blades or rotors.
Meteorological Tower. For the purposes of wind energy conversion
systems, meteorological towers are those which are erected primarily
to measure wind speed and direction plus other data relevant to
locating a CWECS. Meteorological towers do not include towers and
equipment used by airports, the Nebraska Department of
Transportation or other similar applications to monitor weather
conditions.
Rotor Diameter. The diameter of the circle created by the outer most
point of the rotor blades of the windmill. (see Diagram #1)
Shadow flicker. Strobe effect that occurs when sun is horizontal to
rotor blades, which causes repetitive intermittent shadows that can
affect people on adjacent or near-by properties.
Diagram #1
Substations. Any electrical facility utilized to convert electricity produced by a Commercial Wind
Energy Conversion System for interconnection with high voltage transmission lines.
Tower. The vertical component of a wind energy conversion system that elevates the wind turbine
generator and attached blades above the ground.
Transmission Line. The electrical power lines that are High Voltage Transmission Lines carrying
electricity over medium to long distances rather than directly interconnecting and supplying electric
energy to retail customers.
Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS). An aggregation of parts including the base, tower,
generator, rotor, blades, supports, and configuration as necessary to convert the power of wind into
mechanical or electrical energy, e.g. wind charger, windmill, or wind turbine.
Wind Turbine Generator. The component of a wind energy system that transforms mechanical
energy from the wind into electrical energy.
Small Wind Energy Conversion System.
Small Wind Energy Conversion System (SWECS) is a facility used for the production of a maximum
of Twenty-Five (25) kilowatts of electrical energy supplied by the wind. The facility may include wind
turbine(s) with total height(s) of one hundred (100) feet or less and any transmission lines. The
SWECS is primarily used to generate energy for use by its owner. A small wind energy facility shall
be sited and designed to minimize adverse visual impacts on neighboring properties. To be used
in conformance with Nebraska State Statutes 70-2001 through 70-2005, regarding Net
Metering. (25 Kilowatt limit approved by the McCook Planning Commission to increase to a
maximum of 100 Kilowatts with Nebraska State Legislature authorization by future amendment.)
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 103
General Site and Design Standards:
1. Located on a lot or parcel of at least three (3) acres.
2. Shall be permitted by an approved Special Exception Permit to be issued in the “RL”, “RM”,
“RM-M”, “RH”, “CB”, “BC”, “HC”, “IL”, “IH”, “F”, “SF”, “PD’, and “N-HCD” Zoning Districts.
3. SWECS shall maintain a minimum setback distance from any property line of one and one-half
(1.5) times the total system height of the windmill for non-participating property owners.
Adjoining property owners (second or third additional farm/ranch single dwelling units for the
purpose of housing relatives or permanent agriculture workers) participating in the same or
Aggregated Project shall have no setback requirements between adjoining properties.
4. SWECS shall maintain a minimum setback distance from any public road, or highway of at least
one point one (1.1) times the total system height of the windmill from the public road or highway
right-of-way.
5. In no case shall a WECS be located within any required setback or in any front yard area.
6. Turbines and towers shall be of tubular design and if painted or coated, shall be of a nonreflective
white, grey, or other neutral color and shall not be used to display advertising.
7. SWECS shall not be artificially lighted unless such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA).
8. All electrical wires associated with a small wind energy system other than the wires necessary
to connect the wind generator to the tower wiring, the tower wiring to the disconnect junction
box, and the grounding wires shall be located underground.
9. The minimum distance between the ground and any part of the rotor blade system shall be thirty
(30) feet.
10. All ground mounted electrical and control equipment must be labeled and secured to prevent
unauthorized access. A tower may not have step bolts or a ladder within eight (8) feet of the
ground that is readily accessible to the public.
11. The owner of a small wind energy facility shall minimize or mitigate any interference with
electromagnetic communications, such as radio, telephone or television signals caused by the
facility.
12. Construction access must be re-graded and re-vegetated to minimize environmental impacts.
13. A SWECS application must include an agreement that addresses decommissioning and
abandonment of the facility. The agreement must at a minimum provide for reuse or
dismantlement of the facility at the owner’s expense.
Application Requirements:
1. A survey map at an appropriate scale identifying:
C Site boundary;
C Adjacent public right-of-ways;
C Existing structures;
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 104
C Proposed small wind energy system and accessory structures; Adjacent ownership and
existing residences;
C Any overhead utility lines.
2. A report from a licensed engineer containing:
a. Small wind system specifications including manufacturer and model; rotor diameter, tower
height, tower type (freestanding or guyed);
b. Documentation to establish that the tower has sufficient structural integrity for the proposed
use at the proposed location;
c. Certification that the small wind energy system complies with all applicable state
construction and electrical codes and the National Electrical Code.
3. Compliance with FAA Regulations, including any Documentation required by the FAA certifying
approval of proposed location when located within the three (3) mile Planning Jurisdiction of any
airport.
4. Signed letter of Notification by the property owner submitted to the Electrical
Supplier/Purchaser, Red Willow County Assessor’s Office, and City of McCook Zoning
Administrator, signifying utility service is approved.
5. Require proof of insurance on application.
Commercial Wind Energy Conversion System – (CWECS).
A wind energy conversion system under common or aggregated ownership or operating control that
includes substations, MET towers, cables/wires and other building accessories, who’s main
purpose is to supply electricity to off-site customers.
Commercial Wind Energy Conversion Systems may be included as an aggregated project. Such
as those projects that are developed and operated in a coordinated fashion, but which have multiple
entities separately owning one or more of the CWECS within a larger project. Associated
infrastructure such as power lines and transformers that service the facility may be owned by a
separate entity, but are also part of the aggregated project. All individual wind turbine towers of an
aggregated project shall be in conformance with Section 6.55 (A) items one through 15.
General Site and Design Standards:
1. Located on a lot or parcel of at least ten (10) acres in size.
2. The entire aggregated project shall be permitted by a Special Exception Permit in an “AG”
District.
3. If an aggregated project, setbacks from multiple entities (turbines) shall be one and one-tenth
(1.1) times the height of the total system.
4. Each CWECS location must have a 911 address.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 105
5. CWECS shall be designed and placed in such a manner as to minimize to the greatest extent
feasible, adverse visual and noise impacts on adjacent areas. This shall include documentation
of:
a. Noise levels conforming to the International Electromechanical Commission (IEC)
Standard 61400-11 part 11; and
b. Projections of the “shadow flicker” on any existing structures located off the property on
which the CWECS will be constructed and the extent and duration of the shadow flicker on
these existing structures.
6. CWECS shall maintain a minimum setback distance from any property line of one and
one-half (1.5) times the total system height of the windmill for non-participating property owners.
Adjoining property owners participating in the same Aggregated Project shall have no setback
requirements between adjoining properties.
7. CWECS shall maintain a minimum setback distance from any public road, or highway of at least
one point one (1.1) times the total system height of the windmill from the public road or highway
right-of-way.
8. In no case shall a WECS be located within any required setback or in any front yard area.
9. Structures for wind turbines shall be self-supporting tubular towers, if painted or coated shall
be of a non-reflective neutral color such as white or pale gray. No lattice structure shall be used.
No logos or advertisements are allowed on these structures. Each turbine shall be marked with
a visible identification number located no higher than fifteen (15) feet above ground level.
10. Colors and surface treatment of the CWECS and supporting structures shall, to the greatest
extent possible, minimize disruption of the natural characteristics of the site.
11. Reasonable measures shall be taken to mitigate specific adverse visual impacts such as
reflections, shadow flicker, and blade glint affecting residences within or immediately adjacent
to the project area.
12. CWECS shall be equipped with air traffic warning lights or other marking lights only if so
required by the Federal Aviation Administration and in which event, such light should be
positioned or shielded to avoid visual impact on neighboring properties, and shall be a white
flashing light from daylight till twilight and a steady red light night time. Light system must be
maintained and working at all times.
13. The applicant shall minimize or mitigate any interference with electromagnetic communications,
such as radio, telephone or television signals caused by any wind energy facility.
14. A Meteorological Tower is permitted by a Conditional Use Permit for the purposes of the
Aggregated Project. Meteorological towers shall meet the same setback requirements of those
established for an Aggregated Project. If the tower is non-functional, it shall be removed after
a period of two (2) years.
15. CWECS shall have a minimum setback of one-quarter (1/4) mile from any adjacent residence
not owned by the owner of the CWECS. However, no setback is required between an adjacent
residence of an owner participating in the same Aggregated Project.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 106
Application Requirements:
The applicant for a conditional use permit for construction of a CWECS shall file an application with
the City of McCook Zoning Administrator The application shall include the name(s) of the project
applicant(s), the name of the project owner(s), and the legal description and address for the project.
The application shall also include the following documents:
1. A survey map illustrating the following:
A. Property lines, dimension, acreage and contours with appropriate intervals for site
evaluation.
B. Location and elevation of all components of the proposed CWECS.
C. Location and dimensions of all existing structures and uses on property within three
hundred (300) feet of the system.
D. Height of any structures over thirty-five (35) feet within a five hundred (500) foot radius on
site or offsite of the proposed CWECS.
E. Location of any overhead utility lines on the property.
F. Location of all known communications towers within two (2) miles of the proposed CWECS.
G. Access roads.
H. Adjacent ownership, land uses, existing residences, schools, churches, hospitals, public
libraries, federal, state, county or local parks, recognized historic or heritage sites, identified
wildlife preserves, or habitat areas to a distance of 2,640 feet (one-half mile).
I. Provide a copy of the Easement Deed from the Red Willow County Register of Deeds Office
for each property involved in the CWECS.
J. Provide a map illustrating all transmission lines connecting to the Substation.
K. Copy of Agreement or Notification of Compliance Letter between the Beatrice Airport
Authority and the Applicant.
2. Applicant shall identify potential effects in terms of constraints or benefits the wind energy
facility may place on current or future use of the land within the project site and the surrounding
area. The extent of any limitations due to public health and safety risks shall be specifically
addressed, and the effects on the following activities shall also be addressed:
A. Existing or proposed tourist or recreation activities;
B. Residential activities;
C. Industrial activities;
D. Agricultural activities; and
E. Commercial activities
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 107
3. Soil erosion, sediment control, and storm water runoff plan shall address what types of erosion
control measures will be used during each phase of the project. It shall identify plans for:
A. Grading;
B. Construction and drainage of access roads and turbine pads;
C. Design features to control dust;
D. Design features to maintain downstream water quality;
E. Re-vegetation to ensure slope stability;
F. Restoring the site after temporary project activities;
G. Disposal or storage of excavated materials;
H. Protecting exposed soil;
I. Stabilizing restored material and removal of silt fences or barriers when the area is
stabilized; and
J. Maintenance of erosion controls throughout the life of the project.
4. Applicant shall provide information regarding flora and fauna of the proposed project area
including:
A. Officially listed threatened or endangered species;
B. Critical habitat and habitat conditions; and
C. An avian study based on the US Fish and Wildlife Services “Interim Guidelines to Avoid and
Minimize Wildlife Impacts from Wind Turbines”
5. Standard drawings of the structural components of the CWECS, including structures, tower,
base, and footings.
6. Certification by a registered engineer that:
A. There is a substantial need for the proposed use or CWECS, one hundred (100) kW or
greater;
B. All applicable local, state, and federal building, structural and electrical codes have been
followed;
C. The site is feasible for a CWECS; the CWECS can be successfully operated in the climate
conditions found in Red Willow County;
D. The rotor and over speed control have been designed for the proposed use on the proposed
site;
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 108
E. The design and safety of the proposed tower to withstand winds of ninety (90) miles per
hour; and
F. If the wind turbine were to fall, no building or structure, existing or potential, would be
damaged.
Construction and Operations:
1. All public roads to be used for the purpose of transporting CWECS, substation parts, cement
or equipment for construction, operation, or maintenance of the CWECS shall be identified and
applicable weight and size permits from the impacted road authority(ies) shall be obtained prior
to construction.
A pre-construction survey must be conducted with the appropriate jurisdictions to determine
existing road conditions. Those included are Applicant(s); Land Owner(s); CWECS Owner(s);
Township Representative(s), Highway Superintendent and/or Zoning Administrator. The survey
shall include photographs and a written agreement to document the conditions of the public
roads and facilities. All expenses of the survey shall be the Applicant’s responsibility.
2. The CWECS owner shall be responsible for immediate repair of damage to public roads and
drainage systems stemming from construction, operation, or maintenance of the CWECS
3. Solid and hazardous wastes, including but not limited to crates, packaging materials, damaged
or worn parts, as well as used oils and lubricants shall be removed from the site promptly and
disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations.
Safety Measures:
1. Each CWECS shall be equipped with both manual and automatic controls to limit the rotational
speed of the rotor blade so it does not exceed the design limits of the rotor.
2. The Planning Commission shall determine the height, color, and type of fencing, if needed, for
the CWECS installation. CWECS shall include no sign or advertising of any kind, except for
one sign not to exceed two (2) square feet posted at the base of the tower, electrical equipment,
and entrances. The sign shall contain the following information:
A. Warning – high voltage
B. Manufacturer’s name
C. Operator’s name
D. Emergency phone number
E. Emergency shutdown procedures
3. Each CWECS shall be properly grounded to safely sustain natural lightning strikes in
conformance with the National Electric Code.
4. Any CWECS facility shall be equipped with anti-climbing devices. Tower climbing apparatus
shall not be located within fifteen (15) feet of the ground. Where the tower is capable of being
climbed, a locked, protective fence at least six (6) feet high shall enclose the tower.
5. The CWECS operator shall maintain a current insurance policy which will cover liability,
installation, operation, and any possible damage or injury that might result from the failure of
a tower or towers or any other part or parts of the generation and transmission facility. The
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 109
amount of said policy shall be established as a condition of approval. The CWECS shall be
warranted against any system failures reasonably expected in severe weather operation
conditions
Discontinuation and Decommissioning:
1. CWECS shall be considered a discontinued use after one (1) year without energy production,
unless a plan is developed and submitted to the City of McCook Zoning Administrator outlining
the steps and schedule for returning the CWECS to service. All CWECS and accessory facilities
shall be removed four (4) feet below ground level within ninety (90) days of the discontinuation
of use. This period may be extended by the Zoning Administrator following a written request
by an agent of the owner of the CWECS.
2. Each CWECS shall have a decommissioning plan outlining the anticipated means and costs
of removing CWECS at the end of the serviceable life or upon becoming a discontinued use.
The cost estimates shall be made by a competent party, such as a profession engineer, a
contractor capable of decommissioning, or a person with suitable expertise or experience with
decommissioning.
3. At the end of the aggregated project’s useful life, the entire site shall be restored in accordance
with the requirements of this condition within eighteen (18) months.
Noise:
No CWECS shall exceed 60 dBA at the nearest structure occupied by humans. In the event of
periods of severe weather, as defined by the United States Weather Service, a CWECS may
exceed 60 Dba.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 110
ARTICLE 22
NON-CONFORMING LOTS, NON-CONFORMING USES OF LAND,
NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES, NON-CONFORMING USES OF
STRUCTURES AND PREMISES, AND
NON-CONFORMING CHARACTERISTICS OF USE.
Article 22 - Non-Conforming Lots, etc.
Section 2201. Intent. Within the districts established by this Ordinance or amendments that may
be adopted later there exist (1) lots, (2) structures, (3) uses of land and structures, and (4)
characteristics of use which were lawful before this Ordinance was passed or amended, but which
would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this Ordinance or future
amendment. It is the intent of this Ordinance to permit these non-conformities to continue until they
are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this Ordinance that nonconformities
shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, and not be used as grounds for
hiding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
Non-conforming uses are declared by this Ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the
districts involved. A non-conforming use of structure, a non-conforming use of land, or a nonconforming
use of structure and land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after
passage of this Ordinance by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to
be seen from off the premises, or by the addition of other uses, or a nature which would be
prohibited generally in the district involved.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in any building on which
construction was begun prior to the effective date of adoption of this Ordinance or amendment
thereto and upon which actual building construction has been carried on diligently.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall nullify or extend any non-conforming uses limited or controlled by
Ordinance No. 1580 unless such use was placed in a different zone by this Ordinance. All nonconforming
uses limited in duration under Ordinance No. 1580 shall expire and cease on the date
originally set by that Ordinance.
Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun
preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual
construction, provided that work shall be carried on diligently.
Section 2202. Non-Conforming Lots of Record. In any district in which single-family dwellings
are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any
single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance,
notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this Ordinance. Such lot must be in
separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This
provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both,
that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and requirements other
than those applying to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the
district in which such lot is located. Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through
action of the Board of Zoning Adjustment.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 111
If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single
ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this Ordinance, and if all or part
of the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the land involved shall
be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of this Ordinance, and no portion of said
parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area
requirements established by this Ordinance, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which
creates a lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this Ordinance.
Section 2203. Non-Conforming Uses of Land or Land with Minor Structures Only. Where,
at the time of passage of this Ordinance, lawful use of land exists which would not be permitted by
the regulations imposed by this Ordinance, and where such use involves no individual structure with
a replacement cost exceeding $1,000, the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, provided:
1. No such non-conforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater
area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
Ordinance.
2. No such non-conforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or
parcel other than that occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this Ordinance.
3. If any such non-conforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than twelve
(12) months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this
Ordinance for the district in which such land is located.
4. No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this Ordinance shall be erected
in connection with such non-conforming use of land.
5. Provided, however, no such non-conforming use shall be allowed to continue longer than for
a period of seven (7) years from the date of passage of this Ordinance. At the end of said
seven (7) year period, such non-conforming use of land or land with minor structures shall be
terminated. Provided, further, that all non-conforming signs, billboards and junk yards shall be
terminated, or otherwise made to conform to the provisions of this Ordinance within five (5)
years from the date of passage of this Ordinance.
Section 2204. Non-Conforming Structures. Where a lawful structure exits at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this
Ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, it’s location on the lot, or
other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
1. No such non-conforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity,
but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its non-conformity.
2. Should such non-conforming structure or non-conforming portion of structure be destroyed by
any means to an extent of more than fifty (50%) percent of its replacement cost at time of
destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with provisions of this Ordinance.
3. Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance what so ever, it shall thereafter
conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 112
Section 2205. Non-Conforming Use of Structures or of Structures and Premises in
Combination. If lawful use involving individual structures with a replacement cost of $1,000 or
more, or of structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this Ordinance, that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this
Ordinance, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions:
1. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this Ordinance in the district in which
it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally
altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it
is located;
2. Any non-conforming use may be extended through any parts of a building which were
manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this
Ordinance, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building;
3. If no structural alterations are made, any non-conforming use of a structure, or structure and
premises, may, as a special exception, be changed to another non-conforming use provided
that the City Council, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find
that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing
non-conforming use. In permitting such change, the City Council may require appropriate
conditions and safeguards in accord with the provisions of this Ordinance;
4. Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a non-conforming use is
superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and
the non-conforming use may not thereafter be resumed;
5. When a non-conforming use of a structure or structure and premises in combination, is
discontinued or abandoned for twelve (12) consecutive months, the structure, or structure and
premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations
of the district in which it is located;
6. Where non-conforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal
or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the non-conforming status of the land. Destruction
for the purpose of this subsection is defined as damage to an extent of more than fifty (50)
percent of the replacement cost at time of destruction.
Section 2206. Repairs and Maintenance. On any non-conforming structure or portion of a
structure containing a non-conforming use, work may be done in any period of twelve (12)
consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures,
wiring, or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding twenty-five (25%) percent of the current
replacement cost of the non-conforming structure or non-conforming portion of the structure as the
case may be, provided that the cubic content existing when it became non-conforming shall not be
increased.
If a non-conforming structure or portion of a structure containing a non-conforming use becomes
physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance, and is declared by any duly
authorized official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter
be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it
is located.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 113
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe
condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting
the public safety, upon order of such official.
Section 2207. Uses Under Special Exception Provisions, Non-Conforming Uses. Any use
which is permitted as a special exception in a district under the terms of this Ordinance, other than
a change through Board of Zoning Adjustment action from a non-conforming use to another use
not generally permitted in the district, shall not be deemed a non-conforming use in such district,
but shall, without action, be considered a conforming use.
Section 2208. Non-Conforming Open Storage Yards, Outdoor Display or Junk Yards. Any
non-conforming open storage yard, outdoor display or junk yard which is non-conforming either
permitted in the district or because not located within a completely enclosed building shall be
discontinued or made to conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which located within
three (3) years from the date such use became non-conforming with respect to this Ordinance.
However, no such use shall be required to terminate if within said period it shall be located within
a completely enclosed building or surrounded by solid fence or other screening that obscures the
stored goods or materials from general view.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 114
ARTICLE 23
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE AND ENFORCEMENT
Article 23 - Administrative Procedure and Enforcement
Section 2301. Duties of Administrative Official, Board of Zoning Adjustment, and Courts on
Matters of Appeal. It is the intent of this Ordinance that all questions of interpretations and
enforcement shall be first presented to the Zoning Administrator and that such questions shall be
presented to the Board of Zoning Adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the Zoning
Administrator, and that recourse from the decisions of the Board of Zoning Adjustment shall be to
the courts as provided by law.
Section 2302. Administration and Enforcement. An administrative official who shall be known
as the Zoning Administrator and who shall be designated by the City Council, shall administer and
enforce this Ordinance. He may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the City
Council may direct.
If the Zoning Administrator shall find that any of the provisions of this Ordinance are being violated,
he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal use
of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions,
alterations, or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any
other action authorized by this Ordinance to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its
provisions.
Section 2303. Building Permits Required. No building or other structure shall be erected,
moved, added to, or structurally altered without permit therefor issued by the Zoning Administrator.
No building permit shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator except in conformity with the
provisions of this Ordinance, unless he receives a written order from the Board of Zoning
Adjustment in the form of an administrative review, special exception, or variance as provided by
this Ordinance.
Section 2304. Application for Building Permit. All applications for building permits shall be
accompanied by plans in triplicate drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and shape of the
lot to be built upon, the exact sizes and locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any, and
the location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration. The application shall include
such other information as lawfully may be Non-Conforming Uses. It shall be unlawful to use or
occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof
hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or
structure until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued therefor by the Zoning
Administrator stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of
this Ordinance.
No non-conforming structure or use shall be maintained, renewed, changed or extended until a
certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning Administrator. The certificate
of zoning compliance shall state specifically wherein the non-conforming use differs from the
provisions of this Ordinance, provided, that upon enactment or amendment of this Ordinance,
owners or occupants of non-conforming uses or structures shall have six (6) months to apply for
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 115
certificates of zoning compliance. Failure to make such application within six (6) months shall not
be presumptive evidence that the property was in conforming use at the time of enactment or
amendment of this Ordinance.
A permit for erection, alteration, moving or repair of any building shall be issued until an application
has been made for a certificate of zoning compliance, and the certificate shall be issued in
conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance upon completion of the work.
A temporary certificate of zoning compliance may be issued by the Zoning Administrator for a
period not exceeding six (6) months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending
its completion, provided, that such temporary certificate may include such conditions and
safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public.
The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of certificates of zoning compliance and a copy
shall be furnished upon request to any person.
Failure to obtain a certificate of zoning compliance shall be a violation of the ordinance and
punishable under Section 2702 of this Ordinance.
Section 2306. Expiration of Building Permit. If the work described in any building permit has
not begun within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire; it shall
be canceled by the Zoning Administrator; and written notice thereof shall e given to the persons
affected.
If the work described in any building permit has not been substantially completed within two (2)
years of the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and be canceled by the Zoning
Administrator, and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice
that further work as described in the canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new
building permit has been obtained.
Section 2307. Construction and Use To Be As Provided in Applications, Plans, Permits and
Certificates of Zoning Compliance. Building permits or certificates of zoning compliance issued
on the basis of plans and applications approved by the Zoning Administrator authorize only the use,
arrangement and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use,
arrangements or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction in variance with that authorized
shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance, and punishable as provided by Section 2702 hereof.
Section 2308. Schedule of Fees, Charges, and Expenses. The City Council shall establish a
schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a collection procedure for building permits, certificates
of zoning compliance, appeals and other matters pertaining to this Ordinance. The schedule of
fees shall be posted in the office of the Zoning Administrator, and may be altered or amended only
by the City Council. Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no
action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 116
ARTICLE 24
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
Article 24 - Special Exceptions
Section 2401. Special Exceptions. As the zoning ordinance is established at the present time,
the McCook City Council has been given the authority to hear and decide requests for special
exceptions. This is consistent with State Law; however, the City also has the option to delegating
this power to the Planning Commission through the Zoning Ordinance.
Section 2402. Conditions for Granting Special Exceptions. A special exception shall not be
granted by the City Council unless and until:
1. A written application for a special exception is submitted indicating the section of this ordinance
under which the special exception is sought and stating the grounds on which it is requested;
2. Notice shall be given at least ten (10) days in advance of public hearing. The owner of the
property for which special exception is sought or his agent shall be notified by certified mail.
Notice of such hearings shall be posted on the property for which special exception is sought
at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing;
3. The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or agent or attorney;
4. The City Council shall make a finding that is empowered under the section of this Ordinance
described in the application to grant the special exception, and that the granting of the special
exception will not adversely affect the public interest;
5. Before any special exception shall be issued, the City Council shall make written findings
certifying compliance with the specific rules governing individual special exceptions and that
satisfactory provisions and arrangements have been made concerning the following where
applicable:
A. ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon with particular reference
to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access
in case of fire or catastrophe;
B. off-street parking and loading areas where required, with particular attention to the items in
A above, and the economic, noise, glare or odor effects of the special exception on
adjoining properties and properties generally in the district;
C. refuse and service area, with particular reference to the items in A and B above;
D. utilities, with reference to locations, availability, and compatibility;
E. screening and buffering with reference to type, dimensions, and character;
F. signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic safety, economic
effect and compatibility and harmony with properties in the district;
G. required yards and other open space;
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 117
H. general compatibility with adjacent properties and other property in the district.
I. compatibility with the existing and future land use plans in the McCook Comprehensive
Plan.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 118
ARTICLE 25
BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT
Article 25 - Board of Zoning Adjustment
Section 2501. Creation, Members, Meetings, Rules. There is hereby established a Board of
Zoning Adjustment. The word "Board" when used in this Ordinance shall be construed to mean the
Board of Zoning Adjustment. The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall consist of five (5) members
appointed by the City Council.
One (1) member only of the City Board of Zoning Adjustment shall be appointed by the City Council
from membership of the Planning Commission and the loss of membership on the Planning
Commission by such member shall also result in the immediate loss of membership on the Board
of Zoning Adjustment and the appointment of another planning commissioner to the Board of
Zoning Adjustment.
The members appointed shall serve for terms of three (3) years and be removable for cause by the
City Council upon written charges and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled by
appointment for the unexpired term.
The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall annually elect one (1) of its members as chairperson,
another as vice-chairperson, who shall act as chairperson in the chairperson's absence, and
appoint a secretary who may be an officer or an employee of the City. Each shall serve until his/her
successor has been selected. The presence of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary
to constitute a quorum.
All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the
call of the Chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. The Board shall keep
minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question; if absent or
failing to vote, indicating such fact; and shall keep records of its examinations and other official
actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record.
The Board shall adopt from time to time such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary, to
carry the appropriate provisions of this Ordinance into effect and all its resolutions and orders shall
be in accordance therewith.
Section 2502. Appeals to Board, Record of Appeal, Hearing and Stays. Appeals to the Board
of Zoning Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board
or bureau of the City affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be
taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with the officer from
whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of Zoning Adjustment a notice of appeal specifying
the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board
all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from
whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Zoning Adjustment after the notice of appeal shall
have been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion,
cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise
than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Zoning Adjustment or by a court
of record on application of notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause
shown.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 119
The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give
public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a
reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
Section 2503. Powers and Jurisdiction Relating to Administrative Review. The Board of
Zoning Adjustment shall have the power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is
error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official or
agency based on or made in the enforcement of any zoning regulation or any regulation relating
to the location or soundness of structures or to interpret any map, except that the authority to hear
and decide appeals shall not apply to decisions made under Article 24 of this Ordinance.
Section 2504. Powers and Jurisdiction Relating to Variances. The Board of Zoning Adjustment
shall have the power, where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a
specific piece of property at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance, or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such piece
of property, the strict application of any regulation under this Ordinance would result in peculiar and
exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardships upon the owner of such
property, to authorize upon an appeal relating to the property, a variance from such strict
application so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship, if such relief may be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose
of this Ordinance.
1. No such variance shall be authorized by the Board unless it finds that the strict application of
the Ordinance would product undue hardship; such hardship is not shared generally by other
properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity; the authorization of such variance
will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and the character of the district will not
be changed by the granting of the variance; and the granting of such variance is based upon
reasons of demonstrable and exceptional hardship as distinguished from variations for
purposes of convenience, profit or caprice;
2. No variance shall be authorized unless the Board finds that the condition or situation of the
property concerned or the intended use of the property is not of so general or recurring nature
as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an
amendment to this Ordinance.
3. A variance from the terms of this Ordinance shall not be granted by the Board of Zoning
Adjustment unless and until a written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating the
following:
A. Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or
building involved and which are not found in the same zoning district and which were not
created by an action of the property owner or the applicant;
B. The reduction of the minimum requirements of this Ordinance which would be necessary
to permit the proposed use or construction;
C. The literal interpretation of the provision of this Ordinance would deprive the applicant of
rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this
Ordinance;
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 120
D. The granting of the variance will not adversely affect the rights of adjacent property owners
or residents nor will it confer upon the applicant any special privilege denied by this
Ordinance to other land or structures in the same district;
E. The variance will not adversely affect the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience
or welfare;
F. The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use
of the land or structure;
G. Granting the variance requested will not be opposed to the general spirit and intent of this
Ordinance.
4. No non-conforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings in the same district, and
no permitted structures or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the
issuance of variance;
5. Notice of public hearing shall be given as in Section 2502 above; the public hearing shall
beheld; any party may appear in person, or by agent or by attorney; the Board of Zoning
Adjustment shall make findings that the requirements of this section have been met by the
applicant for a variance; the Board shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the
application justify the granting of the variance; the Board shall further make a finding that the
reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance; and that the variance is
the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or
structure; the Board shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in
harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance, and will not be injurious to the
neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare;
6. In granting any variance, the Board of Zoning Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions
and safeguards in conformity with this Ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards,
when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation
of this Ordinance and punishable under Section 2702 of this Ordinance;
7. Under no circumstance shall the Board of Zoning Adjustment grant a variance to allow a use
not permissible under the terms of this Ordinance in the district involved, or any use expressly
or by implication prohibited by the terms of this Ordinance in said district.
Section 2505. Board has Powers of Administrative Officer on Appeals; Reversing Decision
of Administrative Officer. In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board of Zoning
Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision
or determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination
as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal
is taken.
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination of any such officer, or to decide in favor of the applicant on
any matter upon which it is required to pass under this Ordinance or to affect any variation in this
Ordinance.
Section 2506. Appeals to District Court. Any person or person, jointly or severally, aggrieved
by any decision of the Board of Zoning Adjustment, may appeal as provided by Section 19-912
Neb. Rev. Stat., 1943.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 121
ARTICLE 26
(This Article is reserved for future use.)
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 122
ARTICLE 27
AMENDMENT
Article 27 - Amendment
Section 2701. This Ordinance may, from time to time, be amended, supplemented, changed,
modified or repealed. In case of a protest against such change, signed by the owner of
twenty (20%) percent or more, either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or
of those immediately adjacent on the sides and in the rear thereof extending three hundred (300')
feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment shall not become effective
except by public hearing, by both the Planning Commission and City Council and the favorable vote
of three-fourths (3/4) of all members of the City Council.
The provisions of this Ordinance relative to public hearings and official notice shall apply equally
to all changes or amendments. In addition to the publication of the notice therein prescribed, a
notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on or near the property on which action is pending.
Such notice shall not be less than eighteen (18") inches in height and twenty-four (24") inches in
width with a white or yellow background and black letters not less than one and one-half (1½)
inches in height. Such posted notice shall be so placed upon such premises that it is easily visible
from the street nearest the same and shall be so posted at least ten (10) days prior to the date of
such hearing. It shall be unlawful for anyone to remove, mutilate, destroy, or change such posted
notice prior to such hearing. Any person so doing shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. If the
record title owners of any lots included in such proposed change be non-residents of the City, then
a written notice of such hearing shall be mailed by certified mail to them addressed to their last
known addresses at least ten (10) days prior to such hearing. The owners or occupants of the real
estate located within three hundred (300') feet of the real estate to be zoned or rezoned shall be
personally served with a written notice thereof at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing
if they can be served with such notice within the County where such real estate is located.
Where such notice cannot be served personally upon such owners or occupants in the county
where such real estate is located, a written notice of such hearing shall be mailed to such owners
or occupants addressed to their last known addresses at least ten (10) days prior to such hearing.
The provisions of this section, in reference to notice shall not apply: (1) in the event of a proposed
change in such regulations, restrictions or boundaries throughout the entire area of an existing
zoning district or of such municipality; or (2) in the event additional or different types of zoning
districts are proposed, whether or not such additional or different districts are made applicable to
areas, or parts of areas, already within a zoning district of the city, but only the requirements of
Section 19-904, Neb. Rev. Stat. 1943, shall be applicable.
Section 2702. No amendment, supplement, change or modification of this Ordinance, including
the boundaries of any zoning district shall be made by the City Council without first the
consideration of each by the City Planning Commission. Following a public hearing before and
consideration by the City Planning Commission, the Commission shall submit in writing its
recommendations on each amendment, supplement, change or modification to the City Council
within thirty (30) days after receipt thereof. Said recommendations shall include approval,
disapproval, or other suggestions and the reasons thereof, and a discussion of the effect of each
amendment, supplement, change or modification on the Comprehensive Plan. Said
recommendations shall be of an advisory nature only.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 123
ARTICLE 28
COMPLAINTS, PENALTIES, REMEDIES
Article 28 - Complaints, Penalties, Remedies
Section 2801. Complaints Regarding Violations. Whenever a violation of this Ordinance occurs,
or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating fully
the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. He shall record properly
such complaint, immediately investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this Ordinance.
Section 2802. Penalties. The owner or agent of a building or premises in or upon which a
violation of any provisions of this Ordinance has been committed, or shall exist on lessee or tenant
of an entire building or entire premises in or upon which such violation shall exist, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100) for any
one offense recoverable with costs, together with judgment or imprisonment until the amount of said
fine and costs shall be paid. Each and every day that such violation continues after notification
shall constitute a separate offense.
Any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in or
maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties
herein provided.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary
to prevent or remedy any violation.
Section 2802. Remedies. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted, or maintained or any building, structure or land is used in violation of
this Ordinance, the appropriate authorities of the City may instigate any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
conversion, maintenance or use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to prevent the
occupancy of said building, structure or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use
on or about such premises.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 124
ARTICLE 29
LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
Article 29 - Legal Status Provisions
Section 2901. Separability. Should any article, section or provision of this Ordinance be declared
by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this
Ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or
invalid.
Section 2902. Purpose of Catch Heads. The catch heads appearing in connection with the
foregoing sections are inserted simply for convenience, to serve the purpose of any index and they
shall be wholly disregarded by any person, officer, court or other tribulation in construing the terms
and provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 2903. Statutory Amendments Apply. When any ordinances and statutes referred to in
this Zoning Ordinance are amended after the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, the
amendments shall apply.
Section 2904. Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in
conflict with this Ordinance, or inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance, are hereby
repealed to the extent necessary to give this Ordinance full force and effect.
Section 2905. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its
passage and publication (in pamphlet form) according to law.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 125
ARTICLE 30
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER REGULATIONS
Article 30 - Telecommunications Tower Regulations
Section 3000. Purpose. These regulations are adopted to protect the public health, safety and
welfare, and to minimize visual impact, while furthering the development of enhanced
telecommunications services in the City. These regulations are designed to comply with the
Telecommunications Act of l996 and any other applicable laws. The provisions of this chapter are
not intended to and shall not be interpreted to prohibit or to have the effect of prohibiting personal
wireless services. This chapter shall not be applied in such a manner as to unreasonably
discriminate between providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services.
Section 3001. Definitions. For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the
meaning ascribed to them below:
Abandonment, in the case of a non co-located facility, shall mean: (a) failure to start operations
within 90 days of completion of the structure, or (b) to cease operation for a period of 90 or more
consecutive days. In the case of a co-located facility, abandonment shall mean: (a) failure to start
operations within 180 days of completion of the structure, or (b) to cease operation for a period
of 180 or more consecutive days. In the event that factors beyond a provider’s control postpone the
start of or cause the temporary cessation of operations of a co-located or non-colocated facility, the
time limitations specified herein shall be extended for such period of delay.
Administrative permit shall mean a process and approval by the City Manager or Designee as
described in this chapter.
Antenna shall mean any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, data, Internet, or video
communications, excluding individual residential television antenna, through the sending and/or
receiving of electromagnetic waves, and includes equipment attached to a tower, or building, or
other structure for the purpose of providing personal wireless services, including unlicensed
wireless telecommunications services, wireless telecommunications services utilizing frequencies
authorized by the Federal Communications Commission for “cellular”, “enhanced specialized mobile
radio”, “specialized mobile radio” and “personal communications services”, telecommunications
services, and its attendant base station.
Antenna support structure shall mean any pole, telescoping mast, tower, tripod, or other structure
which supports a device used in the transmitting or receiving of radio frequency signals.
Array shall mean a set of antennas for one carrier or service that are placed on a structure at a
given height and spaced so as to avoid interference.
Camouflage describes a personal wireless service facility that is disguised, hidden, or integrated
with an existing structure or a personal wireless service facility that is placed within an existing or
proposed structure so as to be effectively hidden from view.
Co-location shall mean the location of antenna or an array of antennas on a personal wireless
facility or antenna support structure by more than one personal wireless service provider.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 126
Design shall mean the appearance of personal wireless service facilities, including such features
as their materials, colors, texture, scale, and shape.
EIA shall mean the Electronics Industry Association.
Equipment enclosure shall mean a structure, shelter, cabinet, or vault used to house and protect
the electronic equipment necessary for processing wireless communication signals and associated
equipment. Associated equipment may include air conditioning, backup power supplies and
emergency generators.
FAA shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission.
Fall zone shall mean the area on the ground within a prescribed radius from the base of a personal
wireless service facility within which there is a potential hazard from falling debris or collapsing
material.
Governing authority shall mean the City Council of the City of McCook.
Height shall mean the vertical distance above grade to the highest point of the antenna support
structure, including the lightning rod and antenna.
Modification shall mean the changing of any portion of a personal wireless service facility from its
description in a previously approved permit. Examples include, but are not limited to, changes in
design, height, number or location of antennas.
Mount shall mean the structure or surface upon which personal wireless service facilities are
mounted. There are three types of mounts: (i) Building mounted – a personal wireless service
facility affixed to the roof or side of a building; (ii) Ground mounted – a personal wireless service
facility fixed to the ground such as a tower; and (iii) Structure mounted – a personal wireless service
facility fixed to a structure other than a building, such as light standards, utility poles, and bridges.
Personal wireless service, personal wireless service facilities, personal wireless facilities
and facilities used in this chapter shall be defined in the same manner as in Title 47, United States
Code, Section 332 (c)(7)(C), as they may be amended now or in the future and includes facilities
for the transmission and reception of radio or microwave signals used for communication, cellular
phone, personal communications services, enhanced specialized mobile radio, and any other
wireless services licensed by the FCC and unlicensed wireless services.
Provider shall mean every corporation, company, association, joint stock company, firm,
partnership, limited liability company, other entity and individual which provides personal wireless
service over personal wireless service facilities.
Screening shall mean materials, or landscaping, which effectively hide personal wireless facilities
from view.
Security barrier shall mean a wall, fence, or berm that has the purpose of sealing a personal
wireless service facility from unauthorized entry or trespass.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 127
Site shall mean a tract or parcel of land that contains personal wireless service facilities including
any antenna, support structure, building, accessory buildings, and parking and may include other
uses associated with and ancillary to personal wireless services.
Special exception permit shall mean a process and approval as currently described in
Section 3002 this Article and Article 24 of Zoning Ordinance No. 1580, or as otherwise set forth
in City ordinances or regulations.
Tower shall mean any structure that is designed, constructed or used for the primary purpose of
supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers, or
monopole towers. The term encompasses personal wireless service facilities including microwave
towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers or personal communications services
towers, alternative tower structures, and the like.
Unlicensed wireless services shall mean commercial mobile services that operate on public
frequencies and do not need a FCC license.
Section 3002. Permits Required. No person shall locate an antenna or tower for personal
wireless services or alter an existing personal wireless services facility upon any lot or parcel except
as provided in this chapter.
Maintenance or repair of a personal wireless service facility and related equipment, excluding
structural work or changes in height, dimensions or number of antenna, towers, or buildings, is
excluded from the requirement to obtain an administrative or special permit. However, building
permits may still be required.
Installation of personal wireless service facilities requires either an administrative permit issued by
the City Manager or Designee, or approval of a special exception permit by the City Council.
1. Administrative Permit: In any zoning district, the City Manager or Designee may issue an
administrative permit approving an application to co-locate additional antennas on a
camouflaged facility or rooftop facility, or facility subject to an existing special permit, if the
application does not exceed the permitted height in the district, and will have minimal adverse
effect on the surrounding property, entryway corridors to the City, landmarks or designated
landmark districts, Heritage Square area, or properties listed or eligible to be listed on the
National Register of Historic Places.
Within 30 days of receiving a complete application, the City Manager or Designee shall act on
the request for an administrative permit.
If a request for an administrative permit is not acted upon within 30 days, or is denied, or the
conditions imposed thereon are unacceptable to the applicant, then the applicant may, by
written notice to the City Manager or Designee, convert the request for an administrative permit
to an application for a special exception permit. Moreover, an applicant may, in lieu of and
without first seeking an administrative permit hereunder, request a special exception permit for
its proposed facility.
2. Special Exception Permit: All towers and additions to existing facilities not issued or eligible for
an administrative permit and all requests for a special exception permit shall be reviewed and
evaluated in accordance with Article 30 and Article 24 of Zoning Ordinance No. 1580.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 128
Section 3003. Term of Permit. An administrative or special exception permit granted hereunder
shall be in effect for a term of ten (10) years unless it is sooner terminated due to abandonment or
failure to comply with this Code.
Section 3004. Exemptions. The following are exempt from the provisions of this ordinance and
shall be permitted in all zoned areas:
C Industrial processing and manufacturing, scientific or medical equipment using frequencies
regulated by the FCC.
C Radar systems for military and civilian communications and navigation.
C Licensed amateur (ham) radio operations, complying citizen band radio operations, and two
meter repeating.
C Satellite dish antennas less than two (2) meters in diameter, including direct to home satellite
services, when used as a secondary use of the property.
C Microwave dish antennas less than two (2) meters in diameter, including wireless cable or
Internet services, when used as a secondary use of the property.
C Temporary wireless services utilized for communications in the event of emergency.
C Routine maintenance or repair of a personal wireless service facility and related equipment
(excluding structure work or changes in height or dimensions of antennas, towers, or buildings),
provided that compliance with the standards of this ordinance are maintained.
C Subject to compliance with all other applicable standards of this ordinance, a building permit
application need not be filed for emergency repair or maintenance of a personal wireless
service facility until (30) days after completion of such emergency activity.
Section 3005. Renewal Applications. A permittee that desires to renew its administrative or
special exception permit hereunder shall, not more than 365 days nor less than 90 days before
expiration of the current permit, file an application with the City for renewal of its permit which shall
include the applicable information required pursuant to the permit application.
Section 3006. Renewal Determinations. After receiving a complete application hereunder, the
City Manager or Designee in the case of an administrative permit and the Planning Commission
and City Council in the case of a special exception permit, shall make a determination granting or
denying the renewal application in whole or in part. If the renewal application is denied, the
determination shall include the reasons for non-renewal. The standards enumerated in this Code
shall apply when determining to grant or deny the application, plus a determination of the
applicant's compliance with the requirements of this Code.
Section 3007. Obligation to Cure As a Condition of Renewal. No permit shall be renewed until
any ongoing violations or defaults in the permittee's performance of the requirements of this Code,
and all applicable laws, statutes, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations have been cured, or a
plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the permittee has been approved by the City.
Section 3008. Location Preferences. Personal wireless facilities shall be located and designed
to minimize any significant adverse effect on the abutting property. Sites shall be placed in
locations where the existing topography, vegetation, buildings, or other structures provide the
greatest amount of screening. The locational preferences for siting new personal wireless service
facilities are listed below:
1. Preferred Location Sites:
A. Publicly owned sites on which personal wireless facilities can be unobtrusively located with
due regard to visibility, aesthetic issues, traffic flow, public safety, health and welfare. Such
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 129
sites may include locating on existing buildings, co-locating on existing towers, screened
roof-top mounts, water towers, billboards, electric substations, or other camouflaged sites,
but shall not include new towers.
B. Privately owned sites on which personal wireless facilities can be unobtrusively located with
due regard to visibility, aesthetic issues, traffic flow, public safety, health and welfare. Such
sites may include locating on existing buildings, co-locating on existing towers, screened
roof-top mounts, water towers, billboards, electric substations, or other camouflaged sites,
but shall not include new towers.
C. Publically owned sites in which the facility is minimally obtrusive, has a minimal impact on
the surrounding area, is an appropriate distance from residential land uses, has minimal
impact on residential uses, with due regard being given to the scale of the facility and the
surrounding area and the impact on the location.
D. Sites in commercially or industrially zoned districts in which the facility is minimally
obtrusive, has a minimal impact on the surrounding area, is an appropriate distance from
residential land uses, has minimal impact on residential uses, with due regard being given
to the scale of the facility and the surrounding area and the impact on the location.
2. Limited Preference Sites:
A. Sites on other public property.
B. Sites on other commercially or industrially zoned property.
3. Sensitive Location Sites. Sites located in areas with predominantly residential uses,
environmentally sensitive areas, entryway corridors, landmarks or landmark districts, properties
listed or eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the Airport Environs,
and other sensitive areas.
Section 3009. Application Requirements.
1. Pre-Application Conference and Fees. Prior to the acceptance of an application by the City,
applicants shall participate in a pre-application conference for the purposes of discussing
application requirements, specifics of the site, plans for current and future facilities, and
establishing the application fee. The purpose of establishing the application fee is to ensure
the recovery of City costs and expenses associated with the review of the application including,
but not limited to, actual costs of City staff time and resources as well as any outside
consultation expenses which the City reasonably determines are necessary to adequately
review and analyze the application.
The pre-application fee shall be $100.00. If the application needs additional administrative or
legal work or research then the fee shall be a minimum of $1,000.00. The City shall apply such
fee against all costs associated with its evaluation of any pending application. In the event that
total costs are in excess of the fee, the applicant shall, upon notice from the City, pay such
costs. In the event that total costs are less than the fee, the City shall refund a portion of the fee
to the applicant. An application form should be produced by the City to reflect the necessary
information as well as other legal services/research. The application process should not
exceed thirty (30) days.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 130
2. Applications for either an administrative permit or a special exception permit for a personal
wireless facility shall be filed with the City Manager or Designee and shall include the following:
A. A plot plan of the lot and the proposed uses drawn to an accurate scale and showing all
pertinent information. The application material shall provide sufficient information, as
determined by the City Manager or Designee, to allow a complete review of the proposal.
Failure to provide adequate information may result in the rejection of the application.
B. A statement identifying which location preference identified in Section 3008 herein, the
proposed facility is meeting.
(1) Whether any preferred location sites are located within the service area of the proposed
personal wireless service facility;
(2) What good faith efforts and measures were taken to investigate each of these preferred
location sites and why such efforts were unsuccessful;
(3) Why the use of a preferred location site is not technologically, legally or economically
feasible;
(4) How and why the proposed site is required to meet service demands for the proposed
facility and citywide network; and
(5) The distance between the proposed facility and the nearest residential unit and
residentially zoned properties.
C. A description of the security barrier surrounding the base of the tower and accessory
equipment. The description should include the method of fencing, finished color and, if
applicable, the method of camouflage and illumination. Access shall be through a locked
gate. The tower shall either have no climbing devices attached to the lower twenty feet of
the tower or shall be fitted with anti-climbing devices.
D. A statement indicating proposed measures designed to minimize potentially adverse visual
effects on adjacent properties with consideration given to design, unobtrusiveness,
minimum height necessary to accommodate antenna, avoidance of artificial light and
coloring provisions;
E. Provide a description of the anticipated maintenance and monitoring program for the
antennae and back up equipment, including frequency of maintenance services.
F. Provide copies of any environmental documents required by any federal agency.
Section 3010. Standards for Evaluation.
1. Planning Commission may recommend and the City Council may approve, by special exception
permit, a personal wireless facility in any zoning district after review and consideration of all of
the following:
A. Conformity with Comprehensive Plan.
B. Preference of site location in accordance with Section 3008 herein.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 131
C. Compatibility with abutting property and surrounding land uses.
D. Adverse impacts such and the visual, environmental or noise impacts.
E. Screening potential of existing vegetation, structures and topographic features, and
screening potential of proposed facilities, ground level equipment, buildings, and tower
base.
F. Scale of facility in relation to surrounding land uses.
G. Compatibility with surrounding uses.
H. Impact on views/vistas.
I. Impact on landmark structures/districts, historically significant structures/districts,
architecturally significant structures, landmark vistas or scenery and view corridors from
visually obtrusively antennas and back-up equipment.
J. Impact on natural resources, open spaces, recreational trails, and other recreational
resources.
K. Color, finish, height, and wattage.
L. Ability to co-locate.
M. Availability of suitable existing structures for antenna mounting.
N. The conditions for granting Special Exception in Article 30, Section 2402 of Zoning
Ordinance No. 2013-2897.
2. An application to construct new towers shall be denied if the applicant has not shown by
substantial evidence that it has made a good faith effort to mount the facilities on an existing
structure and/or tower.
3. Locations in sensitive location sites shall be considered only if the applicant:
A. Provides evidence showing what good faith efforts and measures were taken to secure a
preferred location site or limited preference site within one-quarter mile of the proposed
facility; and
B. Demonstrates with engineering evidence why each such preferred location site or limited
preference site was not technologically, legally or economically feasible.
4. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, personal wireless facilities approved by special
exception permit may be allowed to exceed the maximum height for the district in which they
are located. Antennas or towers for personal wireless services exceeding 100 feet in height
may not be located in any residential zoned district and must be separated from all residential
zoned land by a minimum of 200 feet or 100 percent of the height of such proposed personal
wireless service facility, whichever is greater. Antennas or towers for personal wireless
services of 100 feet or less in height may be located in residential zoned districts provided said
personal wireless service facility is separated from any residential structure, school or church
by a minimum of 100 percent of the height of such proposed personal wireless service facility.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 132
These regulations shall not prohibit the school district from having their own communication
tower or antenna on school and/or school district property, provided said personal wireless
service facility is separated from any residential structure or church by a minimum of 100
percent of the height of such proposed personal wireless service facility.
Section 3011. Design Criteria for Personal Wireless Service Facilities.
1. Equipment enclosures used primarily for personal wireless service facilities: Ground level
equipment, buildings, and the tower base shall be screened from public view. The standards
for the equipment buildings are as follows:
A. The maximum floor area is 3,500 square feet and the maximum height is twelve feet. The
Planning Commission may recommend and the City Council may approve an increase in
the maximum area to accommodate co-location.
B. Ground level buildings shall be screened from view by landscape plantings, fencing, or
other appropriate means, as specified herein or in the Subdivision Regulations; Design
Standards of the City.
C. Equipment buildings mounted on a roof shall have a color and texture similar to the exterior
building walls.
D. Equipment buildings which are located in residential zones shall be designed so as to
conform in appearance with residential structures.
E. Equipment buildings, antenna, and related equipment shall occupy no more than twenty-five
percent (25%) of the total roof area of a building, which may vary in the City's sole discretion
if co-location and an adequate penthouse type structure are useed.
F. All base equipment and structures shall be located no closer to the property line than the
minimum setback for the zone in which it is located.
2. Security Fencing: A well-constructed fence not less than six feet in height from the finished
grade shall be provided around each tower and equipment enclosure. Access to the tower shall
be through a locked gate. Screening shall be in conformance with design plans that have been
approved by City Manager or Designee and the Subdivision Regulations; Design Standards of
the City.
3. Color\Finish\Lights: The tower shall have a galvanized finish. It shall not be painted in alternate
bands of distinctive orange and white colors or equipped with lights unless specifically required
for safety reasons by a governmental agency having jurisdiction thereof. If so required, such
lights shall not exceed the necessary minimum standards therefor. The color, finish and lighting
of the facility shall be specified at the time of application review. No signals, lights, or signs
shall be permitted on towers unless required by the FCC or the FAA. Options on lighting shall
be indicated on the application. In cases where there are residential zoned properties located
within a distance of 300 percent of the height of an antenna or tower for personal wireless
services, any personal wireless service facility shall be equipped with dual mode lighting if lights
are required by the FCC or the FAA.
4. Antenna Accommodations: In order to reduce the number of antenna support structures
needed in the City in the future, any new proposed support structure shall be designed to
accommodate antenna for at least one additional provider. Area shall be reserved for other
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 133
providers’ equipment near the base of the applicant’s tower, unless co-location is shown to be
infeasible. The site plan for towers in excess of 100 feet in height must propose space for two
comparable providers, while the site plan for towers of 100 feet or less in height must propose
space for one comparable provider, unless co-location is shown to be technically or
economically infeasible.
5. Antenna Criteria: Antenna on or above a structure shall be subject to the following:
A. The proposal shall demonstrate that the antenna and support structure are safe and the
surrounding areas will not be negatively affected by support structure failure, falling ice, or
other debris. All support structures shall be fitted with anti-climbing devices.
B. Antenna attached to the wall of an existing building shall be mounted in a configuration as
flush to the wall as technically possible and should not project more than twenty feet (20')
above the wall on which it is attached.
C. The antenna shall be architecturally compatible with the building and /or wall on which it is
mounted, and designed and located so as to minimize any adverse aesthetic impact. The
antenna shall be constructed, painted, or fully screened to match as closely as possible the
color and texture of the building and wall on which it is mounted.
D. The antenna may be attached to an existing conforming mechanical equipment enclosure
which projects above the roof of the building, but may not project any higher than that
allowed in the applicable zoning district.
E. If an accessory equipment shelter is present, it must blend with the surrounding buildings
in architectural character and color.
F. Roof mounted antenna and related base stations shall be completely screened from view
by materials that are consistent and compatible with the design, color, and materials of the
building.
F. Rooftop mounts and related base stations shall be screened and integrated with the design
of the building.
H. Antenna attached to the roof of a building, an existing tower, a water tank, or a similar
structure must be either:
(1) Omnidirectional or whip antenna no more than seven inches in diameter; or
(2) Panel antenna no more than two feet wide and eight feet long.
(3) Microwave circular antenna three meters or less in diameter.
I. Antenna, antenna arrays, and support structures shall not extend more than the permitted
height in the applicable zoning district. The antenna, antenna array, and their support
structure shall be mounted so as to blend with the structure to which the antenna is
attached. The antenna and its support structure shall be designed to withstand a wind force
of 80 miles per hour with 1/2 inch ice without the use of supporting guy wires. The antenna,
antenna array, and their support structure shall be a color that blends with the structure on
which they are mounted.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 134
6. Free-standing roof-top antenna support structures: The roof-top structure must be
architecturally and visually (color, size, bulk) compatible with surrounding existing buildings,
structures, vegetation, and/or uses. Such facilities will be considered architecturally and
visually compatible if they are camouflaged to disguise the facility.
Site location and development shall preserve the pre-existing character of the site as much as
possible. Existing vegetation should be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing
topography of the site should be minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual
impact of the site on the surrounding area. The effectiveness of visual mitigation techniques
must be evaluated by the City, in the City's sole discretion.
7. Fall Zone: Towers and other camouflaged support structures shall be set back a distance no
less than one half than the height of the structure. The Planning Commission may recommend
and the City Council may grant a reduction in the required fall zone when it finds that such
reduction will not adversely impact adjacent properties, and is consistent with the intent of this
title to promote the public health, safety and welfare. However in no instance shall the setback
be less than that required by the underlying zoning district.
Section 3012. General Requirements. The personal wireless service provider shall comply at
all times with the current applicable FCC and FAA standards and regulations, and any of those of
other agencies of the federal government with authority to regulate towers and antennas.
1. Building Codes; Safety Standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a
tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable
City building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic
Industries Association ("EIA"), as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the City
concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards, then upon notice being
provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring the tower into
compliance with such standards. If the owner fails to bring its tower into compliance within
thirty (30) days, the City may remove the tower at the owner's expense.
2. Structural Design. Towers shall be constructed to the EIA Standards, which may be amended
from time to time, and all applicable construction/building codes. Further, any improvements
and/or additions to existing towers shall comply with the requirements of this chapter and shall
require submission of site plans sealed and verified by a professional engineer which
demonstrate compliance with the EIA Standards and all other good industry practices. The
plans shall be submitted and reviewed at the time building permits are requested.
3. Required Parking. Parking shall be required as per Zoning Ordinance No. 2013-2897
4. Tower Separation. An applicant will be required to demonstrate why it is necessary from a
technical standpoint to have a tower within one-quarter (¼) mile of a tower whether it is owned
or utilized by applicant or another provider.
5. Surety and Indemnity Requirements.
A. Prior to issuance of a building permit for a tower, the applicant shall post a surety, approved
by the City Attorney, with the City in the minimum amount necessary, as determined by the
City, to guarantee the future removal of the facilities. The surety may not be revoked or
terminated during the term of the permit. The City may use the surety for any expenses it
incurs in removing any of the provider’s facilities.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 135
B. A provider shall at its sole cost and expense, indemnify and hold harmless the City, its
officers, officials, boards, commissions, agents, representatives, and employees against any
and all claims, suits, losses, expenses, causes of actions, proceedings, and judgments for
damage arising out of, resulting from, or alleged to arise out of or resulting from the
construction, operation, repair, maintenance or removal of the provider’s facilities.
Indemnified expenses shall include, but not be limited to, all out-of-pocket expenses, such
as costs of suit and defense and reasonable attorney fees, and shall also include the
reasonable value of any services rendered by the City Attorney’s office and any employees
of the City and any consultants retained by the City.
6. Safety Inspection Requirements. The facility operator shall conduct safety inspections in
accordance with the EIA, FCC, and FAA Standards and within 60 days of the inspection, file
a report with the Department of Building and Safety.
Section 3013. Non-use; Abandonment. In addition to the definition of abandonment provided
in Section 3007, facilities shall be considered abandoned ninety (90) days after the expiration of
an administrative permit or special permit and partially abandoned in the event that a portion of the
antenna support structure is no longer used.
1. Abandonment: No less than thirty (30) days prior to the date that a personal wireless service
provider plans to abandon, partially abandon or discontinue operation of a facility, the provider
must notify the City by certified U.S. mail of the proposed date of abandonment, partial
abandonment or discontinuation of operation. In the event that a provider fails to give notice,
the facility shall be considered abandoned upon the City's discovery of discontinuation of
operation for more than 90 and 180 days, as the case may be, on all or part of such facility.
Upon such abandonment, the provider shall have sixty (60) days or such additional period of
time determined in the reasonable discretion of the City within which to:
A. Reactivate the use of the facility or transfer the facility to another provider who makes actual
use of the facility; or
B. Dismantle and remove facility. If the facility or portion thereof is not removed within the
sixty (60) days time period or additional period of time allowed by the City, the City may
remove such tower or portion thereof or antenna at the provider’s expense. If there are two
or more providers co-locating on a facility, then this provision shall not become effective
until all providers cease using the facility or until a portion of the antenna support structure
is no longer used.
At the earlier of sixty (60) days from the date of abandonment without reactivation or upon
completion of dismantling and removal, City approval for the facility or a portion thereof shall
automatically expire.
2. If ownership of a facility is transferred from one provider to another, the previous provider and
the new provider shall be required to notify the City of the change of ownership or transfer within
thirty days of the change of ownership or transfer of the facility. The new provider shall be
required to make amendments to the application that is on file with the City, in order to provide
current information. The new provider shall also provide a surety in accordance with
Section 3012.
Section 3014. Zoning Districts Allowed. Personal wireless services facilities may be allowed
by administrative or special exception permit in any zoning district, but only as a special exception
and not as a permitted use.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 136
ARTICLE 31
NEIGHBORHOOD AND HISTORICAL CONSERVATION DISTRICT (N-HCD)
Article 31 - Neighborhood and Historical Conservation District (N-HCD)
Section 3100. Purpose. The Neighborhood and/or Historical Conservation Overlay District is
intended to accommodate unique land use, urban design, and other distinctive characteristics of
neighborhoods. The district, used in combination with a base district, allows variations in permitted
uses and site development regulations that are adapted to the needs of a specific neighborhood.
In addition, the district may include supplementary site regulations.
Section 3101. Application process.
1. An Application for an overlay district may be initiated by a majority of property owners within the
proposed district.
2. An application for creation of a neighborhood and/or historical conservation district shall include
the following components:
A. A statement of purpose, describing the reasons that the existing base district or districts are
not fully adaptable to the specific neighborhood.
B. A map indicating the boundaries of the proposed overlay district, specifying the base district
or districts included with these boundaries.
C. A neighborhood and/or historical conservation plan, consisting of maps and other graphic
and written material necessary to describe land uses, a name or title to distinguish the
proposed neighborhood and/or historical conservation district, distinctive neighborhood
characteristics, building siting and design, site development requirements, signage,
circulation, and other features to the proposed neighborhood and/or historical conservation
district.
D. A specific set of modifications to be made in existing base district regulations, including use,
site development, and off-street parking.
Section 3102. Adoption of District.
1. A neighborhood and/or historical conservation plan, as prepared by the neighborhood and/or
historical conservation district application shall be transmitted to the Planning Commission.
2. The Planning Commission, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon the plan
and district application.
3. The Planning Commission may recommend amendments to the plan and district application.
4. The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be transmitted to the City Council for
final action.
5. The City Council, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon the plan and the
neighborhood and/or historical district application and ordinance.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 137
6. The ordinance adopting the neighborhood and/or historical district shall include a statement of
purpose, a reference to the approved neighborhood and/or historical conservation plan, and a
list of modifications to the base district(s) regulations.
7. Each neighborhood and/or historical district shall be shown on the zoning map, identified
sequentially by order of enactment and referenced to the enacting ordinance.
8. Any protest against a neighborhood and/or historical conservation overlay district shall be made
and filed as provided by Section 19-905, Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1997, and amendments
thereto.
Section 3103. Criteria for approval. The City Council may adopt a neighborhood and/or historical
conservation district if the area meets one (1) or more of the following criteria:
1. The area has distinctive building features, such as scale, size, type of construction, or
distinctive building materials that should be preserved.
2. The area has distinctive site planning features, such as lot platting, setbacks, street layout,
alleys or sidewalks that the base district regulations cannot accommodate.
3. The area has distinctive land use patterns, including mixed land uses or unique uses or
activities, that the base district cannot accommodate.
4. The area has special natural or streetscape characteristics, such as creek beds, parks, gardens
or street landscaping that should be preserved or respected.
Section 3104. Building permits. Building or other permits issued by the City of McCook in a
neighborhood and/or historical conservation district shall be consistent with the adopted
neighborhood and/or historical conservation district ordinance and the approved neighborhood
and/or historical conservation plan.
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 138
Zoning Ordinance No. 2016-2929 passed May 2, 2016.
Revisions:
Section 2103 - Accessory Building - Reference Ordinance No. 2014-2906
Section 1202 - Permitted Special Uses Central Business District -
Reference Ordinance No. 2015-2925
CITY OF MCCOOK, NEBRASKA ZONING ORDINANCE NO. 2016-2929 PAGE - 139

Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
Section 1 Authority..................................................................................................................1
Section 2 Purpose.....................................................................................................................1
Section 3 Jurisdiction...............................................................................................................1
Section 4 Applicability............................................................................................................ 1
Section 5 Definitions................................................................................................................2
Section 6 Severability.............................................................................................................. 6
Section 7 Procedures................................................................................................................6
7.1 General Procedures.................................................................................................. 6
7.2 Preliminary Plat Submission Requirements.............................................................7
7.3 Fees.......................................................................................................................... 7
7.4 Scale and Preliminary Plat Contents........................................................................7
7.5 Notification of Improvement Schedule....................................................................8
7.6 Notification of County Planning Commission.........................................................8
7.7 Notification of School Board...................................................................................8
7.8 Approval or Rejection..............................................................................................8
7.9 Recording of Action.................................................................................................8
7.10 Approval is Conditional...........................................................................................8
7.11 Installation of Improvements for Final Plat Approval.............................................9
7.12 Final Plat Submission Requirements....................................................................... 9
7.13 Scale and Final Plat Contents.................................................................................. 9
7.14 Supplementary Data Required............................................................................... 10
7.15 Professional Assistance..........................................................................................10
7.16 Planning Commission Recommendations............................................................. 10
7.17 Administrative Subdivision .................................................................................. 10
7.18 Waiver for Minor Subdivisions............................................................................. 12
Section 8 Streets, Alleys, Sidewalks, Driveways, Gates....................................................... 12
8.1 Streets.....................................................................................................................12
8.2 Street Extension..................................................................................................... 12
8.3 Dedication of Right-of-Way For Existing Streets................................................. 13
8.4 Dedication of Right-of-Way For Existing Streets................................................. 13
8.5 Intersections........................................................................................................... 14
8.6 Widths, Grades and Sight Distance Requirements................................................ 14
8.7 Marginal Access Streets.........................................................................................15
8.8 Street Jogs.............................................................................................................. 15
8.9 Property Address....................................................................................................15
8.10 Street Names.......................................................................................................... 15
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS w CONTINUED
PAGE
8.11 Private Streets and Reserve Strips......................................................................... 16
8.12 Grading Specifications...........................................................................................16
8.13 Minimum Pavement Widths.................................................................................. 16
8.14 Street Surfacing......................................................................................................16
8.15 Curb and Gutter......................................................................................................16
8.16 Blocks.................................................................................................................... 16
8.17 Street Name Signs..................................................................................................16
8.18 Alleys..................................................................................................................... 17
8.19 Sidewalks............................................................................................................... 17
8.20 Driveways.............................................................................................................. 17
8.21 Street and Walkway Lighting................................................................................ 17
8.21 Gates...................................................................................................................... 17
Section 9 Utility and Drainage Facilities...............................................................................17
9.1 Sewer and Water....................................................................................................17
9.2 Sanitary Sewer Improvements............................................................................... 18
9.3 Drainage Improvements.........................................................................................19
9.4 Storm Sewers and Storm Water Drainage............................................................ 20
9.5 Culverts and Bridges..............................................................................................20
9.6 Solar Access...........................................................................................................21
9.7 Erosion Control......................................................................................................21
9.8 Fire Protection........................................................................................................21
9.9 Electric, Gas, and Telephone Improvements......................................................... 21
Section 10 Shared Improvement Costs....................................................................................22
10.1 Extensions to Boundaries.......................................................................................22
10.2 Off-site Extensions.................................................................................................22
10.3 Public /Private Partnerships and Alternative Sources of Funding.........................22
Section 11 Subdivision Improvement Procedure ....................................................................23
11.1 Subdivision Improvement Guarantees ..................................................................23
11.2 Surety Performance Bond .....................................................................................23
11.3 Escrow Account ....................................................................................................23
11.4 Security Agreement .............................................................................................. 23
11.5 Improvement (Assessment) District ..................................................................... 24
11.6 Time Limits ...........................................................................................................24
11.7 Installation of Improvements ................................................................................ 24
TABLE OF CONTENTS w CONTINUED
PAGE
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
3
11.8 Plan Review Reimbursement ................................................................................24
11.9 Failure to Complete Improvements ...................................................................... 24
11.10 Inspection and Certification ..................................................................................25
11.11 Reduction of Guarantees .......................................................................................25
11.12 Release of Guarantees ...........................................................................................25
Section 12 Dedication of Public Land .................................................................................... 26
12.1 Dedication .............................................................................................................26
Section 13 Annexation and Recording of Plat ........................................................................26
13.1 Subdivision Annexation of Adjoining or Continuous Properties ......................... 26
13.2 Subdivision Annexation: Petition for Annexation ...............................................26
13.3 Subdivision Annexation: Adoption Plan by Resolution ...................................... 26
Section 14 Variances................................................................................................................27
14.1 Granting of Variances; Conditions........................................................................ 27
14.2 Recording of Plat................................................................................................... 27
14.3 Planned Development............................................................................................ 27
Section 15 Public Sites and Open Spaces................................................................................28
15.1 Recreation Standards............................................................................................. 28
15.2 Recreation Sites..................................................................................................... 28
Section 16 Amendments.......................................................................................................... 28
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
1
SECTION 1. AUTHORITY. These Regulations are hereby adopted and enacted under
authority of R.R.S., Nebr. 1943, Chapters 19-916 thru 19-922 and 16-901 to 16-905, and
amendments thereto, and comprise requirements, standards and specifications with respect to
provisions for the proper location and width of streets, building lines, open spaces, safety,
recreation; and, for the manner in which streets will be graded and improved; and, the extent to
which water, sewer and other utility services shall be provided; and, to provide for the approval
of preliminary plats and final plats and endorsement thereof by the McCook, Nebraska Planning
Commission and by the City Council. No final plat of a subdivision shall be approved and
accepted by the McCook City Council unless it conforms to the provisions of these regulations.
SECTION 2. PURPOSE. The purpose of these regulations is to provide for the orderly
development of McCook and its environs; to proscribe standards for the laying out of
subdivisions in harmony with the comprehensive plan; for the coordination of streets and utilities
within subdivisions with other existing or planned streets and utilities; for coordination of
subdivisions with other features of the comprehensive plan to provide for adequate open space
for traffic, recreation, light and air; and for the distribution of population and traffic in such a
manner so as to create conditions favorable to health, safety, convenience or prosperity, all in
accordance with applicable state statutes.
SECTION 3. JURISDICTION. The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to the lands
within the Corporate Limits and to the unincorporated area located two (2) miles beyond and
adjacent the Corporate Limits of the City of McCook, Nebraska, as the same may be amended
from time to time, pursuant to Section 16-902, under authority of R.R.S., Nebr. 1943, as
amended.
SECTION 4. APPLICABILITY. Any plat, hereafter made, for each subdivision or part
thereof lying within the jurisdiction of this ordinance, shall be prepared for approval and
recorded as herein prescribed. The regulations contained here in shall apply to the subdivision of
a lot, tract, parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts, or other division of land for the purpose of
sale or development, whether immediate or future, including the re-subdivision or re-platting of
land or lots, except that the division of land when the smallest parcel created is more than ten
(10) acres in area shall be exempt from these regulations. Further, the regulations set forth by
this ordinance shall be minimum regulations which shall apply uniformly throughout the
jurisdiction of this ordinance except as hereafter provided.
A. Each separate principal use/building within the jurisdiction of this ordinance shall be situated
on a separate and single subdivided lot of record unless otherwise provided in the zoning
ordinance of the City of McCook, Nebraska.
B. No subdivision of land shall be permitted within the planning jurisdiction of McCook unless
a plat is approved in accordance with the provisions of these Regulations. Further, no lot in a
subdivision may be sold, transferred or negotiated to sell, no permit to erect, alter, or repair any
building upon land in a subdivision may be issued, and no building may be erected in a
subdivision unless a final plat has been approved by the McCook City Council and recorded with
the Red Willow County Register of Deeds.
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
2
C. These Subdivision Regulations shall not apply to the following:
1. To a subdivision of land whereby the smallest parcel created or remaining is more
than ten (10) acres, as pursuant to Section 19-921, under authority of R.R.S., Nebr
1943, as Amended.
2. The subdivision of burial lots in cemeteries.
3. A change in the boundary between adjoining lands which does not create an
additional lot or does not result in non-conformity of an existing lot.
SECTION 5. DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of these Regulations, certain terms or words
used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the
plural number includes the singular.
BLOCK. A tract or parcel of land bounded by public streets or lands, streams, railroads,
unplatted lands or a combination thereof.
BUILDING LINE. A line parallel or nearly parallel, to either the street line or the lot line not
abutting the street and at a specified distance from the street or lot line which marks the
minimum distance from either line that a building may be erected. In the case of a cul-de-sac,
the building line shall be measured around the curvature of the street line.
BUILDING OFFICIAL. The person or persons designated by the governing body to administer
this subdivision ordinance whether such person or persons are an entitled Building Official,
Building Inspector, Administrative Official, Zoning Administrator, or the City Manager.
COMMON OPEN SPACE. That undivided land in a subdivision which may be jointly owned
by all property owners of the subdivision, for the benefit of the owners of the individual building
sites of said development.
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
3
COMMON SEWER SYSTEM. A sanitary sewage system in public ownership which provides
for the collection and treatment of domestic effluent in a central sewage treatment plant which
meets the minimum requirements of the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality for
primary and secondary sewage treatment and which does not include individual septic tanks or
portable sewage treatment facilities.
COMMON WATER SYSTEM. A water system which provides for the supply, storage and
distribution of potable water on an uninterrupted basis which is in public ownership.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The long range development plan adopted by the McCook City
Council.
COVENANT. Written promise or pledge.
CULVERT. A transverse drain that channels water under a street or driveway.
EASEMENT. A grant by property owner to the public, a corporation or persons of the use of a
tract of land for a specific purpose.
ENGINEER, CITY. One, licensed by the State of Nebraska, designated by the McCook City
Council to act for the City.
FRONTAGE. The length of the property abutting on one (1) side of a street measured along the
dividing line between the property and the street.
GREEN AREA. Same as common open space.
IMPROVEMENT. Street pavement or resurfacing, curbs, gutter, sidewalks, water lines, sewer
lines, storm drains, street lights, flood control and drainage facilities, utility lines, landscaping,
and other related matters normally associated with the development of raw land into building
sites.
LOT. A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in this Article,
including one (1) main building together with its accessory buildings, the open spaces and
parking required by this Article and fronting upon a street.
LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection.
LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot which has frontage on one street only.
LOT, THROUGH. A lot other than a corner lot fronting on more than one street.
LOT OF RECORD. A tract of land described as an integral portion of a subdivision plat which
is properly recorded in the office of the Red Willow County Clerk.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION All subdivisions not classified as minor subdivisions, including but
not limited to subdivisions of five (5) or more lots, or any size subdivision requiring any new
street or extension of the local governmental facilities, or the creation of any public
improvements.
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
4
MINOR SUBDIVISION Any subdivision containing up to five (5) lots fronting on an existing
street, and not involving any new street or road, the extension of municipal facilities, the creation
of any public improvements, any zoning change, and not adversely affecting the remainder of the
parcel of adjoining property.
MONUMENTS. Permanent iron markers [minimum ½” x 24” rebar (or pipe) with surveyor’s
cap and a number] used to establish definitely all lines of the plat of a subdivision, including all
lot corners, boundary line corners and points of change in street alignment.
OUT LOT. Property shown on a subdivision plat outside of the boundaries of the land which is
developed and which is to be excluded from the development of the subdivision.
PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET. Off-street parking shall mean an area, enclosed or
unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one automobile, together with a driveway connecting the
parking space with a street or alley and permitting ingress and egress.
PEDESTRIAN WAYS. A tract of land dedicated to public use, which cuts across a block to
facilitate pedestrian access to adjoining streets and properties.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. Special development of certain tracts of land, planned and
designed as a unit for one (1) or more land uses under rules and procedures contained in these
Regulations.
PLANNING AREA. The statutory zoning jurisdiction of the City of McCook.
PLANNING COMMISSION. The appointed planning body designated by the McCook City
Council.
PLAT, FINAL. The map of a subdivision to be recorded after review and recommendation by
the Planning Commission to the City Council and with any accompanying material for final
approval and, after such approval, to the Red Willow County Clerk for recording as described in
these regulations.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY PLAT. The preliminary drawing or drawings, described in these
regulations, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the
Planning Commission for review and recommendation to the City Council for final approval.
PLOT. A parcel of ground.
PUBLIC WAY. An alley, avenue, boulevard, bridge, channel, ditch, easement, expressway,
freeway, highway, land, parkway, right-of-way, road, sidewalk, street, subway, tunnel, viaduct,
walk, or other ways in which the general public or a public entity have a right, or which are
dedicated, whether improved or not.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land taken or dedicated for use as a public way. In addition to the
roadway, it normally incorporates the curbs, lawn strips, sidewalks, lighting, and drainage
facilities, and may include special features such as grade separation, landscaped areas, viaducts
and bridges.
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
5
SETBACK LINE. The term "setback line" means a line, as shown on a record plat or otherwise
established by the McCook City Council, beyond which no part of a main exterior wall of a
building or structure may project. The projection of roof eves, or other building components are
allowed as per the provisions of the McCook Zoning Regulations.
SEWERS, ON-SITE. A septic tank or similar installation on an individual lot which utilizes an
aerobic bacteriological process or equally satisfactory process for the elimination of sewage and
provides for the proper and safe disposal of the effluent, subject to the approval of health and
sanitation officials having jurisdiction, and only allowed when the McCook public sewer system
is unavailable.
SIDEWALK. A paved path for pedestrians at the side of a street or roadway.
STREET. Street shall mean a public or private thoroughfare including avenues, which affords
principle means of access to abutting property.
SUBDIVIDER. The owners, developers or agents of persons or corporations affecting
subdivision.
SUBDIVISION. The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels for the
purpose of transfer of ownership, building development, or, if a new street is involved, any
division of a parcel of land. The term includes re-subdivision, and, when appropriate to the
context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
SURVEYOR. Any person registered in Nebraska to practice surveying.
THOROUGHFARE, STREET OR ROAD. The full width between property lines bounding
every public way of whatever nature, with a part thereof to be used for vehicular traffic and
designated as follows:
Alley: A dedicated public right-of-way, other than a street, which provides only a
secondary means of access to abutting property.
Arterial Street: A street which provides for through traffic movement between and
around streets with direct access to abutting property, subject to necessary control of
entrances, exits, and curb use.
Collector Street: A street which provides for traffic movement between arterials and
local streets, with direct access to abutting property.
Cul-de-sac: A local street of relatively short length with one (1) end open to traffic and
the other end terminating in a vehicular turnaround.
Dead-end Street: A street temporarily having only one (1) outlet for vehicular traffic and
intended to be extended or continued in the future.
Local Street: A street which provides direct access to abutting land and local traffic
movement, whether in business, industrial or residential land.
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
6
Marginal Access Street: A local or collector street, parallel and adjacent to an arterial or
collector street, providing access to abutting properties and protection from arterial or
collector streets (Also called frontage street or service road).
VICINITY MAP. A drawing located on the plat which sets forth by dimensions or other means,
the relationship of the proposed subdivision or use to other nearby developments or landmarks
and community facilities and services within the City of McCook, in order to better locate and
orient the area in question.
WALKWAY. See sidewalk.
ZONE OR DISTRICT. A section of the zoning area for which uniform regulations governing
the use, height, area, size and intensity of the use of buildings, land, and open spaces about
buildings, are established.
SECTION 6. SEVERABILITY. Should any section or provision of these Regulations be
declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity
of these Regulations as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid.
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
7
SECTION 7. PROCEDURES
7.1 General Procedure. When the subdivision of land is proposed, before any contract is made
for the sale of any part thereof, and before any building permits are granted, the subdivision
owner shall apply for and secure approval of such proposed subdivision in accordance with the
following procedure:
1. Administrative Subdivision. An administrative subdivision shall not be considered a
subdivision subject to the requirements of a minor or major subdivision. A Plat reviewed
and approved by Zoning Administrator, Utilities Director and City Manager. See Section
7.17.
2. Minor Subdivision. A Final Plat is submitted to the City Council for Approval. See
Section 7.12
3. Major Subdivision. Major Subdivisions are required to submit a Preliminary and Final
Plat to the Planning Commission and City Council for approval. See Sections 7.2 and
7.12
7.2 PRELIMINARY PLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS. The applicant of Major
Subdivisions shall prepare and submit an application for preliminary plat approval. The
applicant shall prepare and file three (3) copies of a proposed preliminary plat, one (1) full size
copy, one (1) copy reduced to 8 ½ by 11 inches, and one (1) full-size electronic copy in portable
document format (pdf). The application for preliminary plat approval shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator at least twenty (20) calendar days before the McCook Planning
Commission meeting at which the application will be considered.
7.3 Fees. Fees are set by the McCook City Council.
7.4 Scale and Preliminary Plat Contents. Preliminary plats shall be a scale of one (1") inch to one
hundred (100') feet, or 1" = 200' if seventy-five (75) percent of the lots are one (1) acre or larger, and
shall be prepared with the following information:
A. Name, location, acreage, owner and designer of subdivision with legal description as
shown by land records.
B. Present zoning.
C. Date, north arrow and graphic scale.
D. Location of property lines, roads, existing utilities with size of lines, and other
underground installations and easement.
E. Names of adjoining properties or subdivisions.
F. Proposed utility system, including water, sewer and paving.
G. Dimensions, lot lines, except that in industrial type subdivisions, lot lines may be
excluded.
H. Location of proposed drainage.
I. Contours at five (5') feet intervals at 1" = 200' scale.
J. Proposed improvements and grading concepts.
K. Location of existing buildings.
L. Proposed easements, dedications and reservations of land required.
7.5 Notification of Initial Improvement Schedule and Subdivision Financing Process.
Subdivider shall indicate by a letter when improvements as required will be provided; any
proposed restrictive covenants for the land involved shall accompany the letter. The options for
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
8
financing subdivision improvements shall be in conformance with the provisions of Sections 10
and 11 of this Ordinance and the subdivider shall indicate in a letter what financing options are
planned to be used for the proposed subdivision.
7.6 Notification of County Planning Commission. The City shall notify the Red Willow County
Planning Commission of any proposed subdivision plat and provide the Commission with all
available materials on the proposed plat, when such proposed plat lies partially or totally within
the extraterritorial subdivision jurisdiction being exercised by that Municipality in such County.
The Commission shall be given four (4) weeks to officially comment on the appropriateness of
the design and improvements proposed in the plat. The review period shall run concurrently
with subdivision review activities of the City after the Commission receives all available
material for a proposed subdivision plat.
7.7 Notification of School Board. At least ten (10) days prior to the McCook Planning
Commission meeting at which the preliminary plat is to be considered for approval, the Planning
Commission shall submit a copy of the proposal to the School Board of each School District
which the proposed development affects, and shall notify the School Board of the meeting date.
Copies of the plat may be submitted to any other agency which may be affected.
7.8 Approval or Rejection. After review of the preliminary plat and negotiations with the
subdivider, and before the City Council reviews and acts on the Preliminary Plat, the McCook
Planning Commission shall reject or conditionally approve the preliminary plat, within thirty
(30) days after the official meeting at which the plat was considered.
7.9 Recording of Action. The action of the McCook Planning Commission shall be noted on
three (3) copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions determined.
One (1) copy shall be returned to the subdivider, one (1) copy relayed to the City Council and
one (1) copy retained by the Planning Commission.
7.10 Approval is Conditional. Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the
final plat; it shall be deemed an expression of approval or conditional approval of the submitted
plat, as a guide for the preparation of the final plat, which will be subject to further consideration
by the McCook Planning Commission and the McCook City Council. Any conditional approval
of the preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of one (1) year unless an extension is
granted by the Planning Commission.
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
9
7.11 Installation of Improvements for Final Plat Approval. The subdivision design standards
contained in this ordinance and hereinafter referred to as Subdivision Regulations are formulated
to assure that the style, character, and form of new developments will conform to minimum
requirements promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of the public. In addition to these
regulations and to insure that future developments are consistent with the growth objectives and
goals of the City and its Two-Mile Planning Jurisdiction, subdivisions shall conform to the
Comprehensive Plan of the City of McCook, to the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinances and to
any other applicable ordinances of the City of McCook. Following approval of the preliminary
plat, the subdivider shall:
(1) Agree to install the required improvements or;
(2) Sign an agreement, which shall be entered into only at the option of the City,
thereby guaranteeing the installation of improvements; or
(3) Furnish a bond or enter into an escrow or security agreement approved by the
City Attorney in an amount sufficient to guarantee the installation of the
required improvements.
7.12 FINAL PLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS. The Subdivider of Major Subdivisions
shall submit a Final Plat, showing entire concept, to the City Clerk within twelve (12) months of
approval of the preliminary plat, unless an extension is granted by the Planning Commission. The
final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved and to the requirements of all applicable
ordinances and State statutes; and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of
the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at the time;
provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of these Regulations.
A Subdivider of a Minor Subdivision can submit the final plat to the City Clerk after review and
approval of the City Manager.
7.13 Scale and Final Plat Contents. One (1) original and two (2) original ink copies of the final plat
and other exhibits required for approval shall be submitted. The final plat shall be drawn in ink on
mylar and shall be at a scale of one (1") inch to one hundred (100') feet or larger. The final plat shall
show the following:
A. Date, title, name and location of subdivision.
B. Streets and street names, lots, setback lines, lot numbers, etc, except that in industrial
type subdivision lot designation may be excluded.
C. Graphic scale and north arrow.
D. Monuments (ferrous) minimum one-half (1/2) inch diameter, maximum, Twenty-Four
(24) inches in length with surveyor’s cap and number.
E. Dimensions, angles and bearings, and complete legal description of the property.
F. Sufficient survey data to reproduce any line on the ground.
G. Names of adjoining subdivisions.
H. Location and dimensions of any easements.
I. Purpose for which sites are dedicated or reserved, and the transfer of ownership of the
same.
J. Certification by surveyor as to accuracy of survey and plat.
K. Certification signed and acknowledged by all parties holding title or having any title
interest in the land subdivided and consenting to the preparation and recording of the
plat as submitted.
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
10
L. Certification recording the approval by the Planning Commission.
M. Certification recording the approval by the City Council and the acceptance of any
dedications.
7.14 Supplementary Data Required. The final plat shall be accompanied with Construction plans of
all required public improvements, and a Drainage Study approved and sealed by a Nebraska
Professional Engineer and any State Offices requiring review and approval.
7.15 Professional Assistance. The City Council or the Planning Commission may request such
professional assistance as it deems necessary to properly evaluate the plats submitted.
7.16 Planning Commission Recommendations. The Planning Commission shall reject or approve
the final plat and have prepared a recommendation to the City Council recommending rejection or
approval. All reasons for recommending rejection shall be clearly stated. Notification of approval or
rejection by the Planning Commission or City Council shall be given the subdivider within sixty (60)
days after submission of the final plat to the Planning Commission.
7.17 ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION. An owner may file application with the Zoning
Administrator of the City for approval of a proposed administrative subdivision plat as provided
in this section. As used herein, the term "administrative subdivision" shall mean the resubdivision
of existing subdivided lots and blocks, involving the adjustment of existing lot
boundaries or the consolidation of lots, in a manner consistent with the Zoning Ordinance
concerning minimum area and dimensions of lots, but not necessitating the dedication of
additional public right-of-way or easements or the installation of required public improvements.
1. Plat. The property owner shall submit an accurately drawn plat showing the proposed lots
including all pertinent dimension lines. The plat shall be on eight and one-half (8½) by eleven
(11) inch sheet(s) of paper; be drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred
(100) feet; show the direction north by an arrow; reflect all adjoining public streets and alleys
and public easements; and show any existing buildings or structures on the tract of land being
changed. Except in the case of the consolidation of lots or the re-subdivision of two lots where
a portion of a lot is added to the other lot, attached to the plat shall be a certificate signed by a
registered land surveyor licensed in the State of Nebraska certifying that each proposed lot has
been accurately surveyed and that each lot corner has been well and accurately staked and
marked.
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
11
2. Lots. An administrative subdivision shall only be used to create a maximum of two (2) lots
from any lot. If said two (2) lots have been created by administrative subdivision, any further
subdivision shall be done by filing and processing a vacation of existing lots, Preliminary Plat,
and Final Plat as provided in the subdivision ordinance. Exceptions to the foregoing restriction
shall be permitted only to allow adjustment of lot lines in cases of mistake or error.
An administrative subdivision shall be applied only once to any specific lot or
combination of lots.
3. Frontage access, Each lot created must have at least 50 feet of frontage on an adjacent
public street and at least 30 feet of frontage on any adjacent alley or a 10-feet wide utility
easement along the rear property line if no alley adjoins the lot.
4. Minimum Zoning and Subdivision Criteria. Except as provided in subsection 5(b) herein,
each lot created shall comply with the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and this section.
5. Provisions for Existing Structures. If the administrative subdivision involves existing
structures on the lots created, the following shall apply:
(a) Except as provided in subsection 5(b) of this section, each structure must meet lot
setback, building separation and other building and zoning requirements using the
new boundaries for ownership created by the administrative subdivision.
(b) A duplex dwelling may be divided as part of an administrative subdivision even
though each portion of a structure so divided may not meet side lot setback
regulations. Each portion shall be physically modified to operate as an
independent unit and shall have adequate fire separation installed to provide a
minimum of two (2) hour protection between units or greater where required by
fire zone regulations.
(c) Each lot shall be provided with adequate vehicle off-street parking as per the
Zoning Ordinance.
6. Tax Records. Prior to the approval of the administrative subdivision, the property owner
shall provide a statement from the County Treasurer showing that according to their records,
there are no unpaid taxes against said land within the proposed administrative subdivision or
any part thereof. The property owner shall provide a statement from the County Clerk that
there are no liens against said land. The property owner shall also provide a statement from
the City Treasurer showing that all special assessment installation payments are current as
applied to said proposed administrative subdivision or any part thereof.
7. Fee. The property owner shall pay to the City a fee as reflected on the City's fee
ordinance.
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
12
8. Approval and Filing. The Zoning Administrator shall examine the administrative subdivisionfinal
plat and application as to their compliance with the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and this
section and shall submit the application and plat to the Utilities Director for his review and
recommendation. If the Zoning Administrator finds that the administrative subdivision final plat
has been prepared and submitted in compliance with the requirements of this section and the
Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall approve such plat. A Certificate of Approval
shall be issued for each administrative subdivision so approved. If the Zoning Administrator
finds that the proposed plat does not qualify for approval as an administrative subdivision final
plat, the Zoning Administrator shall return the proposed plat to the owner, without an approval,
The Zoning Administrator shall file an approved administrative subdivision plat in the office of
the County Clerk of Red Willow County, Nebraska within fifteen (15) days from the date it is
granted.
9. Appeal. In the event of a denial of an administrative subdivision, the applicant may appeal to
the City Council alleging error in the decision of the Zoning Administrator, by filing, an
appeal in writing with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days after the return of the proposed
plat "to the owner without an approval. The City Council may affirm or reverse the Zoning
Administrator's decision."
7.18 WAIVER FOR MINOR SUBDIVISIONS. The subdivider may make application for,
and the City Council may grant, a waiver of some or all of the requirements provided for herein
for small residential, commercial and industrial subdivisions where the following conditions
exist:
1. The subdivision contains no more than five (5) lots, which total area of said lots
shall not exceed one half (1/2) acre each, and conform to existing zoning
ordinances,
2. All lots of the proposed subdivisions shall be platted on existing streets,
3. Surfaces of all streets serving the subdivision meet, or exceed, street surface
standards of the City,
4. Public water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer system facilities are available to all lots in
the subdivision,
5. The development of the subdivision will not increase erosion or flooding potential,
and
6. The subdivider demonstrates to the City Council that said development is in
conformity with the potential development of abutting property. A subdivider
requesting a waiver hereunder shall submit said request in writing to the City
Council prior to the submission of a Final Plat. The request for a waiver shall
include a list of all requirements for which a waiver is sought by reference to code
numbers and descriptive headings.
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
13
SECTION 8. STREETS, ALLEYS, SIDEWALKS, DRIVEWAYS, GATES.
8.1 Streets. The arrangements, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall
conform to the comprehensive development plan and shall be considered in their relation to
existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and
in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets.
8.2 Street Extension. The street layout of the proposed subdivision shall provide for the
continuation of appropriate projection of streets and alleys already existing in areas being
subdivided. Where, at the determination of the City Council, it is desirable to provide street
access to adjoining properties, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundaries
of such properties. Where the City Council deems it necessary, such dead-end streets more than
ninety-one and one-half (91.5) meters, or three hundred (300) feet in length shall be provided
with a turnaround having not less than thirty-six and one-half (36.5) meters, or one hundred
twenty (120) feet outside diameter of traveled way, which can be waived by the City Manager
upon due cause. The street system for the proposed subdivision shall provide for extending
existing streets at the same or greater width, but in no case shall a street extension be of less
width than the minimum width required in these regulations for a street in its category.
8.3 Dedication of Right-of-Way for New Streets. The dedication of right-of-way for new streets
measured from lot line to lot line shall be as shown on the comprehensive development plan. All
streets classified as arterial streets by the comprehensive development plan shall have all points
of access approved by the City Council. Marginal access streets may be required by the City
Council for subdivisions fronting on arterial streets.
8.4 Dedication of Right-of-Way for Existing Streets. Subdivisions platted along existing streets
shall dedicate additional right-of-way if necessary to meet the minimum street width
requirements set forth in these Regulations. The entire minimum right-of-way width shall be
dedicated where the subdivision is on both sides of an existing street. When the subdivision is
located on only one (1) side of an existing street, one half of the required right-of-way width,
measured from the center line of the existing roadway, shall be dedicated. Dedication of one half
of the right-of-way for proposed streets along the boundaries of land proposed for subdivision
shall be prohibited.
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
14
8.5 Intersections. Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at an angle of ninety (90) degrees,
and no intersection shall be at any angle of less than sixty (60) degrees. Street curb intersections
shall be rounded by radii of at least twenty (20) feet. When the smallest angle of street
intersection is less than seventy-five (75) degrees, the City Council may require curb radii of
greater length. Wherever necessary to permit the construction of a curb having a desirable radius
without reducing the sidewalk at a street corner to less than normal width, the property line at
such street corner shall be rounded or otherwise set back sufficiently to permit such curb
construction. No lot or other parcel of land which abuts on and has access to either a collector or
a minor street shall have a service drive, curb cut, or other means of access to an arterial street
within fifty (50) feet of the right-of-way of any street which intersects such arterial street on the
side on which such lot or parcel is located.
8.6 Widths, Grades and Sight Distance Requirements. While maximum grades may be modified
by the City Manager, right-of-way widths, pavements widths, grades and sight distance
requirements shall be as follows:
TYPE R.O.W. PAVEMENT MAXIMUM
GRADE
MINIMUM
SIGHT DISTANCE
ON CURVES
Arterial *100' 40'** 6% 400'
Marginal Access 30' 22’ 8% 300'
Collector *80' 38'** 6% 300'
Local 60' 35' 8% 300'
Alleys 20' 16' no max.
no max.
none
none
Cul-de-sac 80' Street Entrance 35'
Paved Radius 60’
10% 200'
Sidewalk 5’
* Streets in these classifications shall be designed and graded to the full right-of-way widths stated.
** The Developer shall not be responsible for providing pavement wider than 35’.
The horizontal alignment on all streets except in unusual cases as determined by the McCook
Planning Commission shall as follows:
STREET TYPE RADII OF HORIZONTAL CURVES
Arterial Streets 700' Minimum
Collector Streets 300' Minimum
Local Streets 100' Minimum
8.7 Marginal Access Streets. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
arterial street, the City of McCook may require access streets, reverse frontage with screen
planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
15
service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential
properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
Where the proposed subdivision abuts upon or contains an existing or proposed arterial street or
highway or which traffic volumes and vehicular speeds warrant special safety considerations, the
City may require that marginal access streets be provided in order that no lots front on such
existing or proposed arterial street or highway.
Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railway right-of-way or limited access highway
right-of-way, the City may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such
right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park
purposes in residential districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the
requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
8.8 Street Jogs. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125)
feet shall be prohibited. Cul-de-sacs, minor terminal or dead-end streets or courts which are
designed so as to have one end permanently closed shall not be longer than five hundred (500)
feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having a radius at the outside of
the right-of-way of at least eighty (80) feet.
8.9 Property Address. The addressing of properties within the City Limits will be the
responsibility of the City Clerk. Addressing of properties must follow the utilized 911
addressing system.
8.10 Street Names. Proposed streets which are in alignment with other already existing and
named streets shall bear the names of such existing streets. The name of a proposed street which
is not in alignment with an existing street shall not duplicate the name of any existing street,
irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place, court, lane, road, pike,
highway, parkway or similar suffix. Whenever a street alignment changes direction more than
forty-five (45) degrees without a return to the original alignment within a distance of five
hundred (500) feet, then the name of the street shall be changed at the point of curvature.
Whenever a cul-de-sac street serves not more than three (3) lots, the name of the intersecting
street shall apply to the cul-de-sac. To avoid duplication and confusion, the proposed names of
all streets shall be approved by the designated City Engineer prior to such names being assigned
or used.
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
16
8.11 Private Streets and Reserve Strips. There shall be no private streets platted within a
subdivision. There shall be no reserve strips in a subdivision except where their control is
definitely vested in the City or County under conditions approved by the City Council as
authorized herein.
8.12 Grading Specifications. All streets, roads and alleys shall be graded to their full widths by
the subdivider, so that street pavements and sidewalks can be constructed on the same level
plane. The American with Disabilities Act (ADA) provisions and regulations should be met.
Deviation from this standard due to special topographical conditions will be allowed only with
the approval of the City Council. Before grading is started, the entire right-of-way area shall be
first cleared of all tree stumps, roots, brush, and other objectionable materials and of all trees not
intended for preservation. The sub-grade shall be properly shaped, rolled and uniformly
compacted to conform with the accepted cross-section and grades.
In cuts and fills, all tree stumps, boulders, organic material, soft clay, spongy material and other
objectionable materials shall be removed to a depth of at least two (2) feet below the graded
surface. This objectionable matter, as well as similar matter from cuts, shall be removed from
the right-of-way area and disposed of in such a manner that it will not become incorporated in
fills or hinder proper operation of the drainage system.
8.13 Minimum Pavement Widths. Pavement widths shall be measured between curb backs.
8.14 Street Surfacing. The streets in the proposed subdivision shall be paved, including curbs
and gutters, and street surfacing shall be of concrete or any other suitable surface as
recommended by the designated City Engineer and approved by the City Council.
8.15 Curb and Gutter. Curb and gutter shall be provided as required by the City Engineer. In
areas of notable flash flooding or heavy rain run-off, curbs shall be required on all streets
designed for areas where the existing or anticipated residential density of the areas surrounding
the proposed subdivision equals or exceeds three (3) dwelling units per net acre. In commercial
developments, or where other similar intensive urban uses exist or are anticipated, curbs shall be
required. Where curbs exist on abutting properties, their extension shall be required throughout
the proposed subdivision. All curb and gutter shall be constructed in conformance with the
minimum standards of the City and as approved by the City Engineer.
8.16 Blocks. Except in unusual circumstances, the maximum length of blocks shall be seven
hundred (700) feet.
8.17 Street Name Signs. Street name signs, of a type in use throughout the City of McCook,
shall be erected by the subdivider at all intersections.
8.18 Alleys. Alleys shall be provided to give access to the rear of all lots used for commercial
purposes. Minimum Right-of-Way of an alley shall be twenty (20) feet and the paved width of
an alley shall be sixteen (16') feet. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be
avoided, but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe vehicular
movement.
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
17
Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with
adequate facilities at the dead-end, as determined by the McCook City Council. Alleys need not
be provided in residential areas where the subdivider produces evidence of easements which are
satisfactory to the City Council.
8.19 Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided as required by City ordinances and in
conformance with ADA requirements and shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete or
other acceptable materials as approved by the City Council. Sidewalk thickness shall be not less
than four (4) inches and sidewalk width not less than five (5) feet. Unless otherwise specified,
all sidewalks shall be built upon the terrace, separated by a minimum of five (5) feet from the
curb located on the street.
8.20 Driveways. Driveways shall have a maximum grade of ten (10) percent. Driveways and
curb cuts shall be located not less than three (3) feet from the side lot lines. Curb cuts for
straight curbs and the flare for rolled curbs shall be three (3) feet wider than the driveway
pavement on each side.
8.21 Street and Walkway Lighting. The street lights shall be installed by the City of McCook.
Such lights shall be located at each street and walkway entrance to the subdivision. In addition,
whenever the distance between two (2) adjacent street or walkway lights would exceed three
hundred (300) feet, then additional street lights shall be installed in such manner that proper light
intensity shall be provided and maintained. New subdivision street and walkway lighting may be
installed with all associated wiring underground or overhead, as required by the City.
8.22 Gates. The clear opening provided through gates shall be six-tenths (0.6) meters, or two
(2) feet wider than the traveled way. All gates shall be located a minimum of nine and one-tenth
(9.1) meters, or thirty (30) feet from the public right-of-way and shall not open outward. Fire
department personnel shall have ready access to locking mechanisms on any gate restricting
access to a fire lane. Proposed changes to access shall be preapproved by the authority having
jurisdiction.
SECTION 9. UTILITY AND DRAINAGE FACILITIES.
9.1 Sewer and Water. It shall be required that the owner or developer of the tract to be
subdivided install satisfactory sewer and water lines which are necessary to serve such
subdivision. Installation of the above shall be in accordance with the specifications of the City
of McCook, the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services and the Department of
Environmental Quality, and under the direction and supervision of the McCook City Council.
Where adequate water and sewer lines are accessible within thirteen hundred twenty (1,320) feet
of the final plat, connections to these lines shall be made. Water lines shall be looped according
to specifications set by the City Council.
The cost of providing this engineering service will be the responsibility of the owner or
developer of the tract to be subdivided or by other agreement with the City. Design of municipal
water mains and sanitary sewer lines shall conform to standards and guidelines approved by the
McCook City Engineer.
9.2 Sanitary Sewer Improvements. The following requirements shall govern sanitary sewer
improvements:
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
18
1. Where an adequate public sanitary sewer system is reasonably accessible in the
determination of the McCook City Council, public sanitary sewers shall be installed
to adequately serve all lots, including lateral connections to the public system.
Public sewer system extensions shall meet the requirements of the City standards
and the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality and the Department of
Health and Human Services System. Combinations of sanitary sewers and storm
sewers shall be prohibited.
2. Where a public sanitary sewer system is not reasonably accessible, the subdivider
may provide:
a. A central treatment plant, provided that such central treatment plant is installed
in accordance with the City and State Department of Environmental Quality
and Department of Health and Human Services System requirements, or
b. Lots may be served by individual disposal systems, if the provisions of the
following section are met.
3. a. Where the installation of individual disposal systems is considered, the
suitability of the soil for individual systems, the absorptive ability of the soil,
surface drainage, ground water level, and topography shall be the criteria for
determining whether or not the installation of individual systems is
permissible. Criteria shall be in accordance with the requirements of the City
and the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality and Department of
Health and Human Services System.
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
19
b. Each lot so served shall be of a size and shape to accommodate the necessary
length of tile field at a safe distance from and at a lower elevation than the
proposed buildings. Such lot size and shape shall conform to the requirements
of the zoning district in which they are located, provided that in no case shall
said minimum lot be less than one (1) acre in area where there is a public water
supply available at the lot, and two and a half (2 1/2) acres where there is not
public water supply available.
c. At least one (1) percolation test shall be made for each lot area being platted,
and each test shall be located in close proximity to the proposed individual
sewage disposal unit, be numbered and its location shown on the preliminary
plat. All percolation tests shall be performed in accordance with the
requirements of the McCook City Council.
9.3 Drainage Improvements. An adequate system for the drainage of all surface water within
the area being subdivided, including ditches, pipes, culverts, intersectional drains, drop inlets,
bridges, and other structures, shall be constructed by the developer. Such drains shall comply as
to size with such requirements, conformable to good engineering practice, as the McCook City
Council shall prescribe; provided that such drains in no event shall be less than twelve (12)
inches in diameter. Cross drains shall be constructed to accommodate all natural water flow, be
built on a straight line and grade, be laid on a firm base but not on rock and be of sufficient
length to permit construction of streets and alleys to their required width and grades.
Surface drainage pipes shall be laid with the spigot end pointed in the direction of the flow, and
all ends shall be fitted and matched to provide tight joints and a smooth uniform invert. Such
pipes shall be placed at a depth below the road bed that is sufficient to avoid dangerous pressure
from impact, and the top, in no event, shall be less than one (1) foot below the surface of the road
bed.
A culvert or other drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential
runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the subdivision. The
McCook City Engineer shall review and approve submitted plans and storm water calculations,
based on the provisions of the construction standards and specifications assuming conditions of
maximum potential watershed development permitted by the Zoning Regulations.
The City Engineer shall also study the effect of each subdivision on existing downstream
drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. Where it is anticipated that the additional
runoff incident to the development or the subdivision will overload an existing downstream
drainage facility or flood existing development upstream, the McCook Planning Commission
may withhold approval of the subdivision until provision has been made for the improvement of
said potential condition in such sum as the Planning Commission shall determine. No
subdivision shall be approved unless adequate drainage will be provided to an adequate drainage
watercourse or facility.
Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development be required to assure that (a) all
such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage, (b) all public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located, elevated and constructed
to minimize or eliminate flood damage, (c) adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce
exposure to flood hazards so as to assure that all building sites are reasonably safe from flood
hazards.
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
20
Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings and individual
lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage
shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot into areas
not designed to handle flood waters. Lot drainage plans shall conform to the drainage study
required for submittal approval.
9.4 Storm Sewers and Storm Water Drainage. Where an adequate public storm sewer system is
available at the plat boundary, the Developer shall construct a storm sewer system and connect
with such storm sewer line. If such a storm sewer system is not accessible, natural drainage
channels with easement of adequate width shall be provided, as determined by the City Engineer
and approved by the City Council. Paved gutters or storm sewers shall be required if velocities
are greater than specified in these regulations or cause destructive erosion. Storm drainage,
including drain tile around basements, shall not be permitted to discharge into any sanitary sewer
facility, but shall connect to an adequate drainage outlet.
9.5 Culverts and Bridges. Where natural drainage channels intersect any street right-of-way, it
shall be the responsibility of the Developer/ Subdivider to have satisfactory bridges and/or
culverts constructed. Where culverts are required, minimum requirements shall be observed as
follows:
1. All culverts shall extend across the entire right-of-way width of the proposed street.
The cover over the culvert and its capacity shall be reviewed and approved by the
City Engineer. The minimum diameter of a culvert pipe shall be twelve (12) inches.
Depending on existing drainage conditions, head walls may be required.
2. Driveway culverts shall have a minimum length of twenty (20) feet, and a minimum
diameter of eighteen (18) inches. The driveway culverts shall be laid so as to
maintain the flow lines of the ditch or gutter. Head walls may be required.
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
21
9.6 Solar Access. In order to promote the conservation of energy through the use of both passive
and active solar systems, streets in residential subdivisions should, where possible, have an eastwest
alignment. Lots intended for detached dwellings should be of sufficient width to allow the
structure to be built with its longest axis running east-west.
In order to allow the orientations of structures on the site so as to maximize potential solar gain,
side lot lines should run as near to north-south as possible providing that the angle between the
side of lot line and the street right-of-way line on a straight street or the tangent to a curved street
shall not be less then eighty (80) degrees.
Any property owner or developer may grant or establish a solar sky-space easement to protect
solar energy systems from shade. The easements shall be created in writing and shall be
recorded separately or should be contained on the face of the plat. The easements shall run with
the land.
9.7 Erosion Control. The subdivider shall be required to provide for the control of erosion of
areas of the subdivision which are disturbed by grading operations by constructing temporary
terraces on slopes, temporary silting basins, sod swales and spillways, and whatever may be
necessary to prevent erosion and damage to adjacent properties from surface drainage pursuant
to the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality and the National Pollution Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) requirements and approved by the City and the City Engineer.
9.8 Fire Protection. Fire hydrants shall be provided by the City in all subdivisions with public
water supplies. The hydrants shall be located between property lines and curbs with all outlets
facing or parallel to the street. Hydrants shall be placed at the corners of all blocks and midblock
for blocks exceeding eight hundred (800) feet in length. Hydrants shall also be required at
the entrance and end of all cul-de-sacs exceeding four hundred (400) feet in length. In no case
shall the spacing between hydrants exceed five hundred (500) feet. The type of hydrant and
control valves and the location of the hydrant shall be approved by the Fire Chief and the Utility
Director. The minimum size of any water line serving any hydrant shall not be less than six (6")
inches in diameter and should be circulating water lines. The size and location of water lines
shall be approved by the City Engineer, Utility Director and the Fire Chief.
9.9 Electric, Gas, and Telephone Improvements.
1. Electric service and telephone service shall be provided within each subdivision.
Gas service may be required where reasonably accessible. Whenever such facilities
are reasonably accessible and available, they may be required to be installed within
the area prior to the approval of the final plat. Telephone, electric, street lighting,
and communications conductors may be installed underground at the option of the
City Council.
2. Overhead secondary utility lines, where installed shall be located at the rear of all
lots.
3. Whenever a sanitary sewer line and electric and/or telephone line is each placed
underground in the same utility easement, the following provisions shall be
applicable:
a. the total easement width shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet, and
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
22
b. the sanitary sewer line shall be installed within three (3) feet of the easement,
and the electric and/or telephone line shall be installed within three (3) feet of
the opposite side of the easement.
SECTION 10. SHARED IMPROVEMENT COSTS.
10.1 Extensions to Boundaries. The subdivider may be required to extend the necessary
improvements to the boundary of the proposed subdivision to serve adjoining un-subdivided
land, as determined by the McCook City Council.
10.2 Off-site Extensions. If street or utilities are not available at the boundary of a proposed
subdivision, and if the City Council finds the extensions across undeveloped areas would not be
warranted as a special assessment to the intervening properties or as a Municipal expense until
some future time, the subdivider may be required, prior to the approval of the final plat, to obtain
necessary easements or right-of-way and construct and pay for such extensions. Such
improvements shall be available for connections by subdividers of adjoining land.
10.3 Public/Private Partnerships and Alternative Sources of Funding. Developers are
encouraged to form partnerships with area organizations and/or work with the City of McCook to
secure alternative sources of funding for infrastructure improvements and developments. These
alternative sources of funding may include, but not be limited to sources available with the
Nebraska Department of Economic Development (Community Development Block Grant
Program) the United States Department of Agriculture – Rural Development (Community
Programs) and local sources of funding from the City, such as Tax Increment Financing and the
receipts from the LB840 program.
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
23
SECTION 11. SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURE.
11.1 Subdivision Improvements Guarantees. Prior to the final plat approval, but after approval
of all improvement plans and specifications, the subdivider shall complete all improvements
required for the subdivision. Final plat approval shall not be given until the dedication of all
appropriate improvements and acceptance thereof by the City Council.
In lieu of requiring the completion of all improvements prior to the final plat approval, the City
Council may enter into an agreement with the subdivider whereby the subdivider shall guarantee
to complete all improvements required by this Ordinance and approved by the Planning
Commission and City Council in a manner satisfactory to the City Council. To secure this
agreement, the subdivider shall provide, subject to the approval of the City Council, one (1) or
more of the guarantees set forth in Sections 11.2, 11.3 and 11.4.
11.2 Surety Performance Bond. The subdivider shall obtain a performance bond from a bonding
company authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska. The bond shall be payable to the
City and shall be in an amount to cover one hundred ten (110) percent of the cost of all
improvements, as estimated by the subdivider and accepted by the City Council upon
recommendations of the City Attorney and Engineer. The duration of the bond shall be until
such time as the improvements are accepted by the City Council in accordance with Section 11.9
of this Ordinance.
11.3 Escrow Account. The subdivider shall deposit cash, or other instrument readily convertible
to cash at face value, either with the City Council or in escrow with a bank. The use of any
instrument other than cash, and in the case of an escrow account, the bank with which the funds
are to be deposited, shall be subject to the approval of the City Council. The amount of the
deposit shall be an amount equal to one hundred ten (110) percent of the estimated cost of all
required improvements as estimated by the subdivider and accepted by the City Council upon
recommendation of the City Engineer.
11.4 Security Agreement. The subdivider shall provide a Security Agreement guaranteeing the
installation of all required improvements. The Security Agreement must be approved by the City
Attorney and in an amount sufficient to guarantee the installation of all improvements.
In the case of an escrow account, the subdivider shall file with the City Council an agreement
between the bank and himself guaranteeing the following:
1. That the funds of said escrow account shall be held in trust until released by the City
Council and may not be used or pledged by the subdivider as security in any other matter
during that period.
2. That in the case of a default on the part of the subdivider to complete said improvements,
the bank shall immediately make the funds of said account available to the City Council
for use in completion of the improvements.
11.5 Improvement (Assessment) District (i.e., a “street” or “sewer” Improvement District).
Because the original intent of such improvements in already built-up areas, and because the City
should not assume the risk of real estate development which results if the lots are unable to be
sold and the subdivider defaults on the assessment payments, the use of improvement districts in
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
24
connections with new subdivision developments may be used as a method of financing such
improvements. Only in specific cases where the subdivider illustrates through extensive market
research will the City Council consider acceptances of an improvement district as a means of
financing the necessary improvements and providing financial security to the City.
11.6 Time Limits. Prior to the granting of final plat approval, the subdivider and the City
Council shall agree upon a deadline for the completion of all improvements. Such deadline shall
not exceed two (2) years from the date of final plat approval, provided, however, the City
Council may extend that deadline for one (1) additional year where the subdivider presents
substantial reason for doing so and provides any additional performance surety made necessary
due to inflation or increased cost of completing the improvements.
11.7 Installation of Improvements. Developers may select either method or combination of
methods listed below to comply with the minimum improvement requirements:
1. They may install the required improvements upon acceptance of plans and specifications
being approved by City Engineer and City Council.
2. Or be constructed by the City, as per the results of the Subdivision Agreement.
11.8 Plan Review Reimbursement. The subdivider or Sanitary and Improvements District shall
reimburse the City such costs incurred by the City for Plan Review, Plan Check, and Plan
Approval as to conformance with approved City Standards and Specifications, but such costs
shall not exceed one (1) percent of the total contracted cost for improvements in the subdivision.
11.9 Failure to Complete Improvements. If any portion of the required improvements shall fail
to be completed and accepted for dedication in compliance with Section 11.9 below within the
required time period, either for reason of non-completion or for reason of substandard and
unacceptable construction, the City Council shall accept one (1) of the following sections:
1. Where improvements have McCook guaranteed under Section 11.2 of this Ordinance, the
bond shall be forfeited to the City.
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
25
2. Where improvements have McCook guaranteed under Sections 11.3 and 11.4 of this
Ordinance, the City Council shall declare whatever security has McCook pledged as a
guarantee to be forfeited. Where the City Council is not already in possession of said
security, it shall immediately take the actions necessary to obtain it. Upon receipt of the
security, the City Council shall use such to finance the completion of the improvements
or rebuilding of substandard improvements. Unused portions of the security shall be
returned to the subdivider without interest.
11.10 Inspection and Certification. The City Engineer or other authorized person shall regularly
inspect construction of required improvements for defects. Upon completion of the
improvements, the City Engineer or other authorized person shall file with the City Council a
statement either certifying that the improvements have been completed in the specified manner
or listing defects in those improvements which do not meet the requirements of the approved
improvement plans and specifications.
Upon completion of the improvements, the subdivider shall file with the City Council a
statement stipulating the following:
1. That all required improvements are complete
2. That these improvements are in compliance with the minimum standards specified by the
Planning Commission and City Council.
3. That the subdivider knows of no defects from any cause in the improvements.
4. That these improvements are free and clear of any encumbrance or lien.
5. That a one (1) year warranty will be in effect.
If the City Engineer or other authorized person has certified that the improvements are complete
and free from defect, the City Council shall accept any dedication of improvements. The City
Council may, at its discretion, accept the dedication of any portion of the improvements,
provided that all statements and agreements specified above have been received for that portion
of the improvements.
11.11 Reduction of Guarantees. In those cases where improvement guarantees have been made
under Section 11.1 or 11.2 of this Ordinance, the amount of the guarantee may be reduced upon
acceptance in compliance with Section 11.9 of the dedication of a portion of the improvements.
11.12 Release of Guarantees. Upon acceptance, in accordance with Section 11.10 of this
Ordinance, the City Council shall authorize the release of the performance bond or the remaining
portion of the escrow.
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
26
SECTION 12 DEDICATION OF PUBLIC LAND
12.1 Dedication.
1. At the time of final plat approval by the City Council, the owners shall be required to
dedicate to the public use all streets, alleys, easements, and buffer strips as required by
the City Council and these Regulations. Acceptance of dedicated land shall be recorded
in the minutes of the City Council.
2. Subdividers of "Commercial" type subdivisions may be required to dedicate land for offstreet
parking as determined necessary by the City Council.
SECTION 13. ANNEXATION AND RECORDING OF PLAT
13.1 Subdivision Annexation of Adjoining or Contiguous Properties. All subdivisions or
additions laid out adjoining or contiguous to the Corporate Limits shall be included within the
same and become a part of the municipality for all purposes whatsoever, upon approval of and
acceptance by Resolution of the City Council. (Ref § 19-916)
13.2 Subdivision Annexation: Petition for Annexation. Any subdivision in which there are
lands dedicated to the City or any subdivision serviced by public utilities shall be annexed to the
City. Before approval for the final plat is given, the Municipal Body shall receive a Petition for
annexation from the owners of the subdivided properties.
13.3 Subdivision Annexation: Adoption Plan by Resolution. The City Council desiring to
annex land under the authority of this section shall first adopt both a resolution stating that the
City is considering the annexation of the land and a plan for extending City services to the land.
The resolution shall state:
1. The time, date and location of the public hearing required below;
2. A description of the boundaries of the land proposed for annexation; and
3. That the plan of the City for extension of City services to the land proposed for
annexation is available for inspection during regular business hours in the office of the
City Clerk.
The plan adopted by the City Council shall contain sufficient detail to provide a reasonable
person with a full and complete understanding of the intentions of the City for extending City
services to the land proposed for annexation. The plan shall:
1. State the estimated cost impact of providing the services to such land.
2. State the method by which the City plans to finance the extension of services to the land
and how any services already provided to the land will be maintained.
3. Include a timetable for extending service to the land proposed for annexation, and
4. Include a map drawn to scale clearly delineating the land proposed for annexation, the
current boundaries of the City, the proposed boundaries of the City after annexation and
the general land-use pattern in the land proposed for annexation.
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
27
A public hearing on the proposed annexation shall be held within sixty days following the
adoption of the resolution to allow the City Council to receive testimony from interested persons.
The City Council may recess the hearing, for good cause, to a time and date specified at the
hearing.
A copy of the resolution providing for the public hearing shall be published in the official
newspaper of the City at least once, not less than ten days preceding the date of the public
hearing. A map drawn to scale delineating the land proposed for annexation shall be published
with the resolution. A copy of the resolution providing for the public hearing shall be sent by
first-class mail, following its passage, to the school board of any school district in the land
proposed for annexation.
SECTION 14. VARIANCES.
14.1 Granting of Variances; Conditions. The McCook City Council may grant variances from
the provisions herein, but only after determining that:
1. There are unique circumstances or conditions affecting the property.
2. The variance is necessary for the reasonable and acceptable development of the
property in question.
3. The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to the adjacent property.
14.2 Recording of Plat. In no case shall the requirement of filing and recording a plat for
subdivision be waived.
14.3 Planned Development. The City Council may also grant reasonable variances, if the
subdivider concurrently submits an application for, and obtains approval of, a planned
development. The subdivider shall indicate where the plans deviate from the requirements of
this Article and shall present sufficient evidence to support the request, indicating why the
request will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare.
Subdivision Regulations
McCook Subdivision Regulations
28
SECTION 15. PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES.
15.1 Recreation Standards. The McCook Planning Commission may require that land be
dedicated for parks and playgrounds or other recreation purposes. Such areas shall be shown and
marked on both the preliminary and final plat, as "Dedicated for Park.” The developer shall
dedicate all such recreation areas to the City of McCook as a condition of final subdivision plat
approval. The Commission may require that the recreation area be located at a suitable place on
the edge of the subdivision so that additional land may be added at such time as the adjacent land
is subdivided. In no case shall an area of less than one-half (1/2) acre be reserved for recreation
purposes if it will be impractical or impossible to secure additional lands in order to increase its
area.
15.2 Recreation Sites. Land reserved for recreation purposes shall be of a character and location
suitable for use as a playground, playfield, or for other recreation purposes; and shall be
improved by the developer to the standards required by the Planning Commission, which
improvements shall be included in the performance bond.
A recreation site shall have a total frontage on one (1) or more streets of at least one hundred
(100) feet, and no other dimension of the site shall be less than one hundred (100) feet unless it is
for a designated linear park, including a hiker/biker trail or open space along a creek or narrow
commons area. The Planning Commission may refer any subdivision proposed to contain a
dedicated park to the McCook Park Board for a recommendation. All land to be reserved for
dedication to the City of McCook for park purposes shall have prior approval of the City Council
and shall be shown marked on the plat "Dedicated for Park."
15.3 Fees in Lieu of Land for Public Sites or Open Spaces. The McCook Park Board and City
Council, may determine when dedicated parks, and/or open space, are not deemed appropriate in
the proposed subdivision, a Fee in Lieu of land may be negotiated during the Subdivision
Agreement process and held by the City of McCook for future parks or open spaces needs in the
general area of the proposed subdivision.
SECTION 16. AMENDMENTS. Any provision herein from time to time may be amended,
supplemented, changed, modified or repealed by the Governing Body according to law;
Provided, however, that such amendments, supplements, changes, modifications or repealed
provisions shall not become effective until after study and report and recommendations of the
Planning Commission.
 
 
 
 
 




 


