7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

THE CODE OF THE CITY OF MINDEN, NEBRASKA
____________
Published by Order of the City Council
____________

M

MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION

CC

Tallahassee, Florida

1994

OFFICIALS
of the
CITY OF
MINDEN, NEBRASKA
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION
____________
Peter M. Jensen, D.D.S.

Mayor
____________
Ray Yant, Council President
John Osgood
Jane Klosterman
Dick McBride

City Council
____________
Brent Lewis

City Administrator
____________
Thomas G. Lieske

City Attorney
____________
Richard Young

City Clerk
PREFACE
1/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Minden, Nebraska.
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1982 Code, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city
council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of
such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the
comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1982 Code, and any subsequent
ordinance included herein.
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter
have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law
have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of
this Code.

Chapter and Section Numbering System
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government
codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number,
and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is
numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the
same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new
material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section
would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be
placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article
embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included
by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained
when including new chapters.

Page Numbering System
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which
represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that
portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case
of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are
typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes:

CHARTER

CHT:1

CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE

CHTCT:1

CODE

CD1:1

CODE APPENDIX

CDA:1

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES

CCT:1

STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE

SLT:1

CHARTER INDEX

CHTi:1

2/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

CODE INDEX

CDi:1

Index
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of
which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government
officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user
to the particular item in which the user is interested.

Looseleaf Supplements
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this
system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page
or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the
manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are
received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached
instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid
misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes.

Acknowledgments
This publication was under the direct supervision of Allen Z. Paul, Supervising Editor, and Robert McNaughton, Editor, of the
Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their
sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.
The publisher is most grateful to Brent Lewis, City Administrator, and Thomas G. Lieske, City Attorney, for their cooperation
and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have
resulted in a Code which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the
day-to-day administration of the city's affairs.

MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION
Tallahassee, Florida

ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 992

An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Minden, Nebraska; Providing for the Repeal of
Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of
Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective.
Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of Minden, Nebraska:
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Minden, Nebraska" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting
of Chapters 1 through 94, each inclusive, is adopted.
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before May 2, 1994, and not included in the Code
or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed.

3/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has
been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or
any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00
and/or imprisonment not to exceed the maximum for the same offense set by statute. Each act of violation and each day upon
which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another
penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the
amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of
nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits.
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city council to
make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the
additions and amendments.
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after May 2, 1994 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall
be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective after publication.
Passed and adopted by the city council this 6th day of September, 1994.

/s/ Peter M. Jensen
Mayor
/s/ Richard Young
City Clerk

Certificate of Adoption
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the city council of the City of
Minden, Nebraska held on the 6th day of September, 1994.

/s/ Richard Young
City Clerk

SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for
codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are
considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are
considered "Omits."
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this City of Minden, Nebraska Code of Ordinances will be
able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution.

Ord. No.

Date

Include/

Adopted

Omit

Supp. No.

4/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

1159

6- 7-2010

Include

17

1160

9-13-2010

Omit

17

1161

10-18-2010

Omit

17

1162

10- 4-2010

Include

17

1163

12- 6-2010

Omit

17

1164

12- 6-2010

Include

17

1165

2- 7-2011

Include

17

1166

5- 2-2011

Include

17

CODE
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code.
The chapters, articles, divisions and sections embraced in this Code shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of the City
of Minden, Nebraska," and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as the "Minden City Code."
State law reference— Revision, publication of ordinances, R.R.S. 1943, §§ 16-247, 16-403—16-405.
Sec. 1-2. - De nitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be
observed, unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise:

Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient.
Chapters, articles, sections. All references to chapters, articles or sections are to the chapters, articles and sections of this
Code unless otherwise specified.

City. The word "city" shall mean the City of Minden, in the County of Kearney, in the State of Nebraska.
Code. The words "the Code" or "this Code" shall mean the Code of the City of Minden, Nebraska.
Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last
day; and if the last day is Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.

Council. The word "council" shall mean the city council of the City of Minden, Nebraska.
County. The word "county" shall mean the County of Kearney, in the State of Nebraska.
5/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears in this Code requiring or authorizing the head of a department or other
officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such department head or other officer to
designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the
provision specifically designate otherwise.

Gender. Words importing the masculine gender include the feminine and the neuter.
In the city. The words "in the city" mean and include any territory within the corporate limits of the City of Minden, Nebraska,
and the police jurisdiction thereof, and any other territory over which regulatory power has been conferred on the city by general
or special act, except as otherwise specified.

Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such
authority to a majority of such persons or officers.

May. The word "may" is permissive.
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.
Number. Words used in the singular shall include the plural and words used in the plural shall include the singular.
Oath. The word "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and
in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" are equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed."

Officials, employees, boards, commissions, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or
other agencies by title only, i.e., "mayor," "chief of police," etc., they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, employees, boards,
commissions or other agencies of this city.

Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include not only the owner of the whole, but any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, or joint tenant of the whole or a part of such building or land.

Person. The word "person" shall include a firm, partnership, association of persons, corporation, organization or any other
group acting as a unit, as well as an individual.

Personal property. The words "personal property" shall include every species of property, except real property.
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively.
Property. The word "property" includes every kind of property, tangible or intangible, subject to ownership.
Real property. The words "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments and all rights thereto and interests
therein, other than a chattel interest.

Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory.
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean that portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and
the adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians.

Signature, subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when the person cannot write, when his
name is written near such mark and is witnessed by a person who writes his own name as witness.

State. The words "the state" shall mean the State of Nebraska.
Street. The word "street" shall mean the entire width between the boundary limits of any street, road, avenue, boulevard or
way which is publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.

6/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Tenant, occupant. The words "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall mean any person who occupies the
whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

Tense. Words used in the past or present tense shall include the future as well as the past and present.
Time. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in
current use in the city.

Writing, written. The words "writing" and "written" shall include typewriting, printing on paper and any other mode of
representing words and letters.

Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year.
State law reference— Definitions, construction and citation, R.R.S. 1943, § 49-801 et seq.; authority of city to enforce certain
ordinances beyond corporate boundaries, R.R.S. 1943, § 16-901; computation of time, R.R.S. 1943, § 25-2221.
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections.
The catchlines of the sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents
of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of any section, nor, unless expressly
so provided, shall they be so deemed when any section, including its catchline, is amended or reenacted, nor shall chapter, article
and division heads or titles constitute parts of this Code or amendments thereto.
State law reference— Similar provisions, R.R.S. 1943, § 49-802(8).
Sec. 1-4. - Incorporation by reference.
All standard codes, rules, regulations and other subject matter herein or hereafter properly incorporated by reference,
together with subsequent amendments thereto, pursuant to state law, and future incorporations by reference shall be kept and
preserved in the office of the city clerk in a separate and distinct file as provided by law.
State law reference— Adoption of standard codes, R.R.S. 1943, § 18-132.
Sec. 1-5. - Parenthetical and reference matter.
The matter in parentheses at the ends of sections is for information only and is not a part of the Code. Citations to the 1982
Code of the city (Code 1982) and to later ordinances indicate only the source, and the text may or may not be changed by this
Code. Reference matter not in parentheses is for information only and is not a part of this Code.
Sec. 1-6. - Police power to extend to city property.
The police power of the city is hereby extended to include all lands or property owned or leased by the city or any agency of
the city and the general ordinances of the city shall be applicable on such property.
State law reference— General powers of city as to acquisition or lease of property, R.R.S. 1943, § 16-201; general welfare powers,
R.R.S. 1943, § 16-246.
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code.
It shall be unlawful for any person, not authorized to do so, to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion
of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever
which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby.
7/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

State law reference— Offenses involving fraud, R.R.S. 1943, § 28-601 et seq.
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty.
(a)

Any person upon whom a duty is placed by the provisions of this Code who shall fail, neglect or refuse to perform
such duty or who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.

(b)

Any person, upon conviction of a misdemeanor under this Code, shall be fined in any sum not to exceed $500.00.

(c)

Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this Code which would also constitute a violation of a
state statute class V misdemeanor or which would constitute a violation of the state rules of the road shall be fined
in any sum not to exceed $100.00, provided that the penalty for a second traffic infraction in one year shall be a fine
not exceeding $200.00, and the penalty for a third traffic infraction in one year shall be a fine not exceeding
$300.00.

(d)

Any person convicted of a violation of this Code shall stand committed to such jail or custody as the county court of
Kearney County shall direct until the fine and costs of prosecution are paid or secured to be paid.

(e)

The penalty provided in this section shall be cumulative and in addition to provisions elsewhere in this Code for the
revocation, cancellation or forfeiture of any license or permit.

(f)

No general penalty of imprisonment exists for violation of this Code beyond that set out in this section. A penalty of
imprisonment in the county jail may be established by ordinance for specific violations, provided the amount of
time in prison does not exceed the maximum provided for by the state statutes for the same offense.

(g)

Each day that a violation of this Code continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be
punishable as such.

State law reference— Penalties for violation of ordinances, R.R.S. 1943, § 16-246; jurisdiction of county court as to violation of city
ordinance, R.R.S. 1943, § 24-517(6); classification of misdemeanors, R.R.S. 1943, § 28-106; general penalties for traffic infraction,
R.R.S. 1943, § 39-6,112.
Sec. 1-9. - Costs of prosecution.
In all cases of violation of ordinances of this city or sections of this Code, where a fine is imposed upon any person found
guilty of the violation thereof, such person so found guilty shall pay the costs of prosecution.
State law reference— Fees and costs in county court, R.R.S. 1943, § 24-532.
Sec. 1-10. - Prosecution of corporations.
(a)

Summons. Whenever a complaint is filed against a corporation for violation of any provision of this Code or
ordinance of the city, and the corporation fails to appear as directed by the warrant, the judge shall issue a
summons commanding the chief of police, or other police officer of the city, to notify the accused thereof, such
summons to be returnable as prescribed in state statute. The summons together with a copy of the complaint shall
be served and returned in the manner provided for service of summons upon such corporations in civil actions.

(b)

Appearance, answer. On or before the return day of the summons duly served on a corporation for the violation of
any provision of this Code or the ordinances of the city, such corporation may appear by one of its officers, or by
counsel, and answer to the complaint by motion, demurrer or plea. Upon failure by such corporation to make such
appearance and answer, the judge shall enter a plea of "not guilty."

(c)

Disposition. Upon appearance being made or plea entered, the corporation charged with the violation of any
provision of this Code or ordinance of the city shall be deemed henceforth continuously in court and subject to the
jurisdiction thereof until the case is finally disposed of. If such corporation shall be found guilty, it shall be fined in

8/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

any sum not exceeding the penalty authorized for such violation, and such fine may be collected by execution
against the property of such corporation.
Sec. 1-11. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of
this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments.
Sec. 1-12. - Ordinances saved from repeal.
Nothing contained in this Code or in the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the
following:
(1)

Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established
or accruing before the effective date of this Code;

(2)

Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of
any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the
city;

(3)

Any appropriation ordinance;

(4)

Any right or franchise granted by the city council to any person;

(5)

Any ordinance providing for local improvements or making assessments therefor;

(6)

Any ordinance annexing property to the city;

(7)

Any ordinance relating to zoning or subdivision regulations;

(8)

Any ordinance fixing utility rates.

Sec. 1-13. - Severability of parts of Code.
If for any reason any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code, or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances is declared to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this Code.
Sec. 1-14. - E ect of additions and amendments.
Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council
to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code, so that reference to the "Code of the City of
Minden, Nebraska" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Sec. 1-15. - Manner of making amendments.
All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be
numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed
chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from
the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby.
Sec. 1-16. - Language of amendments.

9/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the
section of this Code in substantially the following language:
"That section ____________ of the Code of the City of Minden, Nebraska, is hereby amended to read as follows: (set
out new provisions in full)…."
Sec. 1-17. - New material.
(a)

If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used:
"That the Code of the City of Minden, Nebraska, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article, chapter or other
designation as the case may be), to be numbered ____________, which reads as follows: (set out new provisions in
full)…."

(b)

In lieu of subsection (a) of this section, when the city council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and
permanent nature embracing a subject not previously existing in
the Code, which the council desires to incorporate into the Code, a provision in substantially the following language
may be made part of such ordinance:
"It is the intention of the city council, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become
and be made part of the Code of the City of Minden, Nebraska, and the sections of this ordinance may be
renumbered to accomplish such intention."

Sec. 1-18. - Repeal.
All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by
section number, article number, chapter or other number, as the case may be.
Sec. 1-19. - Amendments subject to general penalty.
In case of the amendment by the city council of any section of this Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general
penalty as provided in section 1-8 shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which
a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so
provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed
therein.
Sec. 1-20. - E ect of repeal of ordinances.
(a)

The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed
took effect.

(b)

The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor
any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under the
ordinance repealed.

State law reference— Repealed law not revived, R.R.S. 1943, § 49-802(10).
Sec. 1-21. - Supplementation of Code.
(a)

By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or
directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of
ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The
10/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary,
replace pages which have become obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been
inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the
supplement.
(b)

In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be
excluded from the Code by the omission from reprinted pages.

(c)

When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person authorized to prepare the
supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the
supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may:
(1)

Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;

(2)

Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in
the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;

(3)

Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where
necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers;

(4)

Change the words "this ordinance" or words in the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this
division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________" (inserting section numbers to
indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into
the Code); and

(5)

Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections
inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.

Sec. 1-22. - Publication of ordinances.
Ordinances passed by the city of Minden, Kearney County, Nebraska shall be posted; published in a legal newspaper or
published in book or pamphlet form as required by the statutes of the state.
In the event an ordinance is adopted the council, upon its adoption, shall designate the manner of publication.
Should the council designate posting or book or pamphlet form, the ordinance shall be posted at the city offices located at 325
North Colorado, Minden, Nebraska and shall be available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk during normal working
hours, Monday through Friday.
(Ord. No. 1099, § 1, 5-20-03)

Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
(1) Cross

reference— Businesses, ch. 18; cemeteries, ch. 22; elections, ch. 26; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; board of

health, § 38-26 et seq.; library, ch. 42; library board, § 42-26 et seq.; parks and recreation, ch. 54; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 58;
planning, ch. 62; planning commission, § 62-26 et seq.; taxation, ch. 78; zoning, ch. 94.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Secs. 2-1—2-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL
11/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 2-26. - Meetings.
The regular meetings of the city council shall be on the first and third Monday of each month at 6:00 p.m. local time.
(Code 1982, § 1-201; Ord. No. 920, § 1, 7-17-89; Ord. No. 1145, § 1, 2-2-09)

State law reference— Council meetings, R.R.S. 1943, § 17-105.
Secs. 2-27—2-50. - Reserved.
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 1130, § 1, 1-15-07, repealed § 2-27 in its entirety, which pertained to order of business, and derived from the Code of
1982, § 1-202.
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 2-51. - City o cers.
The city is a city of the second class and is governed by the provisions of R.R.S. 1943, chapter 17, as amended, by a mayor and
council and other officers designated by law or by ordinance.
(Code 1982, § 1-100)

Sec. 2-52. - O cial bonds.
All persons elected or appointed to any office within the city shall, before entering upon their duties as such officers, execute
to the city a good and sufficient bond as provided by law in the sums designated in this section: mayor, $1,000.00; each
councilman, $1,000.00; city clerk, $1,000.00; city treasurer, $5,000.00, or such other sum above $5,000.00 as the council shall from
time to time direct and require; city attorney, $1,000.00; city engineer, $1,000.00; chief of police, $1,000.00; each other permanent
police, $1,000.00; city administrator, $5,000.00; sewer commissioner, $1,500.00. The bonds of the councilmen shall be approved by
the mayor, and all other bonds shall be approved by the council. All of such bonds except that of the city clerk shall be filed with
the city clerk and kept by him. The bond of the city clerk shall be filed with the city treasurer and kept by him.
(Code 1982, § 1-101)

State law reference— Form of bonds, R.R.S. 1943, § 11-104 et seq.
Sec. 2-53. - Annual salaries of elected o cers.
The annual salaries of the elected officers of the city shall be as follows: mayor, $3,000.00; each councilmember, $2,400.00.
Such salaries shall be payable in semiannual installments.
(Code 1982, § 1-104; Ord. No. 927, § 1, 5-7-90)

Sec. 2-54. - Salaries of appointed o cers.

12/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

The salaries of the appointed officers of the city for attendance at council meetings and for ordinary routine services shall be
the following amounts: city attorney, as set and agreed upon from time to time by the city attorney and the mayor, and approved
of by the council; city clerk and city treasurer, as set by the council; provided however, that such officers may be compensated for
extraordinary services other than those listed in this section, upon claims filed with and approved by the city council. Any lawful
fees paid to any of such officers shall be accounted for and paid over to the city treasurer. The fixed salary for the city attorney and
fees for such officer's extraordinary services shall be paid in equal installments on a monthly basis. The fixed salaries of the city
clerk and city treasurer shall be paid in equal installments as in the case of the salary of the mayor and councilmen.
(Code 1982, § 1-104.01; Ord. No. 1146, § 1, 1-19-09)

State law reference— Officers' salaries, R.R.S. 1943, § 17-108.
Secs. 2-55—2-65. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - CITY ADMINISTRATOR

Sec. 2-66. - O ce of city administrator established.
The official duties of the following offices or employments are hereby consolidated and merged into an office to be known as
city administrator: light and water commissioner, sewer commissioner, street commissioner, park superintendent and city zoning
inspector.
(Code 1982, § 1-105)

Sec. 2-67. - Duties of city administrator.
(a)

The city administrator, subject to the orders of the mayor and council, shall have charge of and perform the official
duties of the several offices and employments hereby consolidated, which offices and employments shall always be
construed to be separate, and with the consent and approval of the mayor and council such city administrator may
appoint an assistant for one or more of such departments to carry out such of the duties relating to the specific
office or department to which such assistant may be assigned, as the city administrator may specify in such
appointment.

(b)

The city administrator, in his capacity as the street commissioner, subject to the orders of the mayor and council,
shall have general charge, direction and control of the maintenance of all streets, alleys, crossings, sidewalks,
culverts and bridges within the city and shall see that the same are at all times kept in proper and lawful condition.

(c)

The mayor and council shall employ as many plant engineers as may in their judgement from time to time be
necessary for the operation of the water and light plant. Their duties and hours of work shall be prescribed by the
city administrator in his capacity as water and light commissioner, and they shall at all times be subject to his orders
and directions. Each of such engineers shall be paid such salary as the mayor and council shall from time to time
determine.

(Code 1982, §§ 1-102.02, 1-103, 1-105.01)

Duties of overseer of streets, R.R.S. 1943, § 17-119.
Secs. 2-68—2-90. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
13/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Secs. 2-91—2-100. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - POLICE DEPARTMENT

Sec. 2-101. - Composition; special police; powers and duties.
The police department of the city shall consist of one chief of police and such number of regular police officers as the mayor
with the consent of the council shall appoint. The mayor may also appoint such number of special police officers as he may from
time to time deem necessary to preserve the good order and welfare of the city. All police officers shall be removable by the mayor
at any time. The chief of police or any other regular police officer may hold the office of street commissioner when so ordered by
the mayor and council. The powers and duties of all police officers shall be such as are provided by law.
(Code 1982, § 1-102.01)

Sec. 2-102. - Compensation of police o cers, police chief and street commissioner.
The chief of police, each regular police officer, the street commissioner and any special police officer who may be employed at
any time shall each be paid for their services such compensation as the mayor and council shall determine.
(Code 1982, § 1-102.03)

State law reference— Authority to establish police, R.R.S. 1943, § 17-124.
Secs. 2-103—2-115. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - LEGAL DEPARTMENT

Sec. 2-116. - Duties of city attorney and city prosecutor.
The city legal department shall consist of the city attorney and the city prosecutor.
(1)

The city attorney shall be the legal advisor of the city council. He shall commence, prosecute and defend all
civil actions and all actions not involving the imposition of a fine or imprisonment, necessary to be
commenced, prosecuted and defended on behalf of the city or that may be ordered by the city council. He
shall attend meetings of the council and shall perform such other duties as may be imposed upon him by
general law or ordinance.

(2)

It shall be the duty of the city prosecutor to commence and prosecute all cases for violations of the city
ordinances for the imposition of a fine or imprisonment, which are not otherwise a violation of a state criminal
statute or a traffic infraction. The city prosecutor shall be paid at the same hourly rate as set by the district
court for court-appointed counsel, and as such rate may be changed from time to time by the court, and as
the same is approved by the city council.

(Code 1982, § 1-103.01; Ord. No. 985, § 1, 2-7-94)

State law reference— Duties of city attorney, R.R.S. 1943, § 17-610.
Secs. 2-117—2-120. - Reserved.

14/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS
DIVISION 1. - RESERVED

FOOTNOTE(S):
(2) Editor's

note— Ord. No. 1054, § 1, adopted Oct. 5, 1998, repealed §§ 2-121—2-123, which pertained to the youth advisory

committee and derived from Ord. No. 1032, §§ 1—3, adopted July 21, 1997.
Secs. 2-121—2-140. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT

Sec. 2-141. - City participation and cooperation with agency.
That the City of Minden elects to participate in the Kearney County Emergency Management Agency Organization and will
cooperate to the fullest extent with that agency in meeting the requirements pertaining to the Nebraska Emergency Management
Act.
(Ord. No. 1070, § 1, 11-20-00)

Sec. 2-142. - Kearney County Emergency Management Agency established.
There is hereby created with and for the territory of Kearney County an emergency management organization to be known as
the Kearney County Emergency Management Agency, which is responsible for the preparation and implementation of emergency
functions required to prevent injury and minimize and repair damage due to disasters, to include emergency management of
resources and administration of such economic controls as may be needed to provide for the welfare of the people, and
emergency activities (excluding functions for which military forces are primarily responsible) in accordance with the Nebraska
Emergency Management Act and the Kearney County Local Emergency Operations Plan adopted thereunder.
(Ord. No. 1070, § 2, 11-20-00)

Sec. 2-143. - Appointment of director and other members.
This agency shall consist of a director and other members appointed by the Kearney County Board of Supervisors to conform
to the state organization and procedures for the conduct of emergency operations as outlined in the Nebraska Emergency
Management Act and the Kearney County Local Emergency Operations Plan adopted thereunder.
(Ord. No. 1070, § 3, 11-20-00)

Sec. 2-144. - Territorial limits.
The organization shall perform emergency management functions within the territorial limits of the municipality and the
county, and may conduct these functions outside the territorial limits as directed by the governor during the time of emergency
pursuant to the Nebraska Emergency Management Act, and supplements thereto.
(Ord. No. 1070, § 4, 11-20-00)

Sec. 2-145. - Duties of director.
(a)

The director will be appointed by the Kearney County Board of Supervisors and shall serve during the pleasure of
15/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

the board of supervisors.
(b)

The director shall have direct responsibility for organization, administration and operations of the local emergency
management activities.

(c)

The director shall be responsible for maintaining records and accounting for the use and disposal of all items of
equipment placed under the jurisdiction of the emergency management agency.

(d)

The director may appoint, provide, or remove rescue teams, auxiliary fire and police personnel and other
emergency operations teams, units or personnel who may serve in time of emergency.

(e)

The director with the approval of the governor and consistent with Nebraska Emergency Management Act and
Kearney County Local Emergency Operation Plan, may enter into mutual aid agreements with other public and
private agencies within and without the state for reciprocal emergency aid;

(f)

The director may accept services, materials, equipment, supplies or funds granted or loaned by the federal
government, state government, public and/or private agencies for disaster planning and operations purposes.

(Ord. No. 1070, § 5, 11-20-00)

Sec. 2-146. - Duties of Kearney County Clerk.
The Kearney County Clerk will be responsible for the receipt and disbursement of all Kearney County Emergency Management
Agency funds, where funds are provided for emergency management purposes.
(Ord. No. 1070, § 6, 11-20-00)

Sec. 2-147. - Appointment of local liaison o cer.
A local liaison officer will be appointed by the city council and shall serve during the pleasure of the city council.
(1)

A local liaison officer will serve under the direction and control of the Kearney County Emergency Management
Agency.

(Ord. No. 1070, § 7, 11-20-00)

Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
FOOTNOTE(S):
(3) State

Law reference— Nebraska Liquor Control Act, R.R.S. 1943, § 53-101 et seq.; local licenses, R.R.S. 1943, § 53-134.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 6-1. - De nitions.
All words and phrases used in this chapter which are defined in the state liquor control act are hereby defined as used in this
chapter the same as defined in that act.
(Code 1982, § 7-101)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 6-2. - Drinking in public and certain other places prohibited.

16/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

It shall be unlawful for any person, within the corporate limits of the city, to drink any alcoholic liquors upon any public street,
alley, park, public school premises, premises owned and operated by the city or county, within any theater or public dance hall
during any time such place shall be open to the public, or within any liquor store licensed for the sale of alcoholic liquors or beer,
in original packages.
(Code 1982, § 7-102)

Sec. 6-3. - Possession of open containers of liquor in public places.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the zoning jurisdiction of the city to have in his possession any opened can, bottle,
glass or other container which contains beer or any alcoholic or intoxicating liquid or drink upon any public street, alley, park,
schoolhouse or other premises owned or operated by the city or the county, within any theater or public dance hall or any place
where a public dance is being held, during such time as such place shall be open to the public, or within any liquor store licensed
for the sale of alcoholic liquors, other than beer in the original packages; provided however nothing in this section shall be
construed to prohibit social dancing within any premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic liquors or any place licensed as a
bottle club nor to prohibit the possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages in such an establishment while social dancing
is there in progress.
(Code 1982, § 7-102.01)

Sec. 6-4. - Hours of sale.
(a)

It shall be unlawful for any licensed person, regardless of the class of license issued to the holder thereof, to
dispense or sell any alcoholic beverages within the municipality except during the hours provided in this section:
Alcoholic liquors, except beer and wine, beer and wine:
Secular days (Monday through Saturday inclusive):
Off sale .....7:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
On sale .....7:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
Sundays:
Off sale .....prohibited
On sale, beer and wine only .....10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
On sale, alcoholic liquors .....12:00 noon to 8:00 p.m.
New Year's Eve Day (when the same falls on Sunday)
Off sale (alcoholic liquors, beer and wine) .....12:00 noon to 6:00 p.m.
Off sale and on sale (alcoholic liquors, beer and wine) .....6:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m.

(b)

Such limitations as provided in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply after 12:00 noon on Sunday to a
licensee which is a nonprofit corporation, and the city council by motion may authorize a licensee to sell at retail or
dispense alcoholic liquors, including beer and wine, during specially designated hours at specially designated
locations within the city during any hours which are permitted by state law.

(c)

No person shall consume any alcoholic beverages on licensed premises for a period of time longer than 15 minutes
after the time fixed in this section for stopping the sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises. For the purposes of
this section, on sale shall be defined as alcoholic beverages sold by the drink for consumption on the premises of
17/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

the licensed establishment or dispensed under the authority of a bottle club license. Off sale shall be defined as
alcoholic beverages sold at retail in the original container for consumption off the premises of the licensed
establishment.
(d)

Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit licensed premises from being open for other business on days
and hours during which the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by this section.

(Ord. No. 905, § 1(7-105), 11-16-87; Ord. No. 1013, § 1, 12-4-95; Ord. No. 1100, § 1, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 1112, § 1, 2-2-04)

Sec. 6-5. - Service by minors prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any licensed retailer or for any bottle club operator within the city to employ or permit any person less
than 21 years of age to sell, dispense or serve any alcoholic liquor to any customer or consumer.
(Code 1982, § 7-105.01)

Sec. 6-6. - Act of agent, servant or employee.
Every act of any agent, servant or employee of any licensed retailer of alcoholic liquor or of any bottle club which shall
constitute a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed and held to be the act of the licensed retailer as well as that
of the agent, servant or employer.
(Code 1982, § 7-106)

Sec. 6-7. - Occupation taxes for alcoholic beverages.
(a)

There is hereby levied an occupation tax on persons, businesses and business organizations holding liquor licenses
within the City of Minden, Kearney County, Nebraska and its zoning jurisdiction in the following amounts, to wit:

License class:
"A" .....$100.00
"B" .....100.00
"D" .....200.00
"I" .....250.00
"AB" .....200.00
"ABK" .....200.00
"AD" .....300.00
"ADK" .....300.00
"AK" .....100.00
"BK" .....100.00
"DK" .....200.00
"IB" .....350.00
"IBK" .....350.00
"ID" .....450.00
"IDK" .....450.00
18/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

"IK" .....250.00

Occupational tax:
"L" .....$250.00
"W" .....500.00
"X" .....750.00
"Y" .....250.00
"K" catering .....100.00
"LK" .....350.00
"YK" .....350.00
(b)

Said occupation tax as designated and enumerated herein shall be for the purpose of raising revenue for the
general fund of the city and for the purpose of maintaining the peace, good governmental welfare of the
corporation and the trade, commercial and manufacturers.

(c)

All taxes levied in this article shall be due and payable in advance. Taxes levied and paid at a yearly rate shall be for
a period beginning May 1 and ending the last day of the following April. When any business taxed in this article at a
yearly rate shall commence during any year, the proportional part of the yearly taxes shall be paid for the portion of
the year remaining until the following May 1.

(d)

No taxes in this article shall apply to any business or occupation which is wholly interstate or which is operated by
any department of the government of the United States, or this state, county or other political subdivision.

(e)

All taxes payable as provided in this article shall be paid to the city treasurer at the times specified in this article,
and the treasurer shall give a duplicate receipt therefor, one copy of which shall be filed with the city clerk and the
other copy retained by the taxpayer.

(f)

All occupation taxes shall be due, and payable on the first day of May of each year, except in the event that the said
tax is levied daily, and upon the payment thereof by any person or persons to the municipal clerk, the said clerk
shall give a receipt, properly dated, and specifying the person paying the said tax, and the amount paid. The
revenue collected shall then be immediately deposited into the general fund by the municipal treasurer. The
municipal treasurer shall keep an account of all revenue turned over to him.

(g)

In the event this ordinance is passed and approved after May 1, 2010 it shall be levied, assessed and prorated on a
daily basis until May 1, 2010. All forms, and receipts herein mentioned shall be issued in duplicate. One copy shall
then be kept by each party in the transaction.

(h)

The receipt issued after the payment of any occupation tax shall be the occupation tax certificate. The said
certificate shall specify the amount of the tax and the name of the person, and business that paid the said tax. The
occupation tax certificate shall then be displayed in a prominent place, or carried in such a way as to be easily
accessible, while business is being conducted.

(i)

If any person, company, or corporation fails, to neglects to pay the occupation taxes as provided herein on the day
it becomes due, and payable, the municipality shall then proceed by civil suit to collect the amount due. All
delinquent taxes shall bear interest at the rate of one per cent per month until paid.

(Ord. No. 1159, § 1, 6-7-10)

Sec. 6-8. - Penalty for violation of chapter.

19/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined in any
sum not more than $500.00, shall be adjudged to pay the costs of prosecution and shall be committed to jail until such fine and
costs are paid.
(Code 1982, § 7-107)

Secs. 6-9—6-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES

Sec. 6-31. - Examination of application and applicant generally.
(a)

Filing with state liquor control commission. Any person desiring to obtain a license to sell alcoholic liquors at retail
shall file with the state liquor control commission. The commission shall then notify the city clerk by registered or
certified mail. The city council shall then meet and determine the desirability of the application and report its
recommendation for approval or denial of the application in writing to the state liquor control commission within
45 days of receipt from the state liquor control commission.

(b)

Examination of applicant by council. The city council may examine, or cause to be examined under oath, any
applicant; examine or cause to be examined the books and records of any such applicant; hear testimony and take
proof for its information in the performance of its duties. For the purpose of obtaining any of the information
desired, the city council may authorize as its agent the city clerk or the city attorney to act on its behalf. The city
council may conduct the examination and hold the hearing upon the receipt from the commission of the notice and
copy of the application.

(c)

Hearing. The city council shall fix a time and place at which a hearing will be held, and at which time the city council
shall receive evidence under oath, either orally or by affidavit, from the applicant and any other person concerning
the propriety of the issuance of such license. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a
legal newspaper in or of general circulation in the municipality one time not less than seven, nor more than 14 days
before the time of the hearing. Such notice shall include, but not be limited to, a statement that all persons desiring
to give evidence before the city council in support of or in protest against the issuance of such license may do so at
the time of the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not more than 45 days after the receipt of notice from the
commission.

(d)

Issuance or refusal. After such hearing, the city council shall cause to be spread at large in the minute record of its
proceedings a resolution either issuing or denying such license. Any resolution denying or failing to renew an
application or license rendered by the city shall be in writing or stated in the record and shall be accompanied by
findings. The findings shall consist of concise statements of the conclusions upon each contested issue. The
applicant or licensee shall be notified of the decision in person or by mail. A copy of the decision and order and
accompanying findings shall be delivered or mailed upon request to the applicant or licensee. The clerk of such city
shall thereupon mail or deliver to the commission a copy of the resolution. The city clerk shall thereupon mail to the
commission by first class mail, postage prepaid, a copy of the resolution.

(Code 1982, § 7-108.02)

State law reference— Authority for local governing body to license, R.R.S. 1943, § 53-132.
Sec. 6-32. - Notice of hearing.

20/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Notice of a hearing held pursuant to R.R.S. 1943, § 53-134, shall be given to the applicant by the city clerk and shall contain the
date, time, and location of the hearing. Two or more proceedings which are legally or factually related may be heard and
considered together unless any party thereto makes a showing sufficient to satisfy the council that prejudice would result
therefrom.
(Ord. No. 887, § 1(7-108.03), 6-2-86)

Sec. 6-33. - Hearing procedure.
(a)

The city with respect to licensees within its corporate limits shall have the following powers, function and duties
with respect to retail and bottle club licenses:
(1)

To cancel, revoke, or suspend for cause retail or bottle club licenses to sell or dispense alcoholic liquor issued
to persons for premises within its jurisdiction subject to review as provided in R.R.S. 1943, § 53-1,116, as
presently in effect or as may be amended;

(2)

To enter or to authorize any law enforcement officer to enter at any time upon any premises licensed under
the state liquor control act to determine whether any of the provisions of the act, any rules or regulations
adopted and promulgated by the commission, or any rule, regulation, or ordinance of the city has been or is
being violated and at such time to examine the premises of such licensee in connection therewith;

(3)

To receive a signed complaint from any citizen within its jurisdiction that any of the provisions of the act or any
rules or regulations adopted and promulgated pursuant thereto have been or are being violated and to act
upon such complaints in the manner provided in this section;

(4)

To receive retail or bottle club license fees as provided in R.R.S. 1943, § 53-124(5) or (9), as presently in effect
or as may be amended, and pay the same, after the applicant has been delivered his retail or bottle club
license, to the city;

(5)

To examine or cause to be examined any applicant or any retail or bottle club licensee coming before it as
provided in the act, to examine or cause to be examined the books and records of any such applicant or
licensee, and to hear testimony and to take proof for its information in the performance of its duties. For the
purpose of obtaining any of the information desired, the city may authorize its agent or attorney to act on its
behalf; and

(6)

To cancel, revoke or suspend on its own motion any license if, upon the notice and hearing as provided in
R.R.S. 1943, § 53-134.04, as presently in effect or as may be amended, it determines that the licensee has
violated any of the provisions of the act or any valid and subsisting ordinance, rule or regulation duly enacted,
adopted and promulgated relating to alcoholic liquor. Such order of cancellation, revocation or suspension
shall be subject to review as provided in R.R.S. 1943, § 53-1,116, as presently in effect or as may be amended.

(b)

Hearings will be informal and conducted by the mayor. The intent is an inquiry into the facts, not an adversary
action. Each witness may present their testimony in narrative fashion or by question and answer.

(c)

The city and its representatives shall not be bound by the strict rules of evidence, and shall have full authority to
control the procedures of the hearing including the admission or exclusion of testimony or other evidence. The city
may admit and give probative effect to evidence which possesses probative value commonly accepted by
reasonably prudent individuals. The city may limit testimony where it appears incompetent, irrelevant or unduly
repetitious. If there is opposition to any application and such opposition desires the opportunity to present
arguments and to cross-examine the applicant and any witnesses in favor of such application, they shall choose a
spokesperson to perform such function who shall notify the city of his representation prior to the start of the
hearing.

(d)

The order of the proceeding is as follows:
(1)

Exhibits will be marked in advance by the city clerk and presented to the mayor during the presentation;
21/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(2)

Presentation of evidence, witnesses and arguments by applicant;

(3)

Testimony of any other citizens in favor of such proposed license;

(4)

Examination of applicant, witnesses or citizens by city attorney, city administrator, city council or duly
appointed agent;

(e)

(5)

Cross-examination of applicant, witnesses or citizens by spokesperson for opposition, if any;

(6)

Presentation of evidence and witnesses by opposition;

(7)

Testimony of any other citizens in opposition to such proposed license;

(8)

Presentation of evidence by city and law enforcement personnel;

(9)

Cross-examination by applicant;

(10)

Rebuttal evidence by both parties, and by city administration and agent;

(11)

Summation by applicant and opposition spokesperson, if any.

At the hearing, the city shall only consider the requirements of the state liquor control act and the following criteria:
(1)

The adequacy of existing law enforcement resources and services in the area;

(2)

The recommendation of the police department or any other law enforcement agency;

(3)

Existing motor vehicle and pedestrian traffic flow in the vicinity of the proposed licensed premises, potential
traffic and parking problems, and the proximity and availability of on-street and off-street parking;

(4)

Zoning restrictions and the city's zoning and land-use policies;

(5)

Sanitation or sanitary conditions on or about the proposed licensed premises;

(6)

The existence of a citizen's protest and similar evidence in support of or in opposition to the application;

(7)

The existing population and projected growth within the jurisdiction of the city and within the area to be
served;

(8)

The existing liquor licenses, the class of each such license, and the distance and times of travel between
establishments issued such licenses;

(9)

Whether the proposed license would be compatible with the neighborhood or community where the proposed
premises are located;

(10)

Whether the type of business or activity proposed to be operated or presently operated in conjunction with
the proposed license is and will be consistent with the public interest as declared in R.R.S. 1943, § 53-101.01,
as presently in effect or as may be amended;

(11)

Whether the applicant can ensure that all alcoholic beverages, including beer and wine, will be handled by
persons in accordance with R.R.S. 1943, § 53-168.06, as presently in effect or as may be amended;

(12)

Whether the applicant has taken every reasonable precaution to protect against the possibility of shoplifting of
alcoholic liquor, which alcoholic liquor shall be displayed and kept in and sold from an area which is
reasonably secured;

(13)

Whether the applicant is fit, willing, and able to properly provide the service proposed in conformance with all
provisions and requirements of and rules and regulations adopted and promulgated pursuant to the act;

(14)

Whether the applicant has demonstrated that the type of management and control exercised over the
licensed premises will be sufficient to ensure that the licensee can conform to all the provisions and
requirements of and rules and regulations adopted and promulgated pursuant to the act;

(15)

The background information of the applicant established by information contained in the public records of the
commission and investigations conducted by law enforcement agencies;

(16)

Past evidence of discrimination involving the applicant as evidenced by findings of fact before any
administrative board or agency of the city, any other governmental board or agency of the city, any other
22/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

governmental unit, or any court of law;
(17)

Whether the applicant or the applicant's representatives suppressed any fact or provided any inaccurate
information to the commission or city or the employees of the commission or city in regard to the license
application or liquor investigations. The applicant shall be required to cooperate in providing a full disclosure
to the investigating agents of the city;

(18)

Proximity of and impact on schools, hospitals, libraries, parks and other public institutions;

(19)

Whether activities proposed to be conducted on the licensed premises or in adjacent related outdoor areas
will create unreasonable noise or disturbance; and

(20)

Compliance with state laws, liquor rules and regulations, and municipal ordinances and regulations and
whether or not the applicant has ever forfeited bond to appear in court to answer charges of having
committed a felony or charges of having violated any law or ordinance enacted in the interest of good morals
and decency or has been convicted of violating or has forfeited bond to appear in court and answer charges
for violating any law or ordinance relating to alcoholic liquor.

(f)

It shall be the applicant's duty to produce evidence pertaining to the designated criteria prescribed in this
subsection. The burden of proof and persuasion shall be on the party filing the application. When applicable for
purposes of this section, applicant shall be synonymous with licensee. Any member of the city council and the city
attorney may question any witness, call witnesses, or request information. All witnesses shall be sworn. The hearing
shall be recorded by the city clerk. The city council or the applicant may order the hearing to be recorded by an
official court reporter or a transcript to be made of the hearing, at the expense of the applicant.

Chapter 10 - ANIMALS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(4) State

Law reference— Dogs, R.R.S. 1943, § 54-601 et seq.; rabies, R.R.S. 1943, § 71-4401 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 10-1. - Penalty for violation of chapter.
Unless otherwise specified herein, any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
fined in any sum not exceeding $500.00 and costs of prosecution and stand committed until such fines and costs are fully paid.
(Code 1982, § 2-411)

Sec. 10-2. - Slaughtering.
(a)

Unlawful within city limits. It shall be unlawful to slaughter any beeves, sheep, swine or other animals within the
limits of the city.

(b)

Unlawful within zoning jurisdiction; exception. It shall be unlawful to slaughter any beeves, sheep, swine or other
animals within the zoning jurisdiction of the city, except at such location within the industrial zone which lies north
of U.S. Highway No. 6 and east of State Highway No. 10 at such location as may be approved by the mayor and city
council of the city.

(c)

Existing slaughterhouses. All commercial slaughtering establishments located within the limits of the zoning
authority of the city as of August 1, 1978, shall be deemed to have complied with the required approval of the
mayor and city council, as provided for in subsection (b) of this section.

(Code 1982, §§ 2-401, 2-401.01, 2-401.02)

23/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 10-3. - Interment of dead animals.
All animals which shall die within this city shall be removed or be securely buried by the owners thereof at least four feet
below the surface of the earth at such locality as may be designated by the city police department.
(Code 1982, § 2-402)

Sec. 10-4. - Keeping certain creatures prohibited.
(a)

Swine. It shall be unlawful to keep swine of any kind within the city; provided, however, swine may be kept in any
sanitary enclosure provided by the county fair board during the period that the county fair is in progress and one
day before and one day after the county fair is open, by designation of the county fair board.

(b)

Animals causing odors. It shall be unlawful to keep within the city any cattle, goats, or other animals or fowls of any
kind from which any offensive or obnoxious odors shall be emitted.

(Code 1982, §§ 2-409, 2-410)

Sec. 10-5. - Beekeeping.
(a)

Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, impound, raise or propagate bees, bee hives or bee
colonies within the corporate limits of the city.

(b)

Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and on
conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not more than $500.00. Each separate day of unlawful keeping of bees
shall constitute a separate violation.

(Code 1982, §§ 3-201, 3-202)

Secs. 10-6—10-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - DOGS
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 10-31. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Kennel means any premises keeping, harboring or owning more than three dogs over the age of six months.
Vicious dogs. A vicious dog is defined as a dog that has bitten, killed, wounded, injured or chased any person or other
domestic animal.
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 8-18-97)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 10-32. - Penalty for violation of article.
Unless otherwise specifically stated, any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in any sum not less than $25.00 or exceeding $100.00 for the first
offense; not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00 for the second offense; not less than $75.00 nor more than $100.00 for the
third offense.
24/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(Code 1982, § 3-112; Ord. No. 893, § 13, 11-3-86; Ord. No. 1031, § 2, 8-18-97)

Sec. 10-33. - Running at large.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, harborer, or keeper of a dog to permit such dog to run at large within the corporate limits
of the city. For the purposes of this article, the term "running at large" shall mean permitting any dog to go on or about the public
streets, alleys, public or private lands or other places in the city, except the premises of the owner, and except on a leash not to
exceed ten feet in length, or in an automobile or similar confinement, but at all times in the control of a person who is able to
control such dog.
(Code 1982, § 3-109; Ord. No. 893, § 10, 11-3-86)

Sec. 10-34. - Taking up; impoundment; notice; reclamation.
The police department shall take up any dog found running at large within the city and impound it forthwith. The owner,
harborer, or keeper of such dog, if the same can be determined, shall be notified within 24 hours after impoundment. If the
owner, harborer, or keeper of the dog is unknown, a written description of the dog and the place and time of apprehension shall
be available from the police department. The owner, harborer, or keeper of any dog so impounded may reclaim such dog upon
payment of the license fee, if unpaid, and all costs and charges incurred by the city for impounding and maintaining the dog. In
addition, the following reclaiming charges shall be paid to the city clerk or his representative:
First offense .....$10.00
Second offense .....20.00
Third offense .....30.00
The owner, harborer or keeper of any dog so impounded shall be responsible for the payment of these charges,
whether the owner reclaims such dog or not. The owner, harborer, or keeper of any dog who wishes to contest these
charges may secure the release of his dog by posting a cash bond in the amount of $75.00 with the city clerk.
(Code 1982, § 3-109.01; Ord. No. 893, § 11, 11-3-86)

Sec. 10-35. - Method of taking up.
Whenever in this article the police are required or authorized to take up a dog, they may use whatever means to do so as may
be reasonable under the circumstances, including the use of tranquilizer darts.
(Code 1982, § 3-113)

Sec. 10-36. - Notice and complaint.
Upon taking up any dog for running at large, the police department shall cause a complaint to be filed with the court against
the owner or person found to be harboring or keeping the animal if such person can be ascertained, charging such person with a
violation of this article.
(Code 1982, § 3-109.02)

Sec. 10-37. - Vicious dogs, method of control.
(a)

The police department shall hereby take up any dog suspected of being a vicious dog within the city and impound it
forthwith.

(b)

Upon taking up any dog suspected of being vicious, the police department shall cause a complaint to be filed with
the court against the owner or person found to be harboring or keeping the dog.
25/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(c)

Upon conviction of keeping or harboring a vicious dog, the owner or person keeping said dog may be fined in an amou
exceed $100.00.

(d)

In addition to said fine, the court after full hearing may order that the dog be destroyed. The method of destruction
of said dog shall be, at the direction of the chief of police, by a licensed veterinarian.

(e)

In addition to said fine, the owner or person keeping the vicious dog shall also be assessed court costs, the costs of
keeping said dog during the time of its impoundment and the costs of destroying said dog in the event the court
orders the dog destroyed.

(Code 1982, § 3-114; Ord. No. 1031, § 3, 8-18-97)

Editor's note—
Ordinance No. 1031, § 3, adopted August 18, 1997, amended § 10-37 to read as herein set out. Formerly, such section pertained to
method of destruction.
Sec. 10-38. - Reserved.
Editor's note—
Ordinance No. 1031, § 4, adopted August 18, 1997, deleted § 10-38. Formerly, such section pertained to vicious dogs and derived
from § 3-110 of the 1982 Code.
Sec. 10-39. - Pit bull dogs.
(a)

Keeping prohibited. No person shall own, harbor, or keep within the city a pit bull dog provided, however, that
persons remaining temporarily within the city may be permitted to keep a pit bull dog provided that such dog is at
all times on a leash not to exceed six feet in length or confined within a motor vehicle or similar confinement and at
all times under the control of its owner.

(b)

Defined. For purposes of this section, a pit bull dog shall include any of the dogs commonly referred to as the pit
bull dog, the American pit bull terrier, and the American Staffordshire terrier.

(c)

Impoundment; notice; reclamation. The police department shall take up any pit bull dog and impound it forthwith,
except those which remain temporarily within the city and are restrained as provided in subsection (a) of this
section. The owner harborer, or keeper of such dog may reclaim such dog provided that the dog shall not be
brought back within the city limits, upon payment of all costs and charges incurred by the city for impounding and
maintaining such dog and payment of a $30.00 reclaiming charge. The owner, harborer or keeper of any dog so
impounded shall be responsible for the payment of these charges, whether the owner reclaims such dog or not.
The owner, harborer, or keeper of any dog who wishes to contest these charges may secure the release of his dog
by posting a cash bond in the amount of $75.00 with the city clerk or his representative.

(d)

Violation of section 10-39(a). Any person, association or corporation violating any of the provisions of subsection 1039(a) shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in a sum not less than
$100.00 and not more than $500.00 and, as a part of such conviction, shall be ordered not to own, harbor, or keep
such a dog within the city.

(e)

Temporarily shall be defined as no longer than seven days.

(Ord. No. 901, § 1(3-115.01—3-115.03), 8-3-87; Ord. No. 1142, § 1, 8-4-08)

Sec. 10-40. - Barking dogs.
(a)

Permitting any dog by the owner or harborer of such dog while outside of the dwelling house or other building
owned, occupied or otherwise lawfully used by such person to bark continuously or intermittently over a period of
time exceeding five minutes in such a loud, shrill and/or continuous manner as to create such a disturbance so as
26/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

to annoy a person of normal sensibilities shall be unlawful.
(b)

Upon conviction for a violation of subsection (a) of this section the owner or harborer shall be fined in a sum not
more than $100.00.

(Ord. No. 974, §§ 2, 3, 10-18-93)

Sec. 10-41. - Abate disturbance made by dog.
In the event that a violation of section 10-40 occurs and the police department is unable to locate the owner of the dog, the
police department is hereby authorized to take up the dog in order to abate the disturbance made by the dog.
(Ord. No. 1029, § 1, 2-17-97)

Sec. 10-42. - Taking up; impoundment; notice, reclamation.
The police department upon taking up any dog found in violation of section 10-40 within the city shall impound it forthwith.
The owner, harborer, or keeper of such dog, if the same can be determined, shall be notified within 24 hours after impoundment.
If the owner, harborer, or keeper of the dog is unknown, a written description of the dog and the place and time of apprehension
shall be available from the police department. The owner, harborer, or keeper of any dog so impounded may reclaim such dog
upon payment of the license fee, if unpaid, and all costs and charges incurred by the city for impounding and maintaining the dog.
The owner, harborer or keeper of any dog so impounded shall be responsible for the payment of these charges, whether the
owner reclaims such dog or not. The owner, harborer or keeper of any dog who wishes to contest these charges may secure the
release of his dog by posting a cash bond in the amount of $75.00 with the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 1029, § 2, 2-17-97)

Sec. 10-43. - Keeping a kennel.
It shall be unlawful to keep a kennel as defined herein in any zone within the city except the A agriculture zone.
(Ord. No. 1088, § 1, 8-22-02)

Sec. 10-44. - Penalty [for] keeping a kennel.
Persons found to be in violation of § 10-43 shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00 for each violation.
(Ord. No. 1088, § 2, 8-22-02)

Sec. 10-45. - Continuing acts.
In the event that a person is found to be in violation hereof, law enforcement personnel may cite such persons with additional
violations of § 10-43 for each day said person continues in violation hereof. Each subsequent violation shall be punishable by an
additional $100.00 fine.
(Ord. No. 1088, § 3, 8-22-02)

Sec. 10-46. - Dogs; dog excrement to be removed and disposed of.
It shall be unlawful for any person who is in control of any dog to cause or to permit any such dog to be on any property,
public or private, that is not owned or possessed or under the control of such person and to allow said dog to deposit fecal matter
on the property described herein, unless such person has in his immediate possession a device for the removal of said fecal
matter and for such person to fail to remove excrement left by such dog to a proper receptacle.
(Ord. No. 1133, § 1, 3-5-07)

27/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 10-47. - Animals on city-owned athletic elds.
It shall be unlawful for any person in possession or in control of any animal to cause or permit such animal to be on any cityowned athletic field.
(Ord. No. 1137, § 1, 10-15-07)

Secs. 10-48—10-50. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - LICENSING AND RABIES CONTROL

Sec. 10-51. - Penalty for violation of division.
Any dog within the city that has not been given a rabies shot, good for the ensuing year, shall be taken up by the police
department, placed in a dog pound, and if not vaccinated by the owner within five days shall be destroyed by the police
department. The police department shall within 24 hours notify the owner, if known, of each dog taken up that the dog must be
properly vaccinated and licensed within five days or such dog will be destroyed. If the owner is not known and cannot be located,
the dog shall be held five days and if the owner or a suitable and responsible person does not claim such dog within five days and
have the dog properly vaccinated and licensed, then the dog shall be destroyed.
(Code 1982, § 3-106; Ord. No. 893, § 8, 11-3-86)

Sec. 10-52. - License required.
Any person owning, harboring or keeping a dog over six months of age within the city shall obtain a license from the city for
such dog. The license shall remain in effect for a period commensurate with the rabies vaccination.
(Code 1982, § 3-101; Ord. No. 893, § 1, 11-3-86)

State law reference— Authority to license, R.R.S. 1943, § 17-526.
Sec. 10-53. - Rabies vaccination; revaccination; type of vaccine.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to own, harbor, or keep a dog over six months of age that has not been
properly vaccinated for rabies. The rabies vaccination required by this division shall be an injection of antirabies vaccine of the
chick embryo MLV type, and the frequency of revaccination necessary for approved vaccinations shall be at least once each three
years. The vaccine shall be administered by a licensed veterinarian and shall be given as approved by the state department of
agriculture.
(Code 1982, § 3-102; Ord. No. 893, § 2, 11-3-86)

State law reference— Control of rabies, R.R.S. 1943, § 71-4412.
Sec. 10-54. - Rabies vaccination certi cate.
A certificate that a dog has been vaccinated for rabies shall be presented when an application is made for a license. No license
shall be issued until such certificate is shown. Such certificate shall be of the type mandated by state law.
(Code 1982, § 3-103; Ord. No. 893, § 3, 11-3-86)

State law reference— Contents of certificate, R.R.S. 1943, § 71-4403.
Sec. 10-55. - Fees—License.
28/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

The city council shall, before January 1 of each year, establish the fee which shall be collected by the city for the issuance of
each dog license. If no such fee is established by the city council, as provided in this section, then the fee established for the
previous year shall carry over and shall be the fee for the ensuing year; provided, however, that if the owner of such dog has paid
the fee for the ensuing year prior to a new fee being established, then the fee shall be deemed paid in full for the full term
indicated on the fee receipt.
(Code 1982, § 3-104; Ord. No. 893, § 4, 11-3-86)

Sec. 10-56. - Same—Payment and proration; due notice.
Each dog, within the city, upon receiving its first rabies vaccination, shall be licensed for a period of three years commensurate
with the rabies vaccination. Each dog coming within the city after the date of receiving the rabies vaccination shall be licensed for
the remainder of the rabies vaccination validity, prorated by quarters of years. When, according to the records maintained by the
city, the license of any dog shall expire within 60 days, the owner of such dog shall be notified via U.S. mail at the owner's last
known address.
(Ord. No. 893, § 5(3-104.01), 11-3-86)

Sec. 10-57. - Same—Prorated refund.
The owner of any dog may receive a refund of the license fee by giving immediate notice to the city of the death of a dog or, if
the owner moves outside the city, notice of taking the dog, or notice that the dog has otherwise been removed from the city.
(Ord. No. 893, § 6, 11-3-86)

Sec. 10-58. - Collar and license required.
Each such person owning, harboring, or keeping a dog shall provide such dog with a collar to which the license shall be
attached, and it shall be unlawful for any such person to have any such dog within the corporate limits of the city without such
collar and license in place.
(Code 1982, § 3-105; Ord. No. 893, § 7, 11-3-86)

State law reference— Collar required, R.R.S. 1943, § 54-605.
Sec. 10-59. - Dog bites; impoundment; noti cation.
(a)

Whenever any dog is suspected of having rabies, and whenever any dog shall bite a person within the city, the dog
shall be taken up by the police department and impounded with a licensed veterinarian for observation. When in
the opinion of the veterinarian it is determined the dog is not infected with rabies, the dog shall be released to the
owner; provided, however, the owner must produce a current rabies vaccination certificate and license for the dog
or the dog must be properly vaccinated and licensed prior to release. The owner of such dog shall also pay the cost
of care of such dog during impoundment before the dog shall be released.

(b)

The police department shall within 24 hours after impoundment notify the owner, if known, of each such dog
impounded for observation. The police department shall also notify such owner, if known, as soon as the dog has
been certified for release by the licensed veterinarian. If the owner is not known and cannot be located, or if the
owner fails to pick up such dog after the same has been certified for release, the dog shall be held for five days,
after which time it shall be destroyed. Any dog which is determined by the licensed veterinarian to be infected with
rabies shall be destroyed.

(Code 1982, §§ 3-108.01, 3-108.02; Ord. No. 893, § 9, 11-3-86)

State law reference— Seizure by rabies control authority, R.R.S. 1943, § 71-4406.
29/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(5) Cross

reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 46; planning, ch. 62; solid waste,

ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 86; zoning, ch. 94.
(5) State

Law reference— Authority to adopt standard codes by reference, R.R.S. 1943, § 19-922.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 14-1. - Penalty for violation of chapter.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined in any sum not more than
$500.00 and shall be adjudged to pay the costs of prosecution and may be committed to jail until the fine and costs are paid. If any
licensed plumber or any of his employees shall violate any of the provisions of this article, such violation shall be sufficient cause
for revocation of his license.
(Code 1982, § 10-701)

Sec. 14-2. - Enforcement of chapter.
(a)

Within ten days after receipt by the city water and light department of an order by the city to shut off or to place in
service any utility for any dwelling place within the city, the water and light commissioner shall notify the city zoning
inspector. The city zoning inspector shall thereupon make an inspection of the premises to determine whether the
premises is in substantial compliance with the fire prevention code, the building code, the uniform plumbing code,
the electrical code and all other fire, building, plumbing, electrical and zoning ordinances of the city.

(b)

Upon consideration of such reports, the city zoning inspector shall make a report in writing to the next meeting of
the city planning commission of any substantial violation of any of such regulations.

(c)

Upon consideration of such reports, the city planning commission shall make an order and shall direct that notice
be given by the zoning inspector by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner of any dwelling
place where there is a substantial failure to comply with any of the regulations, specifically setting forth the defects
complained of and advising the owner that the city planning commission has made an order that the premises shall
not be used for habitation or as a dwelling for any person, after the expiration of six months from the date of the
notice, unless the property is brought into compliance with the regulations with respect to the defects referred to in
the order and notice.

(d)

The zoning inspector is directed to make further inspection of the premises whenever the owner shall notify him
that the property has been brought into compliance and shall report to the city planning commission if the property
is then in substantial compliance with such rules and regulations and, at the same time, he shall notify the owner of
such premises that the previously given order and notice thereof have been revoked.

(e)

If the owner of the premises shall fail to notify the zoning inspector that the premises have been brought into
substantial compliance with the rules and regulations, then at the end of six months from the date of mailing such
notice, the zoning inspector shall reinspect the premises. If upon such reinspection, he finds that the premises are
then in substantial compliance he shall proceed in the manner provided by subsection (d) of this section. However,
if the zoning inspector finds upon such reinspection that the premises have not been brought into substantial
compliance with such rules and regulations within 180 days from the date of the order and mailing of the notice
upon the owner of the premises, he shall make a report to the city attorney, together with his recommendation on

30/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

the matter. The city attorney is thereupon directed to take such action as he may deem to be appropriate for the
violation of the ordinances and/or to enjoin as a nuisance the continuing occupancy of the premises for human
habitation because of the failure to meet the requirements of the rules and regulations.
(Code 1982, §§ 15.401.01—15.401.05)

Secs. 14-3—14-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - FIRE LIMITS

Sec. 14-26. - Described.
All of the following described property and territory: lots 1 to 8 inclusive in block 12; all of block 13; the east half of block 14; all
of blocks 19, 20, and 21; the west half of block 28; all of block 29; and the west half of block 30, all in the original town, now city, are
hereby declared to be within the fire limits of such city, and such property is subject to all the provisions of this article.
(Code 1982, § 4-201)

Sec. 14-27. - Erection or rebuilding of structure.
It shall be unlawful to erect, place, rebuild or remodel within the fire limits any building or structure unless the same shall be
built of brick, tile, stone, or concrete with walls at least eight inches thick and with roof of tin, iron or other fireproof material. It is
expressly provided, however, that it shall be permissible to erect within the fire limits a custom designed, commercial type steel
building which is designed, constructed and fabricated by a steel company, provided that no wall of such building shall be closer
than six feet to any interior or rear lot line unless such wall is of eight-inch thick, fireproof material, as specified in this section. It
shall be unlawful to erect, place or keep, within the fire limits, any temporary building or building mounted on wheels or trucks. No
wooden awnings shall be built in front of any building within the fire limits, and no sign shall be projected over any sidewalks
within the fire limits unless the sign shall be not more than eight feet long and securely fastened and hung from the building itself.
No sign shall be extended into the street or across any sidewalk and supported by any post or other support in the street or by
any wire or other support extending across the street.
(Code 1982, § 4-202)

Sec. 14-28. - Chimneys.
All chimneys and flues to buildings shall comply with the requirements of the Uniform Building Code.
(Code 1982, § 4-203)

Sec. 14-29. - Moving buildings.
It shall be unlawful for any person to move any wooden buildings from outside of the fire limits into the fire limits or from any
place to another in such limits.
(Code 1982, § 4-204)

Cross reference— Moving buildings, § 14-231 et seq.
Sec. 14-30. - Allowing building to remain.
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any building placed within the fire limits contrary to the provisions of this article to
remain therein, and each 48 hours that the structure shall be allowed to remain in the fire limits shall be deemed a new and
separate offense and shall be punished as such.
31/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(Code 1982, § 4-205)

Secs. 14-31—14-50. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING CODE

Sec. 14-51. - Adoption of International Building Code.
There is hereby adopted by the mayor and city council, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing the erection,
construction, enlargement, altercation, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area
and maintenance of buildings or structures in the city, that certain code known as the International Building Code and the
International Residential Code, published by the International Code Council, being the 2009 edition (striking sec. 313) or the most
current edition on file in the office of the city clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length
in this article.
(Code 1982, § 16-101; Ord. No. 1156, § 1, 5-17-2010)

Editor's note—
Ord. No. 1156, § 1, adopted May 17, 2010, changed the title of § 14-51 from "Adoption of Uniform Building Code" to "Adoption of
International Building Code."
Sec. 14-52. - Permits.
Any person desiring a permit required in the Uniform Building Code shall make application to the mayor and council on a
blank form furnished by the city clerk giving the estimated cost, size, the material of which the building is proposed to be
constructed, and the proposed location of the lot on which it will stand, and the information required for a building permit. Upon
submission of the application for a building permit to the city, the building permit application will be reviewed by the city building
inspector and any other department of the city to whom the building inspector refers said application. If upon review, the building
inspector finds that the application meets all city requirements, then the building inspector shall issue the building permit. The
building inspector shall report to the city council on at least a monthly basis of all of the building permits issued by the city during
that month. Should the building inspector determine that the application for building permit reveals noncompliance with any code
section of the Minden City Code, he shall either deny the building permit, or refer the same to the board of adjustments for a
variance if a variance will correct any deficiencies in the application. The Minden City Building Inspector shall also have the
authority to refer said application to any other commission or department within the city if said building permit application does
not meet city codes. The cost for a building permit application shall be set by the city council by resolution.
(Code 1982, § 8-102; Ord. No. 969, § 1, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 1015, § 1, 1-15-96)

Sec. 14-53. - Enforcement of article.
The code adopted in this article shall be enforced by the building inspector.
(Code 1982, § 8-302)

Sec. 14-54. - Penalty for violation of article.
(a)

Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code adopted in this article or fail to comply therewith, or
who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made pursuant to such code, or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved pursuant to such code, or any certificate or
permit issued pursuant to such code, and from which no appeal has been taken or who shall fail to comply with
32/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time
fixed in this section, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00. The imposition of one penalty
for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to
correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each ten days
that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
(b)

The application of the penalty in subsection (a) of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of
prohibited conditions.

(Code 1982, §§ 8-306.01, 8-306.02)

Sec. 14-55. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Municipality means the city.
(Code 1982, § 8-303)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 14-56. - Amendments and deletions in the code.
The code adopted in this article is amended and changed in the following respects:
Part IV is deleted.

Section 304 is amended to provide that building permit fees shall be in the amount as shall from time to time
be determined by the mayor and city council by resolution.
(Code 1982, § 8-304)

Sec. 14-57. - Appeals.
Whenever the building inspector shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed
that the provisions of the code adopted in this article do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been
misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the building inspector to the city council
within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed.
(Code 1982, § 8-305)

Secs. 14-58—14-80. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICAL CODE

Sec. 14-81. - Adoption of National Electrical Code.
There is hereby adopted by the mayor and city council for the purpose of safeguarding of persons and of buildings and their
contents from hazards arising from the use of electricity for light, heat, power and for other purposes in the city that certain code
known as the National Electrical Code, being particularly the 1993 edition thereof or the most current edition on file in the office of

33/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

the city clerk, of which code a copy has been and is now on file in the office of the city clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set out at length. The provisions thereof shall be the minimum standards for electrical installations of
any kind within the city.
(Code 1982, § 12-201; Ord. No. 953, § 1, 10-19-92)

Sec. 14-82. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Municipality means the city.
(Code 1982, § 12-203)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 14-83. - Enforcement of article.
The code adopted in this article shall be enforced by the electrical inspector.
(Code 1982, § 12-202)

Sec. 14-84. - Penalty for violation of article.
(a)

Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code adopted pursuant to this article or fail to comply
therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made pursuant to such code, or who shall build in
violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved pursuant to such code, or any
certificate or permit issued pursuant to such code, and from which no appeal has been taken or who shall fail to
comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within
the time fixed in such order, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00. The imposition of one
penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified,
each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.

(b)

The application of the penalty in subsection (a) of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of
prohibited conditions.

(Code 1982, §§ 12-205.01, 12-205.02)

Sec. 14-85. - Appeals.
Whenever the electrical inspector disapproves an electrical installation, orders repair or replacement of an electrical
installation or disapproves plans and specifications for a proposed electrical installation, and which order or decision is disputed
by the person, he may appeal from such decision to the city council within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed.
(Code 1982, § 12-204)

Secs. 14-86—14-105. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - PLUMBING CODE
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

34/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 14-106. - Adoption of Uniform Plumbing Code.
There is hereby adopted by the mayor and city council for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing the minimum
standards for the installation of plumbing in the city that certain code known as the Uniform Plumbing Code, being particularly the
1991 edition thereof and the whole thereof, of which code a copy has been and is now filed in the office of the city clerk, and the
code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this article, and shall take effect from the effective date
of the ordinance from which this article is derived. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city.
(Code 1982, § 10-501; Ord. No. 955, § 1, 10-19-92)

Sec. 14-107. - Enforcement of article; penalties for violation.
(a)

The code adopted in this article shall be enforced by the plumbing inspector.

(b)

Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who
shall violate or fail to comply with any order made pursuant to such code, or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved pursuant to such code, or any certificate or
permit issued pursuant to such code, and from which no appeal has been taken or who shall fail to comply with
such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time
fixed in this article, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00. The imposition of one penalty
for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. All such persons shall be required to correct
or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and, when not otherwise specified, each ten days
that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.

(c)

The application of the penalty in subsection (b) of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of
prohibited conditions.

(Code 1982, §§ 10-502, 10-505.01, 10-505.02)

Sec. 14-108. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Municipality means the city.
Plumber means any person skilled in the planning, superintending and practical installation of plumbing and drainage and
who is familiar with the ordinances and regulations governing the same, and who is engaged as a contractor in the installation,
repair, alteration or removal of plumbing or drainage, with the full responsibility of supervision, whether doing such work by
himself or employing journeyman plumbers and apprentices to assist him. Such term "plumber" shall include every person doing
work of any character connected with the installation, removal or repair of any plumbing system or material connected with the
drainage of buildings or property and all work requiring connections with street sewers, water mains or other plumbing, other
than journeyman plumbers or plumber's apprentices or helpers, as defined in this article.
(Code 1982, §§ 10-101, 10-503)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 14-109. - Appeals.

35/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Whenever the plumbing inspector shall disapprove a plumbing installation, order repair or replacement of a plumbing
installation or disapprove plans and specifications for a proposed plumbing installation, and which order or decision is claimed by
the person affected thereby to be improper within the guidelines established by the code, such person may appeal from such
decision to the city council within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed.
(Code 1982, § 10-504)

Sec. 14-110. - Prohibition of lead pipes, solder and ux.
(a)

Any pipe, solders or flux used in the installation or repair of any residential or nonresidential facility which is
connected to the public water supply system shall be leadfree.

(b)

For purposes of this section, leadfree shall mean:
(1)

Solders and flux: not more than two-tenths percent lead; and

(2)

Pipe and pipe fittings: not more than eight percent lead.

(Code 1982, § 10-507; Ord. No. 909, § 1, 5-16-88)

Secs. 14-111—14-120. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - PLUMBING INSPECTOR

Sec. 14-121. - O ce created.
The city sewer commissioner shall be ex officio the plumbing inspector and shall have all the powers and shall assume all the
duties and responsibilities provided by this division.
(Code 1982, § 10-201)

Sec. 14-122. - Duties.
(a)

Inspect all plumbing work done. It shall be the duty of the plumbing inspector to inspect all plumbing work done in
the city, and if, after having made the proper final inspection on any job of plumbing work, the work is found to be
properly done and to be perfectly tight, as required by this division, it shall be the duty of the plumbing inspector to
issue to the plumber in charge of the work a certificate of completion, setting forth the fact that the work has been
inspected and such work found to have been done according to the requirements of this article.

(b)

Investigate all cases reported to him. It shall be the duty of the plumbing inspector to investigate all cases reported
to or referred to him of the use of imperfect material or workmanship on any job of plumbing work, or the violation
of the provisions of this division by a plumber, builder or owner to stop such work. He shall order the work
removed and replaced in a proper and workmanlike manner to conform to the spirit and intent of this division, and
he may further request the city attorney to file a complaint against any person for violation of the provisions of this
division. It shall be the duty of the city attorney to prosecute such person without unnecessary delay.

(c)

Inspect old plumbing work. It shall be the duty of the plumbing inspector to inspect any work at the request of the
agent, owner or occupant of any building or premises where such plumbing work is located, in order to ascertain
whether or not the plumbing in such building or premises is in a sanitary condition. The plumbing inspector shall
have the right and authority to enter any building upon any premises at all reasonable hours to ascertain if the
provisions of this division or any ordinance relating to plumbing have been or are being violated or being complied
with; also where he has reason to believe that defective or unsanitary plumbing exists, and whenever defective or
unsanitary plumbing is found, it shall be the duty of the plumbing inspector to notify the agent or owner of the
premises on which the defective or unsanitary plumbing is found to forthwith cause such plumbing to be changed
36/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

and to conform with the terms and requirements of this division or any existing ordinance, or to be changed and
made sanitary in such other manner as the plumbing inspector may authorize and direct. Such owner or agent is
hereby required within ten days after receiving such notification to comply therewith, or failing or neglecting to do
so shall be considered as maintaining unsanitary plumbing and violating the requirement of this division. It shall be
the duty of the plumbing inspector to make a complaint against such owner or agent and cause him to be
prosecuted.
(Code 1982, §§ 10-202—10-204)

Sec. 14-123. - Record of inspection.
The plumbing inspector shall keep a record of all inspections made by him as plumbing inspector of the city and make such
reports as may be required by superintendents of other departments, except it shall not be necessary to report the inspections
made on old work.
(Code 1982, § 10-205)

Sec. 14-124. - Unlawful to engage in plumbing business or to do plumbing work.
It shall be unlawful for the plumbing inspector to engage in the business of plumbing or to perform any work as a plumber in
the city during his term of office as plumbing inspector. The plumbing inspector shall not show discrimination between organized
or unorganized union firms or corporations nor shall the inspector solicit for union activity during normal working hours.
(Code 1982, § 10-206)

Sec. 14-125. - Inspection required.
All piping, traps and fixtures of a plumbing system shall be inspected by the plumbing inspector to ensure compliance with all
the requirements of this division with the approved plans and the permit.
(Code 1982, § 10-401)

Sec. 14-126. - Request for inspection.
Request for inspection shall be made at the office of the plumbing inspector by the plumber not less than eight working hours
in advance of inspection.
(Code 1982, § 10-402)

Sec. 14-127. - Work must stand test.
It shall be the duty of the plumbers to make sure that the work meets the requirements of the national and state plumbing
codes.
(Code 1982, § 10-403)

Sec. 14-128. - Inspection notices.
It shall be the duty of each plumber, on completing the roughing-in of the plumbing work in any building within the city to
immediately place or paste a notice thereon, which notice shall be in substantially the following form:
WARNING
This plumbing has not been inspected and approved by the plumbing inspector and must not be covered until
approved.
37/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

No person other than the plumbing inspector shall remove such notice.
(Code 1982, § 10-404)

Sec. 14-129. - Concealing plumbing work before approval.
No person shall so cover or conceal from view any plumbing work in any building in the city so as to prevent a proper
inspection thereof until such work has been inspected by the plumbing inspector, and until the plumbing inspector has placed
thereon a notice or seal stating that the plumbing has been inspected and approved.
(Code 1982, § 10-405)

Sec. 14-130. - Removing obstructions for inspection.
Whenever any plumbing work in any building has been so covered or concealed by lathing, plastering, flooring, or otherwise
before the plumbing inspector has had ample opportunity to inspect such work, then the plumbing inspector shall have the right
and authority to cut through or remove such obstruction sufficiently to afford an adequate means of making a proper inspection.
(Code 1982, § 10-406)

Sec. 14-131. - Roughing-in plumbing inspection.
The plumbing inspector shall make a thorough and complete examination of the work, and if defective material or
workmanship is found on the job, such defective material or workmanship must be removed at the expense of the plumber having
charge of the work and replaced with the proper kind of material and workmanship.
(Code 1982, § 10-407)

Sec. 14-132. - Inspection made on roughing-in to be covered.
When it is necessary to cover over ground before all of the roughing-in is ready for inspection, the plumbing inspector must be
notified and inspection made of such roughing-in.
(Code 1982, § 10-408)

Sec. 14-133. - Final inspection.
Within ten days after the setting of fixtures and the completion of any job of plumbing work and before the city water is
permanently turned on, the plumber having charge of such work shall notify the plumbing inspector that such work is ready for
final inspection.
(Code 1982, § 10-409)

Secs. 14-134—14-145. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - REGISTRATION OF PLUMBERS

Sec. 14-146. - Required.
No person shall engage in or work at the business, trade, or calling of a plumber in the city unless he shall have registered as
provided in this division.
(Code 1982, § 10-301)

38/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 14-147. - Examination required.
Before the applicant shall be registered as a plumber he shall take an examination before the plumbing inspector to
determine his fitness and qualifications. Upon payment of the required fee such applicant, after having shown himself competent
and qualified by such examination, shall be granted a license by the mayor and council.
(Code 1982, § 10-302)

Sec. 14-148. - Registration of corporation, rm or partnership.
Any corporation, firm or partnership may be registered pursuant to this division as a plumber in the name of such
corporation, firm or partnership, provided that such corporation, firm or partnership shall have a plumber who has submitted to
the examination given by the plumbing inspector and has thereby shown himself competent and qualified to engage in the
business, trade or calling of a plumber, as a bona fide officer of such corporation or a member of such firm or partnership, and
who shall at all times be in actual charge of and be responsible for the installation, removal or repair of any plumbing or drainage
and all plumbing work done by such corporation, firm or partnership. Before such corporation, firm or partnership shall be
registered in its corporate, firm or partnership name as a plumber, there shall be filed with the city clerk a certificate from the
plumbing inspector showing the fitness and competency of such officer of such corporation or such member of such firm or
partnership to engage in the business or calling of plumber. If after a license is issued to such corporation, firm or partnership,
such plumber as an officer of such corporation or a member of such firm or partnership shall withdraw therefrom and cease to be
connected therewith, then and in that event the city council shall forthwith revoke the license of such corporation, firm or
partnership.
(Code 1982, § 10-303)

Sec. 14-149. - Expiration of license.
Such license shall expire on the May 1 following the date thereof and shall not be assignable.
(Code 1982, § 10-304)

Sec. 14-150. - Revocation of license.
The city council by a majority vote shall have power to revoke any plumber's license, upon the recommendation of the
plumbing inspector, if the license was obtained through error or fraud, or if the recipient thereof is shown to be grossly
incompetent, or has a second time willfully violated any of the provisions of this division or the building code or building
ordinances of the city. This penalty shall be cumulative and in addition to the penalties prescribed for the violation of the
provisions of this division. If a license is revoked, the holder of the license shall not apply for a license until one year after the date
of such revocation.
(Code 1982, § 10-305)

Sec. 14-151. - Renewal of license.
Licenses, at the time of their expiration, may be renewed upon recommendation of plumbing inspector, without an
examination, upon payment of the required license fee.
(Code 1982, § 10-306)

Sec. 14-152. - Fees and taxes.
(a)

The following fees and taxes shall be charged: plumber's and drainlayer's occupation tax for the first year, $35.00;
for each subsequent year, $15.00.
39/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(b)

Such fees shall be paid to the city treasurer and credited to the general fund of the city and, upon payment of the fees
treasurer shall issue a receipt in duplicate, which duplicate receipt shall be delivered to the city clerk and filed in his off
occupation tax shall be due when the license is issued and on May 1 of each following year.

(Code 1982, §§ 10-307.01, 10-307.02)

Sec. 14-153. - Bond and insurance.
(a)

Every person applying for registration as a plumber shall deliver a bond to the city clerk, to be filed in his office, with
sureties to be approved by the city council in the sum of $5,000.00, which bond shall contain the condition that the
applicant shall defend, save, keep harmless and indemnify the city from all liability, claims, damages, judgments,
costs and expenses of every nature and description caused by or growing out of the making of any excavation, hole
or trench in any street, highway, alley or thoroughfare, including the pavement, sidewalk and sidewalk space in the
city; the opening or removal of any pavement or any sidewalk surface; the placing of any obstruction, barricade,
material, equipment or apparatus of any nature in the street, highway, alley or thoroughfare, including the sidewalk
and sidewalk space; the failure to properly protect any excavation, hole or trench in any street, highway, alley, or
the thoroughfare, including the sidewalk and sidewalk space; any and all negligence on the part of the applicant in
the use and occupancy of any street, highway, alley or thoroughfare, including the sidewalk and sidewalk space, in
any manner or nature whatsoever while engaged in the business of plumbing; the failure to observe the plumbing
or waterworks ordinance in the practice of plumbing. The liability of a plumber under that section shall be limited to
a period of one year after completion and acceptance of the work.

(b)

The applicant shall present evidence to the city clerk that he has an insurance policy providing public liability and
property damage insurance for the general public in the amount of $10,000.00 and $20,000.00 for personal injury
and $5,000.00 for property damage.

(Code 1982, §§ 10-308.01, 10-308.02)

Sec. 14-154. - Drainlayers.
Any person found by the plumbing inspector to be competent and responsible may be issued a drainlayer's license which shall
authorize him to make ditches and lay tile for drains. He shall furnish bond and public liability insurance in the same amount as
plumbers and shall pay an occupation tax in the amount of $15.00 for the first year and $10.00 for each subsequent year.
(Code 1982, § 10-309)

Secs. 14-155—14-175. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - HOUSING CODE
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 14-176. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Basement means a portion of a building located partly below the average of the adjoining ground.
Cellar means a portion of a building located wholly underground.

40/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Dwelling means any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants,
provided that temporary housing as defined in this section shall not be regarded as a dwelling.

Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities
which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.

Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by
removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping; or by any
other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the health officer.

Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
Habitable room means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating
purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, or communicating corridors, closets, and
storage spaces.

Health officer means the legally designated health authority of the city.
Infestation means the presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents, or other pests.
Multiple dwelling means any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.
Occupant means any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or having actual possession of, a
dwelling unit or rooming unit.

Operator means any person who has charge, care, or control of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming
units are let.

Ordinary minimum winter conditions means the temperature 15 degrees Fahrenheit above the lowest recorded temperature
for the previous ten-year period.

Owner means any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
(1)

Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof;
or

(2)

Shall have charge, care, or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as
executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such
person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article, and of
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner.

Plumbing means and includes all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water
pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed
clothes-washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents, and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to
water, sewer, or gas lines.

Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and
sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes.

Roominghouse means any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by
the owner or operator to three or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or
brother of the owner or operator.

41/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; and the term shall include the residue
from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber,
leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass crockery, and dust.

Supplied means paid for, furnished, or provided by or under the control of, the owner or operator.
Temporary housing means any tent, trailer, or other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable
and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on the same premises for more than 30
consecutive days.

Meaning of certain words. Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "roominghouse," "rooming unit," "premises," are
used in this division, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof."
(Code 1982, §§ 8-201.01—8-201.22)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 14-177. - Health o cer authorized to inspect premises.
The health officer is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling
units, rooming units, and premises located within this city in order that he may perform his duty of safeguarding the health and
safety of the occupants of dwellings and of the general public. For the purpose of making such inspections the health officer is
hereby authorized to enter, examine, and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, and premises.
The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit, and rooming unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the health
officer free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit and its premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of such
inspection, examination, and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof access to any part
of such dwelling or dwelling unit, or its premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as
are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this article or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful
order issued pursuant to the provisions of this article.
(Code 1982, § 8-202)

Sec. 14-178. - Enforcement; service of notices and orders; hearings.
(a)

Whenever the health officer determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a
violation of any provision of this article or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to such article, he shall give
notice of such alleged violation to the person responsible therefor, as provided in this section. Such notice shall:
(1)

Be put in writing;

(2)

Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued;

(3)

Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;

(4)

Be served upon the owner, his agent, or the occupant, as the case may require, provided that such notice shall
be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant, if a copy thereof is
served upon him personally; if a copy thereof is sent by certified mail to his last known address; if a copy
thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice; or if he is served with
such notice by any other method authorized or required under the laws of this state.

(b)

Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of
this article and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this article.

(c)

Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of
this article, or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this article, may request and shall be granted a hearing
on the matter before the board of health and the health officer, provided that such person shall file in the office of
42/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

the health officer a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds
therefor within ten days after the day the notice was served.
(d)

Upon receipt of such petition the health officer shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the
petitioner and the board of health written notice thereof. At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be
commenced not later than ten days after the day on which the petition was filed, provided that upon application of
the petitioner the health officer may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day
period, if in his judgment the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such postponement.

(e)

After such hearing, the board of health and the health officer shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the notice,
depending upon their finding as to whether the provisions of this article and of the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant to this article have been complied with. If the board of health and the health officer sustain or modify
such notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice served pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall
automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the health officer within
ten days after such notice is served. After a hearing in the case of any notice suspending any permit required by this
article or by any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this article, when such notice has been sustained by the
board of health and the health officer, the permit shall be deemed to have been revoked. Any such permit which
has been suspended by a notice shall be deemed to be automatically revoked if a petition for hearing is not filed in
the office of the health officer within ten days after such notice is served.

(f)

The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision of the health officer, shall be summarized,
reduced to writing, and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the health officer. Such record shall also
include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision
of the board of health and the health officer may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as
provided by the laws of this state.

(Code 1982, §§ 8-203.01—8-203.04)

Sec. 14-179. - Emergency procedures.
Whenever the health officer finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, he
may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken
as he deems necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this article, such order shall be effective
immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply with the order immediately, but upon petition to the
health officer shall be afforded a hearing before the board of health and the health officer as soon as possible. After such hearing,
depending upon their finding as to whether the provisions of this article and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to
such article have been complied with, the board of health and the health officer shall continue such order in effect, or modify it, or
revoke it.
(Code 1982, § 8-203.05)

Sec. 14-180. - Minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of
living, sleeping, cooking, or eating therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
(1)

Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good working condition and properly connected to a water
and sewer system approved by the health officer.

(2)

Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which affords privacy to a person within such room and which is
equipped with a flush water closet and a lavatory basin in good working condition and properly connected to a
water and sewer system approved by the health officer.
43/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(3)

Every dwelling unit shall contain, within a room which affords privacy to a person within such room, a bathtub or
working condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the health officer.

(4)

Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower required under the provisions of subsections (1), (2)
and (3) of this section shall be properly connected with both hot and cold water lines.

(5)

Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with adequate rubbish storage facilities, type and location of which are
approved by the health officer.

(6)

It is necessary for the health, welfare and protection of the citizens of the city that a mechanical garbage
disposal unit be installed as a part of the plumbing system in each living unit of a multiple dwelling house
containing two or more living units.

(7)

Every dwelling shall have supplied water-heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe
and good working condition, are properly connected with the hot water lines required under the provisions of
subsection (4) of this section, and are capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an
adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a
temperature of not less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit. Such supplied water-heating facilities shall be capable of
meeting the requirements of this subsection when the dwelling or dwelling unit heating facilities required
under the provisions of subsection (5) of this section are not in operation.

(8)

Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and open space at ground
level, as required by the laws of this state and the city.

(Code 1982, §§ 8-204.01—8-204.08)

Sec. 14-181. - Minimum standards for light, ventilation and heating.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of
living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
(1)

Every habitable room shall have at least one window facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total
window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be five percent of the floor area of such
room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window of any such room and such lightobstructing structures are located less than three feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the
ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be
included as contributing to the required minimum total window area.

(2)

Every habitable room shall have at least one window which can easily be opened, or such other device as will
adequately ventilate the room. The total of openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at
least 45 percent of the minimum window area size as required in subsection (1) of this section, except where
there is supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the health officer.

(3)

Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for
habitable rooms contained in subsections (1) and (2) of this section, except that no window shall be required in
adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet compartments equipped with a ventilation system.

(4)

Where there is electric service available from power lines which are not more than 300 feet away from a
dwelling, every habitable room of such dwelling shall contain at least two separate floor or wall-type electric
convenience outlets, or one such convenience outlet and one supplied ceiling-type electric light fixture; and
every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room, and public hall shall contain at least
one supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture. Every such outlet and fixture shall be properly installed,
shall be maintained in good and safe working condition, and shall be connected to the source of electric power
in a safe manner.

(5)

Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good
44/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

working condition, and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and
water closet compartments in every dwelling unit located therein to a temperature of at least 70 degrees
Fahrenheit, at a distance three feet above floor level, under ordinary minimum winter conditions.
(6)

Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling containing five or more dwelling units shall be
adequately lighted at all times. Every public hall and stairway in structures devoted solely to dwelling
occupancy and containing not more than four dwelling units may be supplied with conveniently located light
switches, controlling an adequate lighting system which may be turned on when needed, instead of full-time
lighting.

(7)

During that portion of each year when the health officer deems it necessary for protection against
mosquitoes, flies, and other insects, every door opening directly from a dwelling unit to outdoor space shall
have supplied screens and a self-closing device. Every window or other device with openings to outdoor space,
used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall likewise be supplied with screens, provided that such screens
shall not be required during such period in rooms deemed by the health officer to be located high enough in
the upper stories of buildings as to be free from such insects, and in rooms located in areas of the city which
are deemed by the health officer to have so few such insects as to render screens unnecessary.

(8)

Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for ventilation, and every other opening to a
basement which might provide an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with a screen or such other device as
will effectively prevent their entrance.

(Code 1982, §§ 8-205.01—8-205.08)

Sec. 14-182. - Safe and sanitary maintenance of parts of dwellings and dwelling units.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of
living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
(1)

Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling, and roof shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight, and rodentproof;
shall be capable of affording privacy; and shall be kept in good repair.

(2)

Every window, exterior door, and basement hatchway shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight, and
rodentproof and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair.

(3)

Every inside and outside stair, every porch, and every appurtenance thereto shall be so constructed as to be
safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and shall be
kept in sound condition and good repair.

(4)

Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary
working condition, free from defects, leaks, and obstructions.

(5)

Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor surface shall be constructed and
maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a
clean and sanitary condition.

(6)

Every supplied facility, piece of equipment, or utility which is required under this article shall be so constructed
or installed that it will function safely and effectively, and shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition.

(7)

No owner, operator, or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment, or utility which is required under
this article to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling let or occupied by
him, except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in
process, or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by the health officer.

(8)

No owner shall occupy or let to any other occupant any vacant dwelling unit unless it is clean, sanitary, and fit
for human occupancy.
45/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(Code 1982, §§ 8-206, 8-206.01—8-206.08)

Sec. 14-183. - Minimum space, use and location requirements.
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which
does not comply with the following requirements:
(1)

Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof and at
least 100 additional square feet of floor space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be
calculated on the basis of total habitable room area.

(2)

In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall
contain at least 70 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than
one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.

(3)

No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two or more sleeping rooms shall have such room arrangements that
access to a bathroom or water closet compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping
room can be had only by going through another sleeping room; nor shall room arrangements be such that
access to a sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room or a bathroom or water
closet compartment.

(4)

At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of at least seven feet, and
the floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered as
part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the
maximum permissible occupancy thereof.

(5)

No cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit.

(6)

No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless:
a.

The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and surface runoff water and are insulated
against dampness;

b.

The total window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum window area sizes as required in
section 14-181(1); and

c.

The total of openable window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum as required under
section 14-181(2), except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and
approved by the health officer.

(Code 1982, §§ 8-207, 8-207.01—8-207.06)

Sec. 14-184. - Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
(a)

Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and
sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.

(b)

Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling,
dwelling unit, and premises thereof which he occupies and controls.

(c)

Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by
placing it in the rubbish containers required by section 14-180(5).

(d)

Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his garbage and any other organic waste which
might provide food for rodents, in a clean and sanitary manner, by placing it in the garbage storage containers, or
by disposing of such waste in garbage disposal units, as required by section 14-180(6). It shall be the responsibility

46/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

of the owner to supply such facilities or containers for all dwelling units in a dwelling containing more than four
dwelling units and for all dwelling units located on-premises when more than four dwelling units share the same
premises. In all other cases it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to furnish such facilities or containers.
(e)

Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for hanging all screens and double or storm doors
and windows whenever the same are required under the provisions of this article or of any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant to this article, except where the owner has agreed to supply such service.

(f)

Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any
insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises. Every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling
containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is
the only one infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, whenever infestation is caused
by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a ratproof or reasonably insectproof condition, extermination shall
be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling,
or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall
be the responsibility of the owner.

(g)

Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall
be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.

(Code 1982, §§ 8-208.01—8-208.07)

Sec. 14-185. - Roominghouses.
No person shall operate a roominghouse, or shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any
roominghouse, except in compliance with the provisions of every section of this article, except the provisions of sections 14-180
and 14-184.
(1)

No person shall operate a roominghouse unless he holds a valid roominghouse permit issued by the health
officer in the name of the operator and for the specific dwelling or dwelling unit. The operator shall apply to
the health officer for such permit, which shall be issued by the health officer upon compliance by the operator
with the applicable provisions of this article and of any rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this article.
This permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the roominghouse at all times. No such permit
shall be transferable. Every person holding such a permit shall give notice in writing to the health officer within
24 hours after having sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of ownership of, interest in, or
control of any roominghouse. Such notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the
ownership or control of such roominghouse. Every roominghouse permit shall expire at the end of one year
following its date of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked as provided in this article.

(2)

Any person whose application for a permit to operate a roominghouse has been denied may request and shall
be granted a hearing on the matter before the board of health and the health officer, under the procedure
provided by section 14-178

(3)

Whenever, upon inspection of any roominghouse, the health officer finds that conditions or practices exist
which are in violation of any provision of this article or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this
article, the health officer shall give notice in writing to the operator of such roominghouse that unless such
conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period, to be determined by the health officer, the
operator's roominghouse permit will be suspended. At the end of such period, the health officer shall
reinspect such roominghouse, and if he finds that such conditions or practices have not been corrected, he
shall give notice in writing to the operator that the latter's permit has been suspended. Upon receipt of notice
of suspension, such operator shall immediately cease operation of such roominghouse, and no person shall
occupy for sleeping or living purposes any rooming unit therein.

(4)

Any person whose permit to operate a roominghouse has been suspended, or who has received notice from
47/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

the health officer that his permit is to be suspended unless existing conditions or practices at his
roominghouse are corrected, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the board of
health and the health officer, under the procedure provided by section 14-178, provided that if no petition for
such hearing is filed within ten days following the day on which such permit was suspended, such permit shall
be deemed to have been automatically revoked.
(5)

At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower, properly connected to a water and
sewer system approved by the health officer and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each eight
persons or fraction thereof residing within a roominghouse, including members of the operator's family
wherever they share the use of such facilities, provided that in a roominghouse where rooms are let only to
males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half the required number of water closets. All
such facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as to be reasonably accessible from a common hall or
passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied
with hot water at all times. No such facilities shall be located in a basement except by written approval of the
health officer.

(6)

The operator of every roominghouse shall change supplied bed linen and towels therein at least once each
week, and prior to the letting of any room to any occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the
maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner.

(7)

Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor space,
and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet
of floor space for each occupant thereof.

(8)

Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and open space at ground
level, as required by the laws of this state and the city.

(9)

The operator of every roominghouse shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, and
ceilings, and for maintenance of a sanitary condition in every other part of the roominghouse. He shall be
further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or building
is leased or occupied by the operator.

(10)

Every provision of this article which applies to roominghouses shall also apply to hotels, except to the extent
that any such provision may be found in conflict with the laws of this state or with the lawful regulations of any
state board or agency.

(Code 1982, §§ 8-209, 8-209.1—8-209.10)

Sec. 14-186. - Designation of un t dwellings and legal procedure of condemnation.
The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human habitation and the procedure for the condemnation and
placarding of such unfit dwellings or dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance with the following requirements:
(1)

Any dwelling or dwelling unit which shall be found to have any of the following defects shall be condemned as
unfit for human habitation and shall be so designated and placarded by the health officer:
a.

One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, or vermin-infested that it creates a
serious hazard to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public.

b.

One which lacks illumination, ventilation, or sanitation facilities adequate to protect the health or safety
of the occupants or of the public.

c.

One which because of its general condition or location is unsanitary or otherwise dangerous to the
health or safety of the occupants or of the public.

(2)

Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation, and so designated and placarded by
the health officer, shall be vacated within a reasonable time as ordered by the health officer.
48/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(3)

No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation shall
again be used for human habitation until written approval is secured from, and such placard is removed by,
the health officer. The health officer shall remove such placard whenever the defects upon which the
condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated.

(4)

No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned
as unfit for human habitation and placarded as such, except as provided in subsection (3) of this section.

(5)

Any person affected by any notice or order relating to the condemning and placarding of a dwelling or
dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before
the board of health and the health officer, under the procedure set forth in section 14-178

(Code 1982, §§ 8-210, 8-210.01—8-210.05)

Sec. 14-187. - Nonconforming dwellings and dwelling units.
(a)

Any dwelling or dwelling unit lawfully occupied and existing at the time of the enactment of this article and which
dwelling or dwelling unit does not meet the requirements of this article on the date of enactment will be excepted
from the provisions hereof for a period of six months, during which time the owner or occupant thereof shall make
such changes, alterations and additions as are necessary to meet the requirements of this article.

(b)

It is expressly provided that the exception stated in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply in any situation
provided in section 14-186, or in any situation where the safety or health of the occupant or occupants of a dwelling
or dwelling unit might be in jeopardy.

(Code 1982, §§ 8-211.01, 8-211.02)

Sec. 14-188. - Penalty for violation of this article.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or any provision of any rule or regulation adopted by the health
officer pursuant to the authority granted by this article shall upon conviction be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00 or more
than $500.00, or by imprisonment for not less than one day or more than 30 days. Each day's failure to comply with any such
provision shall constitute a separate violation.
(Code 1982, § 8-212)

Sec. 14-189. - Con ict of ordinances, e ect of partial invalidity.
In any case where a provision of this article is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or
health ordinance or code of the city existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the provision
which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. In any
case where a provision of any other ordinance or code of the city, existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this
article is derived, establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people, the
provisions of this article shall be deemed to prevail, and such other ordinances or codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the
extent that they may be found in conflict with this article.
(Code 1982, § 8-213.01)

Secs. 14-190—14-200. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - MINDEN HOUSING AGENCY

FOOTNOTE(S):
49/268

7/12/2019
(6) Editor's

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

note— Ord. No. 1098, § 1, adopted March 17, 2003, enacted provisions intended for use as article 15, sections 15-1—15-

9. At the direction of Ord. No. 1106, §§ 1, 2, adopted September 2, 2003, said provisions of Ord. No. 1098 have been redesignated
as Article VI, Division 2, §§ 14-201—14-208.
Sec. 14-201. - Rights and duties of housing agency.
The previously created and existing housing authority shall continue to exist as a housing agency under the Nebraska Housing
Agency Act and shall hereafter conduct its operations consistent with the said Act. It shall be named the Minden Housing Agency
and all property, rights and land, buildings, records, and equipment and any funds, money, revenue, receipts or assets of the
housing authority shall belong to the Minden Housing Agency as successor. All obligations, debts, commitments, and liabilities of
the housing authority shall become obligations, debts, commitments and liabilities of the Minden Housing Agency. Any previously
passed resolutions of the housing authority and any actions taken by the housing authority prior to January 1, 2000 with regard to
any project or program which is to be completed within or to be conducted for a 12-month period following January 1, 2000 and
which resolutions or action is lawful under state law as it exists prior to the operative date of LB-105 shall be a lawful resolution or
action of the Minden Housing Agency, binding upon and enforceable by or against the Minden Housing Agency, not withstanding
that such resolution or action is inconsistent with, not authorized, or prohibited under the provisions of the Nebraska Housing
Agency Act. All commissioners of the housing authority and all officers, legal counsel, technical experts, directors, and other
appointees or employees of the housing authority holding office or employment by virtue of any such prior law on January 1, 2000
shall be deemed to have been appointed or employed under the Nebraska Housing Agency Act.
(Ord. No. 1098, § 1, 3-17-03)

Sec. 14-202. - The Minden Housing Agency board.
The mayor/president shall appoint, subject to confirmation or denial of the council, five persons who, along with the resident
commissioner, if any, shall constitute the housing agency board, and such persons shall be called the commissioners. One
commissioner shall be appointed each year. Each commissioner shall serve a five-year term of office or until his/her successor is
duly appointed and qualified; provided that all vacancies shall be filled for the un-expired terms. The council may appoint one of
its members to serve as one of the five members of such housing agency for such term as the council may determine. No person
shall serve as a commissioner unless he/she resides within the area of operation of the Minden Housing Agency. A certificate of
the appointment or re-appointment of any commissioner shall be filed with the city clerk, and such certificate shall be conclusive
evidence of the proper appointment of such commissioner. The commissioner shall receive no compensation for his/her services,
but he/she shall be entitled to the necessary expenses, including travel expenses, incurred in discharge of his/her duties as
provided by §§ 81-1174—81-1177, R.R.S. A majority of commissioners shall constitute a quorum of the agency for the purpose of
conducting its business, exercising its powers, and for all other purposes. Action may be taken by the agency upon the vote of the
majority of the commissioners present and voting, unless the by-laws of the agency or the ordinance creating the agency require a
larger number. The commissioners shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among the commissioners and shall have
the power to employ an executive director who shall serve as ex-officio secretary of the agency. The agency may also employ legal
counsel for said services as it may require. It may employ accountants, appraisers, technical experts and such other officers,
agents, and employees as it may require and shall determine their qualifications, duties, compensations, and terms of office. The
agency may delegate such other powers and duties to its agents or employees, as it may deem proper. During his/her tenure and
for one year thereafter, no commissioner, officer or employee of the housing agency shall voluntarily acquire any interest, direct
or indirect, in any project or in any property included or planned to be included in any project, or in any contract or proposed
contract relating to a housing project. If any such commissioner, officer or employee involuntarily acquires any such interest, or
voluntarily or involuntarily acquired any such interest prior to appointment or employment as commissioner, office, or employee,
he/she shall immediately disclose his/her interest in writing to the agency, and such disclosure shall be entered upon the minutes
of the agency, and he/she shall not participate in any action by the agency relating to the property or contract in which he/she has
any such interest. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute misconduct in office. This prohibition shall not
50/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

apply to the acquisition of any interest in notes or bonds of the agency issued in connection with any housing project, or to the
execution of the agreements by banking institutions for deposit or handling of funds in connection with a project or to act as
trustee under any trust indenture, or to utility services, the rates for which are fixed or controlled by a governmental agency. This
section shall not be construed to preclude, regulate or restrict the participation of any tenant of the agency from serving, if
appointed, as a commissioner of such authority, but he/she may not participate in any decision solely affecting his/her individual
interest.
(Ord. No. 1098, § 1, 3-17-03)

Sec. 14-203. - Appointment of resident commissioner.
A sixth commissioner, to be known as the resident commissioner, shall be appointed to the governing body by the
mayor/president of the city council, subject to confirmation or denial by the council. To select the initial resident commissioner, or
to fill subsequent vacancies in the position, the housing agency shall notify any resident advisory board or other resident
organization and all adult persons directly assisted by such agency, to the effect that the position of resident commissioner is open
and that if any such person is interested in being considered as a candidate for the position, such person should notify the housing
agency, in writing, within 30 days of the person's willingness to be considered and to serve as resident commissioner. The names
of all persons interested who have notified the housing agency of their interest in so serving shall be forwarded to the
mayor/president of the council and the resident commissioner shall be appointed from the list of names, subject to confirmation
by the council. Upon the appointment of a resident commissioner, the certificate of appointment shall state the term is for five
years or when no longer an eligible resident, whichever occurs first. In the event that no qualified person has submitted his or her
name to the housing agency as being interested as a candidate for the position, and the housing agency has received no
notification of interest in serving as a resident commissioner by any person, no resident commissioner shall be required to be
selected. In the event a resident commissioner is appointed and resigns from the position prior to completion of the appointed
term, or is no longer an eligible resident, or is otherwise disqualified or removed from the board, and a vacancy is created, the
housing authority shall solicit new candidate(s) for the position following the same procedure set forth above. In the event that no
resident commissioner is selected and the position is un-filled, the agency shall re-notify all adult persons directly by the agency
that the position of resident commissioner is open and solicit these persons for candidates for the position not less than once
annually. In the event no resident commissioner is appointed, the housing agency shall continue its duties with five members.
(Ord. No. 1098, § 1, 3-17-03)

Sec. 14-204. - Removal of commissioners.
The mayor/president may remove a commissioner for neglect of duty, misconduct in office, or conviction of a felony, in the
manner prescribed hereinafter. The mayor/president shall send a notice of removal to such commissioner, which notice shall set
forth the charges against him/her. Unless within the ten days from the receipt of such notice, the commissioner files with the clerk
a request for a hearing before the council, the commissioner shall be deemed removed from office. If a request for a hearing is
filed with the clerk, the council shall hold a hearing not sooner than ten days after the date a hearing is requested, at which time
the commissioner shall have the right to appear in person or by counsel and the council shall determine whether the removal shall
be upheld. If the removal is not upheld, the commissioner shall continue to hold his/her office.
(Ord. No. 1098, § 1, 3-17-03)

Sec. 14-205. - Autonomy of agency.
The Minden Housing Agency is a political subdivision, independent from the city and operated by the housing agency. The
housing agency shall constitute a public body, corporate and politic, and shall have all the powers necessary or convenient to carry
out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of the Nebraska Housing Agency Act.
(Ord. No. 1098, § 1, 3-17-03)

51/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 14-206. - Housing Agency Act adopted.
Except as otherwise herein specifically provided, the definitions, terms, provisions and conditions set forth in the Nebraska
Statutes under the Nebraska Housing Agency Act are hereby adopted by reference, as they now exist, or may hereafter be
amended, for the operation and management of the Minden Housing Agency, and the housing agency commission shall fully
comply with and be governed by the terms of the Nebraska Housing Agency Act.
(Ord. No. 1098, § 1, 3-17-03)

Sec. 14-207. - Policies and procedures.
The housing agency shall adopt and promulgate fair and equitable policies establishing a plan for selection of applicants. The
plan shall include standards for eligibility, procedures for prompt notification of eligibility or disqualification, and procedures for
maintaining a waiting list of eligible applicants for whom vacancies are not immediately available. Eligible applicants shall be
offered available vacancies as provided in such policies.
(Ord. No. 1098, § 1, 3-17-03)

Sec. 14-208. - Rules and regulations.
The housing agency may adopt, promulgate, and enforce rules and regulations related to carrying our the purposes of the
local housing agency and exercising its powers and to amend or repeal such rules and regulations from time to time.
(Ord. No. 1098, § 1, 3-17-03)

Sec. 14-409. - Filing of plans.
The housing agency shall file with the city clerk a copy of the five-year plan and annual plan required by Section 511 of The
Federal Quality Housing and Work Responsibility Act of 1998. The plans shall be filed with 30 days after the date the plan is filed
with department of housing and urban development.
(Ord. No. 1098, § 1, 3-17-03)

Sec. 14-210. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS

Sec. 14-211. - Authority of mayor and council to condemn.
Upon complaint being made by any citizen, or upon its own motion, the council shall fix a time for hearing the matter of
condemnation of any property on account of its being unsafe for the public interests, public health and for the public safety, and
give notice to the owners, occupants or the agents of the owners or occupants of such structure, if any, either by personal service
or by publication in a newspaper for at least two weeks prior to such hearing. At such hearing evidence shall be submitted for and
against the necessity for the declaring of such property as a menace, or the condemnation thereof. If it shall be found necessary
for the safety of the public and the health of the citizens that any structure or property should be condemned, the mayor and city
council shall make out an order to that effect, ordering the owner or occupants to remove, destroy or otherwise repair such
structure or building that it may be safe for the public and not injurious to the health of the community. Such order shall specify
the time in which it must be complied with, and in case of failure to comply with the same by the owner or occupants, the city shall

52/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

proceed to remove such nuisance and tax the cost thereof to the owners of the real estate, if the nuisance is real estate, if not, to
charge the cost to the general fund of the city. In any event, the cost of removing such nuisance shall be paid out of the general
fund of the city in the first instance.
(Code 1982, § 4-801)

State law reference— Authority to demolish, R.R.S. 1943, § 18-1722.
Secs. 14-212—14-230. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. - MOVING OF BUILDINGS

FOOTNOTE(S):
(7) Cross

reference— Moving buildings, § 14-29.

(7) State

Law reference— Authority to regulate, R.R.S. 1943, § 17-142.

Sec. 14-231. - Penalty for violation of article.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, where no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to a fine
of not less than $100.00, nor exceeding $1,000.00 for each and every offense. Any builder or contractor who shall construct or
alter any building or other structure or make any such improvement costing $1,000.00 or more, and any architect having charge of
such structure or improvement who shall cause or permit to be constructed any building or make any such alteration or
improvement in violation of this article, shall be liable for the penalties provided and imposed by this section.
(Code 1982, § 8-106; Ord. No. 916, § 5, 12-19-88)

Sec. 14-232. - Authority of light commissioner; deposit required.
Any person, having first obtained the proper permit from the council, who desires to move any building in the city that may
necessitate the removing of any wires or any apparatus of the electric system shall first notify the light commissioner of the
proposed moving, and he shall view the building and route of such moving and ascertain to what extent the wires and apparatus
of the light system shall have to be removed and shall estimate the expense thereof, which amount the applicant shall deposit
with the light commissioner. All the work of removing, changing and replacing the wires or apparatus of the light system due to the
proposed moving shall be done under the direction and supervision of the light commissioner and shall be paid out of the money
deposited with the commissioner. Any surplus remaining after all expenses are paid shall be returned to the applicant. In case the
deposit shall be insufficient, the light commissioner shall at any time during the progress of the work demand such additional
deposit as he deems necessary.
(Code 1982, § 12-116)

Sec. 14-233. - Permit required.
No person shall move any building to a proposed site in the city without first obtaining a permit therefore; provided, however,
that a moving permit shall not be required to move a new modular home, as defined in chapter 46.
(Ord. No. 900, § 1(8-101.01), 8-3-87)

Sec. 14-234. - Application for permit.

53/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Any person desiring a permit required in this article shall make application to the mayor and council on a blank form furnished
by the city clerk giving the estimated cost, size, the material of which the building is proposed to be constructed, the proposed
location of the lot on which it will stand, and the required information under section 14-233 for a moving permit.
(Code 1982, § 8-102; Ord. No. 916, § 3, 12-19-88)

Sec. 14-235. - Permit application procedure.
(a)

The application for a moving permit required by section 14-233 for all structures other than garages with outside
dimensions of 24 feet by 24 feet or less and a moving height of 14 feet or less shall be filed with the city clerk. Such
application shall be first submitted to the planning and zoning commission for a recommendation to the city
council. The planning and zoning commission is authorized to adopt such procedures as may be necessary. The
recommendation of the planning and zoning commission shall be submitted to the city council. No application for a
permit required by section 14-233 shall be granted without affirmative vote of three-fourths of the members of the
city council.

(b)

The application for a moving permit for a garage with outside dimensions of 24 feet by 24 feet or less and a moving
height of 14 feet or less shall be submitted to the city administrator, and if he is satisfied that the proposed garage
and location come within the proper regulations, he shall approve such application.

(Ord. No. 916, § 2(8-101.04), 12-19-88)

Sec. 14-236. - Fees, deposits and bonds.
(a)

All fees, deposits, and bonds shall be deposited with the city treasurer. Upon the refusal of the city council to grant
a permit, all deposits and bonds shall be returned to the applicant.

(b)

After the building has been moved, the city administrator shall prepare a written statement of all expenses incurred
in removing and replacing all property belonging to the city, all damage to property belonging to the city, and all
known claims to persons or private property. If there are no claims to persons or private property, the city
administrator shall authorize the city treasurer to return to the applicant all deposits after the city treasurer deducts
the sum sufficient to pay for all costs and expenses for damage done to the property of the city. If there are claims
to persons or private property, the city council shall authorize return of such portion to the applicant after
deduction for all damages.

(Ord. No. 883, § 5(8-101.05), 9-16-85)

Sec. 14-237. - Deposit for moving permit.
The application for a permit required by section 14-233 shall be accompanied by:
(1)

For all structures other than garages with outside dimensions of 24 feet by 24 feet or less and a moving height
of 14 feet or less, a performance bond, executed by a bonding or surety company authorized to do business in
the state, in the amount of $5,000.00 for a dwelling and in the amount of $1,000.00 for all other structures,
except garages with outside dimensions of 24 feet by 24 feet and a moving height of 14 feet or less, for the
outside remodeling of such dwelling or structure to be completed within one year, and conditioned upon the
assurance that this article and other applicable ordinances and laws will be complied with. Such bond shall run
to the city for the use and benefit of any person intended to be protected thereby and shall be conditioned on
the payment of any damages or losses resulting from any malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance or
negligence in connection with any of the activities or conditioned upon which the permit applied for is granted.
Before the performance bond may be released, the city administrator shall determine that outside remodeling
has been completed within one year and that there are no construction liens of record, delinquent real estate
taxes or special assessments. No performance bond shall be required for a building other than a dwelling.
54/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(2)

The city council reserves the right to determine if the application and specifications in this section have been com
before the performance bond may be released.

(3)

A cash deposit, in the sum of $1,000.00 for all structures other than garages with outside dimensions of 24
feet by 24 feet or less and a moving height of 14 feet or less, and in the sum of $100.00 for a garage of such
described dimensions or less, as an indemnity for any damage which the city may sustain by reason of
damage or injury to any highway, street or alley, sidewalk, fire hydrant or other property of the city, which may
be caused by or incidental to the moving of any building over, along or across any street, highway, or alley in
the city, and to indemnify the city against any claims or damages to persons or private property, and to satisfy
any claims by private individuals arising out of, caused by or incidental to the moving of any building over,
along, or across any street, highway, or alley in the city; provided, however, that such cash deposit shall not be
required if the mover has a permit from the state department of roads for either the movement of over
dimensional mobile homes or modular housing or a permit to move buildings on state highways.

(Ord. No. 916, § 1(8-101.03), 12-19-88)

Sec. 14-238. - Approval of permit.
The application shall be submitted to the city administrator, and if he is satisfied that the proposed building comes within
proper regulations as to zoning and fire hazards, he shall approve the application.
(Code 1982, § 8-103; Ord. No. 916, § 4, 12-19-88)

Secs. 14-239—14-260. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. - SATELLITE DISH RECEIVERS

Sec. 14-261. - Penalty for violation of article.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of sections 14-262 and 14-264 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $10.00
nor more than $100.00 for each and every offense.
(Ord. No. 888, § 1(8-101.09), 6-2-86)

Sec. 14-262. - Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to install a television satellite dish receiving antenna unless and until a permit therefore
shall have been first obtained, except for those installations which are for temporary demonstration purposes only. Any person
desiring a permit shall make application to the mayor and council on a blank form furnished by the city clerk giving the estimated
cost, size, and the proposed location on the lot on which it will be located. Such application shall be submitted to the city
administrator, and if he is satisfied that the proposed dish receiver meets the proper regulations, he shall approve the dish
receiver. Fees for the issuance of permits shall be set by the council by resolution.
(Ord. No. 888, § 1(8-101.06), 6-2-86; Ord. No. 1018, § 1, 8-22-96)

Sec. 14-263. - Location and size.
All satellite dish receiving antennas shall be placed to the house or placed within the buildable lot area; provided, however,
that on corner lots, no such satellite dish receiver shall be placed in the side yard adjacent to the street side of such corner lot
determined as follows: No part of any satellite dish receiver shall project beyond a line projected along the side of the existing

55/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

dwelling which is closest to the side street right-of-way. The diameter of all satellite dish receiving antennas shall not exceed ten
feet. No part of a satellite dish receiving antenna may be placed within six feet of any property line. No part of a satellite dish
receiving antenna may exceed a height of 14 feet above the established grade.
(Ord. No. 888, § 1(8-101.07), 6-2-86; Ord. No. 1018, § 2, 8-22-96)

Sec. 14-264. - Demonstration permitted.
A satellite dish receiving antenna may be temporarily placed on a lot for demonstration purposes for a period of time not to
exceed 72 hours.
(Ord. No. 888, § 1(8-101.08), 6-2-86)

Sec. 14-265. - Exceptions to provisions of article.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any satellite dish receiver/antenna that is 24 inches in diameter or less, so long
as said satellite dish receiver/antenna is attached to the house at said location.
(Ord. No. 994, § 1, 9-20-94; Ord. No. 1018, § 3, 8-22-96)

Secs. 14-266—14-285. - Reserved.
ARTICLE X. - FENCES AND SCREEN WALLS

Sec. 14-286. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Fence or screen wall means any vertical structure, other than a building or plant material, which is for the purpose of
obstructing visual observation or for the purpose of obstructing pedestrian, automotive or animal movement or for the purpose of
beautification and which is attached to the ground or to a building, but excluding retaining walls.
(Ord. No. 982, § 1(8-801), 1-3-94)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 14-287. - General requirements for residential districts.
Fences or screen walls shall be permitted in any residential yard, provided, that any fence, outdoor wall, screen, or shrubbery
located in the front yard within two feet of the front lot line shall not be in excess of 42 inches in height above ground level, and
further provided that the location of such fences or screen walls shall be in accordance with the vision clearance requirements set
out in this article.
(Ord. No. 982, § 2(8-802), 1-3-94)

Sec. 14-288. - Vision clearance at intersections.
No shrubs, trees, bushes or other plant material shall be planted, maintained or allowed to grow and no fence shall be erected
so as to hinder vision in the vicinity of an intersection of two streets, within a sight distance triangle as stated in the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials Geometric Design of Highways and Streets.
(1)

Fences, screens, and shrubbery in any yard along any driveway shall not exceed 42 inches in height above
56/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

ground level within two feet of the front lot line and shall not interfere or obstruct the view of drivers backing
out of the driveway on to any street or alley.
(2)

Fences or screens along the side and rear yard lot lines shall not exceed eight feet in height above ground
level.

(3)

Fences and screens located within the "buildable area" on a lot shall not exceed ten feet in height above
ground level.

(4)

All fences shall be constructed of wood, metal, plastics, fiberglass or masonry materials, shall be structurally
sound, and shall have a neat and finished appearance. No fence shall use barbed wire or electrically charged
fence material in its construction.

(5)

Fences must be maintained in good repair. The building and zoning inspector may order any dilapidated,
dangerous or nonconforming fence removed.

(6)

The provisions of this article shall not apply to retaining walls.

(Ord. No. 982, § 3(8-803), 1-3-94)

Sec. 14-289. - General requirement for commercial and industrial districts.
(a)

The maximum height of any fence within a commercial or industrial district is 96 inches; and four strands of barbed
wire may be placed at a 45 degree angle on top of the fence.

(b)

A fence shall not be permitted within any front yard except by conditional use permit and a fence shall not be
permitted in the vision clearance area as defined in section 14-288

(Ord. No. 982, § 4(8-804), 1-3-94)

Sec. 14-290. - Permit required.
No fence or screen wall shall be erected, constructed or moved until a fence building permit shall have been procured from
the building inspector. Application for a permit for a fence shall include a sketch of the lot, the location of any buildings on the lot,
the proposed fence, and sufficient dimensions to accurately locate these features. It shall also include the type of materials to be
used to build the fence. The fence building permit shall be based on the adopted building permit fee schedule.
(Ord. No. 982, § 5(8-805), 1-3-94)

Secs. 14-291—14-300. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XI. - NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM

FOOTNOTE(S):
(8) Editor's

note— Ord. No. 1109 set out the specific provisions for the National Flood Insurance Program, and Ord. No. 1110, § 1,

adopted January 5, 2004, specifically adopted said provisions as part of this Code.
Sec. 14-301. - Statutory authorization, ndings of fact and purposes.
(a)

Statutory authorization. The legislature of the state has in §§ 31-1001—31-1022, R.R.S. 1943 assigned the
responsibility to local government units to adopt floodplain management regulations designed to protect the public
health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the city council ordains as follows.

(b)

Findings of fact.
(1)

Flood losses resulting from periodic inundation. The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to inundation
57/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruptions of commerce and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of
the tax base all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(2)

General causes of the flood losses. These flood losses are caused by:
a.

The cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities.

b.

The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to others, which are
inadequately elevated or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.

(c)

Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and
to minimize those losses described in subsection (b)(1) by applying the provisions of this ordinance/resolution to:
a.

Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flooding or cause
undue increases in flood heights or velocities.

b.

Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities which serve such uses, be provided with
flood protection at the time of initial construction.

c.

Protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazard.

d.

Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the community to purchase flood insurance in
the National Flood Insurance Program.

(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 1-5-04)

Sec. 14-302. - Local administrator responsibilities.
The city administrator hereby has these added responsibilities and is authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions
of this article and all other ordinance/resolutions of the city now in force or hereafter adopted, related to zoning, subdivision or
building codes.
(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 1-5-04)

Sec. 14-303. - Local administrator additional responsibilities.
The city administrator shall be appointed to these additional responsibilities by resolution of the governing body and his
appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service. During temporary absence or disability of the city
administrator, the governing body of the city shall designate an acting administrator.
(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 1-5-04)

Sec. 14-304. - Designation of current FHBM/FIRM.
The governing body of the city hereby designates the current flood hazard boundary map/flood insurance rate map dated
January 16, 2004, and any revisions thereto, as the official map to be used in determining those areas of special flood hazard.
(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 1-5-04)

Sec. 14-305. - Permits required.
No person, firm or corporation shall initiate any floodplain development or substantial improvement or cause the same to be
done without first obtaining a separate permit for development as defined in this article.
(1)

Within special flood hazard areas on the official map, separate floodplain development permits are required
for all new construction, substantial improvements and other developments, including the placement of
manufactured homes.

(2)

Application. To obtain a floodplain development permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefore in
58/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every such application shall:
a.

Identify and describe the development to be covered by the floodplain development permit for which
application is made.

b.

Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be done by lot, block, tract and house and
street address, or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building
or development.

c.

Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed development is intended.

d.

Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed construction.

e.

Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent who may be required to submit evidence to indicate
such authority.

f.

Within designated floodplain areas, be accompanied by elevations of the lowest floor. Including
basement, or in the case of floodproofed non-residential structures, the elevation to which it shall be
floodproofed. Documentation or certification of such elevations will be maintained by the city
administrator.

g.

Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the city administrator (i.e., require a
statement from the applicant that they are aware that elevating or floodproofing structures above the
minimum levels will result in premium reduction, especially in the case of non-residential floodproofing
when a minus one foot (-1') penalty is assessed at the time of rating the structure for the policy
premium.)

(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 1-5-04)

Sec. 14-306. - Development permit applications review.
The city administrator shall review all development permit applications to determine if the site of the proposed development
is reasonably safe from flooding and that all necessary permits have been received as required by federal or state law.
(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 1-5-04)

Sec. 14-307. - All applications review (see section 14-321).
The city administrator, in reviewing all applications for new construction, substantial improvements, prefabricated buildings,
placement of manufactured homes and other developments(s) (as defined in section 14-321 of this article) will:
(1)

Obtain, review and reasonably utilize, if available, any regulatory flood elevation data and floodway data
available from federal, state or other sources, until such other data is provided by the federal insurance
administration in a flood insurance study; and require within special flood hazard areas on the official map
that the following performance standards be met:
a.

That until a floodway has been designated:No development or substantial improvement may be
permitt4ed within the identified floodplain unless the applicant has demonstrated that the proposed
development or substantial improvement, when combined with all other existing and reasonably
anticipated developments or substantial improvements, will not increase the water surface elevation of
the 100-year flood more than one foot at any location.

b.

Residential construction: New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation.

c.

Non-residential construction: New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial
or other non-residential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least
one foot above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
59/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

floodproofed so that below such a level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable
to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy, A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify
that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the local
administrator.
d.

Require for all new construction and substantial improvements: That fully enclosed areas below the
lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than
a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of
all openings shall be no higher than on foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.

(2)

Require the use of construction materials that are resistant to flood damage.

(3)

Require the use of construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.

(4)

Required that new structures be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including
the effects of buoyancy.

(5)

New structures be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

(6)

Assure that all manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist floatation, collapse, or lateral movement.
Manufactured homes much be anchored in accordance with State laws, local building codes and FEMA
guidelines. In the event that over-the-top frame ties to ground anchors are used, the following specific
requirements (or their equivalent) shall be met:
a.

Over-the-top ties be provided a each of the four corners of the manufactured home with two additional
ties per side a the intermediate locations and manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring one
additional tie per side.

b.

Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional tires per side a t intermediate
points and manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side.

(7)

c.

All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds.

d.

Any additions to manufactured homes be similarly anchored.

Assure that all manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within special flood hazard
areas on the community's official map on sites:
a.

Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;

b.

In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;

c.

In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or

d.

In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred
"substantial damage" as the result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the
lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated at least on foot above the base flood elevation and be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of
subsection (6).
60/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(8)

Assure that manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured ho
subdivision within special flood hazard areas on the community's official map that are not subject to the provisio
(7) be elevated so that either:
a.

The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation, or

b.

The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at
least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored
to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of section (6).

(9)

Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within the identified special flood hazard areas on the
community's official map either:
a.

Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,

b.

Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or

c.

Meet the permit requirements and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes"
of this article. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently
attached additions.

(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 1-5-04)

Sec. 14-308. - Subdivision applications.
The governing body of the city shall review all subdivision applications and other proposed new developments (including
manufactured home parks or subdivisions) and shall make findings of fact and assure that:
(1)

All such proposed developments are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

(2)

Subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments (including proposals for manufactured home
parks and subdivisions), greater than five acres or 50 lots, whichever is lesser, include within such proposals
regulatory flood elevation data in special flood hazard areas.

(3)

Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.

(4)

All public utilities and facilities are located so as to minimize or eliminate flood damage.

(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 1-5-04)

Sec. 14-309. - Water and sewage systems.
New and replacement water and sewage systems shall be constructed to eliminate or minimize infiltration by, or discharge
into floodwaters. Moreover, on-site waste disposal systems will be designed to avoid impairment or contamination during
flooding.
(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 1-5-04)

Sec. 14-310. - Storage of material and equipment.
The storage or processing of materials that are in time of flooding buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to
human, animal or plant life is prohibited. Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage
by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if readily removable from the area within the time available after flood
warning.
(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 1-5-04)

Sec. 14-311. - Flood-carrying capacity within any watercourse.
61/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

The governing body of the city will ensure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained. The city will notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating office
(Nebraska Natural Resources Commission) prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit copies of such
notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Moreover, the city will work with appropriate state and federal
agencies in every way possible in complying with the National Flood Insurance Program in accordance with the National Disaster
Protection Act of 1973.
(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 1-5-04)

Sec. 14-312. - Variance procedures.
(a)

The city board of adjustments as established by city council shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from the requirements of this article.

(b)

The board of adjustments shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement,
decision, or determination made by the city administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article.

(c)

Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustments or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the
district court as provided in § 23-168, R.R.S. 1943 (for counties); 19-912, R.R.S. 1943 (for municipalities).

(d)

In passing upon such applications, the board of adjustments shall consider all technical evaluation, all relevant
factors, standards specified in other sections of this article, and;
(1)

The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

(2)

The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

(3)

The susceptibility of proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the
individual owner;

(4)

The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

(5)

The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

(6)

The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;

(7)

The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

(8)

The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that
area;

(9)

The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
a.

The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the
effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and,

b.

The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance
and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets
and bridges.

(e)

Conditions for variances.
(1)

Generally variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot
of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing items ((2)—(5) below) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

(2)

Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitations will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.

(3)

Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering
62/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(4)

Variances shall only be issued upon:
a.

A showing of good and sufficient cause,

b.

A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant,
and

c.

A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances/resolutions.

(5)

The applicant shall be given a written notice over the signature of a community official that:
a.

The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base flood level will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage,
and

b.

Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall
be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required by this article.

(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 1-5-04)

Sec. 14-313. - Non-conforming use.
(a)

A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the passage or amendment of the
ordinance/resolution, but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article may be continued subject to
the following conditions:
(1)

If such use is discontinued for six consecutive months, any future use of the building premises shall conform
to this article. The utility department shall notify the building official in writing of instances of nonconforming
uses where utility services have been discontinued for a period of six months.

(2)

Uses or adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances shall not be entitled to continue as non conforming
uses.

(b)

If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including flood, is shall not be reconstructed if
the cost is more than 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred except that if it is
reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this article. This limitation does not include the cost of any
alteration to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, building, or safety codes or regulations or the cost
of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic
Places.

(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 1-5-04)

Sec. 14-314. - Penalties for violation.
Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions
and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any
person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more
than $100.00, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violations continues shall be
considered a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city council or other appropriate authority from taking such other lawful action as
is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 1-5-04)

Sec. 14-315. - Abrogation and greater restrictions.
63/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate or impair any existent easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this article imposes greater restrictions, the provision of this article shall prevail. All other ordinances/resolutions
inconsistent with this article are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 1-5-04)

Sec. 14-316. - Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be
liberally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal, of any other powers granted by
state statutes.
(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 1-5-04)

Sec. 14-317. - Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood height may be increased by
man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This article does not imply that areas
outside floodplain district boundaries or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damage. This
article shall not create liability on the part of city council or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that may result
from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 1-5-04)

Sec. 14-318. - Severability.
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this article shall not be affected thereby.
(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 1-5-04)

Sec. 14-319. - Appeal.
Where a request for a permit to develop or a variance is denied by the building official the applicant may apply for such permit
or variance directly to the board of appeals.
(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 1-5-04)

Sec. 14-320. - Con icting ordinances/resolutions.
The ordinance/resolution shall take precedence over conflicting ordinances/resolutions or parts of ordinances/resolutions.
The governing body of the city may, from time to time, amend this article to reflect any and all changes in the National Flood
Disaster Protection Act of 1973. The regulations of this article are in compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program
Regulations as published in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations and the 1983 Nebraska Floodplain Management Act.
(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 1-5-04)

Sec. 14-321. - De nitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance/resolution shall be interpreted so as to give them
the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to gibe this ordinance/resolution its most reasonable application.

Base flood means the flood having on percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
64/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or
other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is complete before the effective
date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.

Expansion of existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

Flood means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(1)

The overflow of inland or tidal waters.

(2)

The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.

Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the administrator has delineated both the
special flood hazard areas and the risk premium applicable to the community.

Floodplain means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which
reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their
contents.

Floodway means the channel of the river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.

Historic structure means any structure that is:
(a)

Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the department of
interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;

(b)

Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical
significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;

(c)

Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which
have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or

(d)

Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs
that have been certified either:
(1)

By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior, or

(2)

Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs.

Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not
considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable no-elevation design requirements of this article.

65/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is
designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home"
does not include a "recreational vehicle".

Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

New construction means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced
on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.

New manufactured home park or subdivision mean a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.

100-year flood means the condition of flooding having a one percent chance of annual occurrence.
Principally above ground means that at least 51 percent of the actual cash value of the structure is above ground.
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is:
(1)

Built on a single chassis;

(2)

400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

(3)

Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

(4)

Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use.

Regulatory flood elevation means the water surface elevation of the 100-year flood.
Special flood hazard area is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to one percent or greater chance of flooding
in any given year.

Start of construction [for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the coastal Barrier Resources Act
(Pub. L. 97-348)] includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start
of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the
permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab of footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does in include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such s garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not pat of the main structure. For a substantial improvement,
the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether of
not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home, and a gas or
liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.

Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

66/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This
includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
(1)

Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or
safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or

(2)

Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a "historic structure."

Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the terms of a floodplain management ordinance.
Violation means the failure of a structure of other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain
management regulations.
(Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 1-5-04)

Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES
FOOTNOTE(S):
(9) Cross

reference— Administration, ch. 2; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 58; taxation, ch. 78.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 18-1. - Compliance with pure food laws.
All vendors of products and merchandise within the corporate limits of the city shall conform to the pure food laws of the
state.
(Code 1982, § 11-106)

State law reference— Pure food act, R.R.S. 1943, § 81-216.01 et seq.
Secs. 18-2—18-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATIONAL TAXES

FOOTNOTE(S):
(10) State

Law reference— Occupational taxes, R.R.S. 1943, § 17-525.

Sec. 18-26. - Penalty for violation of article.
Any person violating this article or any of its provisions shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined in any sum not exceeding $500.00 and costs of prosecution and shall stand committed until such fine and costs are
fully paid.
(Code 1982, § 11-122)

67/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 18-27. - Licenses.
(a)

There is hereby created in the city a business license which all new businesses opening within the zoning
jurisdiction of the city shall be required to obtain.

(b)

The business license must be approved by the city zoning inspector before any city utilities shall be delivered to the
property applying for the business license.

(c)

Such business license shall be applied for on a form provided for such purpose which form shall contain at a
minimum the number of the license issued, the date issued, the owner of the property, the name of the person
making the statement or their authorized representative and their respective addresses, the property to be used as
a business, its legal description, the type of business to be operated, the zoning district it is proposed to be located
in and whether such license was approved by the city zoning inspector. There shall be no charge for making
application to the city for such license.

(d)

Such business license shall be approved by the city zoning inspector when all zoning restrictions contained within
the city ordinances are complied with by the business making application for such business license.

(Ord. No. 988, § 1, 5-2-94)

Sec. 18-28. - Levy.
There is hereby levied an occupation tax or license fee on persons, occupations, and businesses within the limits of the city as
designated and enumerated in this article for the purpose of raising revenue for the general fund of the city and for the purpose
of maintaining the peace, good government and welfare of the corporation, and its trade, commerce and manufacturers.

Circuses, menageries, carnivals. For each circus, menagerie or carnival including sideshows within 300 feet of the main tent,
the sum of $50.00 per day, or $200.00 per week.

Miscellaneous shows. For each other show or entertainment not specifically mentioned in this section, including dog or pony
shows and tent shows of all kinds, excepting any show or entertainment which shall be held or given in any theater or other public
building, the sum of $10.00 per day.

Games of amusement. For each game of amusement including cane racks, knife racks, and doll baby racks not prohibited by
the state statutes or by the ordinances of the city, the sum of $5.00 per day.

Telephone business. On the business of conducting and operating a telephone exchange whereby telephone connections are
made and maintained between homes and places of business within the city, the sum of $80.00 per year.

Telegraph business. On the business of sending and receiving messages from persons within the state or to other persons
within the city, the sum of $5.00 per year.

Express business. On the business of receiving, transmitting and delivering packages from persons within this state to other
persons within the state, the sum of $20.00 per year.
(Code 1982, §§ 11-101, 11-110—11-115)

Sec. 18-29. - Tax period.
All taxes levied in this article shall be due and payable in advance. Taxes levied and paid at a yearly rate shall be for a period
beginning May 1 and ending the last day of the following April. When any business taxed in this article at a yearly rate shall
commence during any year, the proportional part of the yearly taxes shall be paid for the portion of the year remaining until the
following May 1.
(Code 1982, § 11-117)

68/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 18-30. - Exceptions.
No taxes in this article shall apply to any business or occupation which is wholly interstate or which is operated by any
department of the government of the United States, or this state, county or other political subdivision.
(Code 1982, § 11-118)

Sec. 18-31. - Treasurer; receipts.
All taxes payable as provided in this article shall be paid to the city treasurer at the times specified in this article, and the
treasurer shall give a duplicate receipt therefor, one copy of which shall be filed with the city clerk and the other copy retained by
the taxpayer.
(Code 1982, § 11-119)

Sec. 18-32. - Collections.
In case of neglect, refusal or failure of any person to pay any of the taxes provided and levied in this article when due, the city
treasurer may distrain for the taxes in the same manner as for the collection of other taxes, or the city may recover the taxes in a
civil suit brought in the name of the city in any court having jurisdiction thereof.
(Code 1982, § 11-120)

Secs. 18-33—18-55. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - BINGO
FOOTNOTE(S):
(11)

State Law reference— Bingo act, R.R.S. 1943, § 9-201 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 18-56. - Penalty for violation of article.
Any association violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, if convicted, shall be fined in any
sum not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense and shall automatically stand committed to the city jail, until
such fine and costs of prosecution are paid in full. Each day that a violation of this article continues shall be considered a separate
and distinct offense.
(Code 1982, § 7-309)

Sec. 18-57. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Association means any board, society, corporation, church, or other entity that has been duly licensed by the state to conduct
the game of bingo within the state.
(Code 1982, § 7-301)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.

69/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 18-58. - Conformance to ordinances and statutes.
Games of bingo shall be conducted within the city strictly in accordance with all ordinances of the city, not inconsistent with
the statutes of the state.
(Code 1982, § 7-304)

Sec. 18-59. - Tax levied.
A tax of ten percent of the gross receipts of each licensed association from the conducting of the game of bingo within the city
is hereby imposed and levied against each such association, payable on or before the tenth day of the immediately succeeding
calendar quarter to the city treasurer. When collected, one-half of such tax shall forthwith be paid by the city treasurer to the state
director of the department of agriculture and inspection and the remaining one-half shall be credited by the city treasurer to the
city general fund.
(Code 1982, § 7-306)

Sec. 18-60. - Quarterly report by associations.
Each association conducting the game of bingo within the city shall submit a written quarterly report to the city clerk covering
the preceding calendar quarter on or before the tenth day of the immediately succeeding calendar quarter. The report shall
include a detailed financial statement of each separate session of bingo conducted by such association, prepared on a form
prescribed by the state director of the department of agriculture and inspection.
(Code 1982, § 7-307)

Sec. 18-61. - State statutes.
All the provisions of the state statutes as the statutes now exist or may hereafter be amended shall be and constitute a part of
this article the same as if repeated verbatim in this article, and violation of the statutes shall be a distinct and separate offense
against the city, as well as against the state, and any violators thereof shall be separately prosecuted by the city for each of such
offenses. If convicted, such violators shall be punished as provided for the violation of other provisions of this article.
(Code 1982, § 7-308)

Secs. 18-62—18-70. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT

Sec. 18-71. - Permit required; application; fee.
An association duly licensed by the state to conduct the game of bingo within the corporate limits of the city shall obtain a
written permit therefor from the mayor and city council before commencing operation of such bingo game. Application for such
permit shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk on such form as he shall prescribe, and he shall issue such permit when
directed by the city council so to do. Such permit shall expire on March 31 following its issuance or renewal. The fee for such
permit, or each renewal thereof, shall be the sum of $10.00, which the applicant shall pay to the city treasurer prior to filing the
application for such permit, or renewal thereof, and a receipt for payment of the fee shall be filed with the application. When a
permit is issued, the city treasurer shall credit such fee to the general fund of the city. The permit shall at all times be displayed
conspicuously at the place where the game of bingo is conducted.
(Code 1982, § 7-302)

70/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 18-72. - Referendum.
No permit for conducting the game of bingo shall thereafter be issued by the city should a majority of the qualified electors of
the city voting thereon at the election at which the proposition was submitted determine that the game of bingo should not be
conducted within the city, until the same quota of the qualified electors of the city shall again authorize the operation of such
bingo game.
(Code 1982, § 7-303)

Sec. 18-73. - Revocation.
Any permit issued under the provisions of this division may be revoked or suspended by the mayor and city council for cause,
when the state license of the association has been revoked or suspended, but such revocation or suspension order shall be
identical in substance with that issued by the state.
(Code 1982, § 7-305)

Secs. 18-74—18-95. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED

FOOTNOTE(S):
(12) Editor's

note— Ordinance No. 1024, § 1, adopted November 4, 1996, repealed §§ 18-96—18-98. Formerly, such sections

pertained to bowling alleys and pool halls and derived from §§ 7-201, 7-202, 11-107 of the 1982 Code.
Secs. 18-96—18-120. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS

Sec. 18-121. - De nition.
An establishment known as a bed and breakfast shall mean the providing of sleeping rooms, including the serving of
breakfast, to the travelling public.
(Ord. No. 978, § 1(11-301), 12-6-93)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 18-122. - Where permitted.
Bed and breakfast establishments shall be permitted in all zoning areas within the city.
(Ord. No. 978, § 1(11-302), 12-6-93)

Sec. 18-123. - Special use permit, conditions.
(a)

Before a bed and breakfast establishment is permitted in the city a special use permit must first be obtained.

(b)

Application for a special use permit must be made through the office of the city clerk. The application will be
forwarded to the city planning and zoning commission for their consideration.

(c)

The special use permit shall not be issued until all of the following conditions are met:
71/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(1)

A site plan has first been reviewed by the city staff and a determination made that adequate and acceptable park

(2)

The dwelling will be occupied by the owner or full-time manager as his residence;

(3)

The dwelling and lot shall be of such size and configuration that use of the premises by various guests will not
overcrowd the building or premises, deprive neighbors of privacy or adversely alter the character of the
neighborhood;

(4)

Only one nonilluminated sign, not exceeding four square feet, may be attached to the building, depicting a
proper name for the premises;

(5)

Breakfast may be served only to guests who spent the previous night on the premises;

(6)

A special use permit for a "bed and breakfast" shall run with the land and be approved for a period not to
exceed two years.

(Ord. No. 978, § 1(11-303), 12-6-93)

ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL CONTRACTOR/CONSULTING BUSINESSES

Sec. 18-124. - De nition.
An establishment performing the functions of a general contractor/consulting business is hereby defined as the providing of
electrical, mechanical, plumbing, structural design and construction management services, including but not limited to the
consulting on the design of construction projects involving the above-mentioned areas, the estimating of costs on said projects
and the preparation and submission of bids on said projects.
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 12-18-95)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 18-125. - Where permitted.
A general contractor/consulting business shall be permitted in an R-1 zoning district within the City of Minden, Kearney
County, Nebraska, so long as said business is located on a minimum area of 130 feet by 140 feet. No private residences shall be
allowed on the same location as a general contractor/consulting business.
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 12-18-95)

Sec. 18-126. - Special use permit, conditions.
(a)

Before a general contractor/consulting business is permitted in the city, a special use permit must first be obtained.

(b)

Application for a special use permit must be made through the office of the city clerk. The application will be
forwarded to the city board of adjustments for their consideration.

(c)

The special use permit shall not be issued until all of the following conditions are met:
(1)

A site plan has first been reviewed by the city staff and a determination made that adequate and acceptable
parking will be provided for;

(2)

Only the storage of materials incidental to the business shall be permitted on the premises;

(3)

Any building on the lots and the lot itself shall be of such size and configuration that the use of the premises
will not overcrowd the building or premises, deprive neighbors of privacy, or adversely alter the character of
the neighborhood;

(4)

Only one nonilluminated sign, not exceeding 22 square feet, may be attached to the building, depicting a
proper name for the business;
72/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(5)

A special use permit for a general contractor/consulting business shall run with the land, and shall be in effect so
property does not constitute a nuisance.

(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 12-18-95)

Chapter 22 - CEMETERIES
FOOTNOTE(S):
(13) Cross

reference— Administration, ch. 2.

(13) State

Law reference— Cemeteries, R.R.S. 1943, § 12-402; power to borrow money, R.R.S. 1943, § 12-1001.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 22-1. - Penalty for violation of chapter.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in any sum not exceeding
$500.00, pay the costs of prosecution and shall be committed to jail until such fine and costs are paid.
(Code 1982, § 13-314)

Sec. 22-2. - Acceptance of cemetery.
The offer of the Minden Prairie Cemetery Association to convey its cemetery property and other assets, subject to the existing
rights of owners of lots in the cemetery, to the city is hereby accepted.
(Code 1982, § 13-301)

Sec. 22-3. - Superintendent; duties.
A superintendent of the cemetery shall be employed by the city, and it shall be his duty to see that the cemetery is properly
cared for and maintained. He shall negotiate the sale of lots and burial spaces and see that all rules of the cemetery board and all
the provisions of this chapter are enforced and complied with. The superintendent shall take care of the grounds, trees and fences
and perform such duties as set out in section 2-19 of the city personnel manual. The city council through its annual budgetary
process shall set the amount of the superintendent's salary and shall pay the salary by warrants drawn on the city treasurer. The
superintendent shall report directly to the city administrator and shall be subject to annual evaluations as set out in section 2.01,
paragraph 7, of the city personnel manual.
(Code 1982, § 13-303.02; Ord. No. 941, § 2, 3-17-92)

Sec. 22-4. - Changes, alterations; permission required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig any grave, make any interment, erect any monument or marker, plant or remove any
trees, plants or shrubbery or make any other change or alteration in the permanent improvement of the cemetery or any part
thereof except with the permission and under the direction of the superintendent.
(Code 1982, § 13-313)

Sec. 22-5. - Permanent fund.
All funds and assets received from the Minden Prairie Cemetery Association which shall properly belong in what has been
known as the permanent upkeep fund shall hereafter be kept by the city in a separate account called the permanent fund.
Whenever lots or spaces shall hereafter be sold as provided in this chapter, 60 percent of the amount from the sale of cemetery
73/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

lots shall be placed in the permanent fund. The permanent fund shall be invested by the board in real estate first mortgages or
such other investment as the city shall consider secure. No investment shall be made in any security in which any member of the
board or the mayor or any member of the council has any interest. The city shall use the greatest care possible to secure
investments with a fair rate of yield and shall use all proper means for the protection of such investments. Mortgages,
assignments and other evidences of indebtedness shall be made payable to the city and can be assigned or released by the city
council. The income from the permanent fund shall be expended by the city for the care and maintenance of the cemetery and for
the purchase of capital assets needed for the care and maintenance of the cemetery. Whenever the city shall consider it advisable
and proper to do so, it may expend a portion of the principal for the purchase of land or for permanent improvements such as
water mains, trees, new fences or other permanent improvements. No part of the principal of the permanent fund shall be
expended for current expenses or for any other purpose except income-yielding investments and permanent improvements as
provided in this chapter.
(Code 1982, § 13-309; Ord. No. 942, § 2, 5-4-92)

Sec. 22-6. - Levy of tax for cemetery improvement.
At the time of levying other city taxes each year, the mayor and council may levy a tax upon all taxable property within the city
at a rate not to exceed one mill upon the dollar of valuation thereof for the use of the cemetery. The amount realized from such
tax may be used by the cemetery board for the purpose of improving lots, drives, fences, trees or shrubbery, or for the installation
of water or for any other permanent improvement of the cemetery.
(Code 1982, § 13-310)

Sec. 22-7. - Sale of lots and spaces.
(a)

The sale of lots and spaces for interment purposes shall be agreed to by the superintendent; deeds conveying the
title to such lots or spaces shall be made for interment purposes only and subject to all the provisions of this
chapter and to all rules and regulations of the mayor and council or the cemetery board now existing or hereafter
made for the control and management of the cemetery. Deeds shall be signed by the mayor, attested by the city
clerk, and the seal of the city affixed. All sales shall be for cash, payable in advance. The owner of any lot or part of
lot shall not have the right to convey such lot directly to any other person. The owner of a lot or portion of a lot may
request, subject to the approval of the cemetery board, the mayor and city council to issue fresh deeds to all of the
owner's holdings or any portion thereof to a third party, provided that the third party shall consent to the issue of
such deed prior to its issuance, and provided further that the original owner shall accept a fresh deed of any
portion of his original holdings for which a deed was not issued to a third party. Lots and spaces shall be sold for
the following prices:
(1)

Lot prices for residents of the city:

1

lot

$700.00

½

lot

350.00

¼

lot

175.00

Single space

75.00

(2)

1

Lot prices for nonresidents of the city:

lot

$1,100.00
74/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

½

lot

550.00

¼

lot

275.00

Single space

(b)

110.00

The prices listed in subsection (a) may be changed by resolution of the mayor and council without amendment of
this chapter. Such resolution shall be spread upon the minutes of the council and shall be certified to the cemetery
board and placed upon its records. All sales of lots or spaces shall be for cash payable in advance.

(c)

All monies received from the sale of lots or investments of funds or from any other source, except general tax
revenues, shall be payable to the city treasurer.

(Code 1982, §§ 13-307.01, 13-307.02; Ord. No. 936, § 1, 3-4-91; Ord. No. 941, § 3(13-303.03), 3-17-92)

Sec. 22-8. - Fees and charges.
(a)

The following charges shall be made:
(1)

The digging and filling of graves for an adult grave with concrete or steel vault is $200.00.

(2)

The digging and filling of graves for children's graves is $50.00.

(3)

The digging and filling of graves for urns is $50.00.

(4)

The removal of a grave including opening, closing, and regrassing is $200.00.

(b)

The charges specified in subsection (a) of this section shall be paid in advance.

(c)

The charges specified in subsection (a) of this section may be changed by resolution of the mayor and city council
without amendment of this section.

(Code 1982, §§ 13-311.01, 13-311.02; Ord. No. 895, §§ 4, 6(13-311.02, 13-311.03), 3-16-87; Ord. No. 936, § 2, 3-4-91)

Sec. 22-9. - Pauper's graves.
When the relatives, friends or acquaintances of any deceased person shall desire an interment to be made in the cemetery,
and such deceased person shall have left no property or estate and no relative financially able to pay for burial space, space for
the burial of such person shall be furnished free of charge. The location of such space shall be determined by the cemetery board.
In all cases the board or superintendent shall first make careful investigation and be satisfied that such deceased person left no
property or estate and has no relatives financially able to pay such expenses.
(Code 1982, § 13-312)

Secs. 22-10—22-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - CEMETERY BOARD

Sec. 22-31. - Created; composition.
There is hereby created and established a cemetery board which shall consist of six members who are residents of the city, to
be appointed by the mayor with the consent of a majority of the members of the council.
(Code 1982, § 13-302.01)

State law reference— Cemetery board members, R.R.S. 1943, § 12-401 et seq.
75/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 22-32. - Appointments; terms; vacancies; compensation.
At the first regular meeting of the mayor and council in December each year the mayor, with the consent of a majority of the
members of the council, shall appoint two members of the board for a term of three years, commencing January 1 of the following
year. All members of the board shall continue to serve until their successors shall be appointed and shall accept such
appointment. Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council may be appointed to the board, and if any member of the
board shall become mayor or a member of the council during his term of office, his membership on the board shall thereby
terminate. Vacancies occurring in the membership of the board by reason of election to the office of mayor or councilmember or
by any reason of the death or resignation of a member or his removal from the city, or in any other manner, shall be filled by
appointment for the unexpired term in the same manner as provided in this section for the original appointment of members. No
member of the board shall receive any salary or other compensation for his services except when a member of the board shall be
chosen secretary and superintendent of the cemetery, in which case such member shall receive compensation as provided for in
this article. No member of the board shall be financially interested in any contract made by the board or in any investment of
cemetery funds.
(Code 1982, § 13-302.02; Ord. No. 895, § 1, 3-16-87)

Sec. 22-33. - Board o cers.
(a)

Chairman, vice-chairman. At its regular meeting in June each year, the cemetery board shall elect a chairman and a
vice-chairman for a term of one year. The chairman shall preside at all meetings of the board, and shall countersign
all minutes of the proceedings of the board. In the absence of the chairman his duties shall be performed by the
vice-chairman. In the case of a vacancy in the office of chairman or vice-chairman, the board at its next meeting
shall fill the vacancy by election. The chairman shall have no vote except when the other members present shall be
evenly divided, in which case he may cast the deciding vote.

(b)

Secretary. At its regular meeting in June of each year the cemetery board, by a majority vote of all its members, shall
appoint some person to be secretary of the cemetery board. This officer may be either a member of the board or
some other suitable person. It shall be his duty to keep accurate records of all proceedings of the board, of all its
receipts and expenditures, of all sales of lots and spaces for interment and of all interments. The city through its city
officers shall make and keep a record of all investments of the permanent cemetery fund.

(Code 1982, §§ 13-303.01, 13-304; Ord. No. 941, § 1, 3-17-92; Ord. No. 942, § 4, 5-4-92)

Sec. 22-34. - Meetings of board; quorum.
The cemetery board shall hold a regular meeting quarterly at a time and place to be fixed by the board. Special meetings may
be called by the chairman of the board at any time. Four members of the board shall constitute a quorum.
(Code 1982, § 13-305; Ord. No. 942, § 5, 5-4-92)

Sec. 22-35. - Management of cemetery.
Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the cemetery board may adopt all necessary rules for the control and management
of the cemetery. It shall make proper provision to keep the grounds neat and clean and free from weeds in the summer season
and the roads and driveways open in the winter season, shall provide for the preservation of trees and shrubbery, regulate the
planting thereof and can remove any tree or shrubbery planted contrary to its rules of which in its judgment may be a detriment
to the cemetery. All proper and lawful expenses as provided in this chapter shall be paid by warrants drawn upon the city
treasurer and signed by the mayor and city clerk/treasurer. No such warrant shall be issued or signed by such officers until the
warrant shall have been duly allowed and authorized by the city council. All monies received from whatever source shall be paid to
the city treasurer, and all payments made for whatever purpose shall be by warrants as provided in this chapter. The board shall
keep a complete and accurate account of all its acts and proceedings, and once each year, at the first regular meeting in April, the
76/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

board shall present to the mayor and council a complete written report of all its acts and doings, receipts and expenses, together
with any suggestions or recommendations which the board desires to make to the mayor and council with respect to the
cemetery.
(Code 1982, § 13-308; Ord. No. 942, § 1, 5-4-92)

Chapter 26 - ELECTIONS

FOOTNOTE(S):
(14) Cross

reference— Administration, ch. 2.

Sec. 26-1. - City shall hold municipal elections on date of state primary.
The city shall hold its municipal elections on the date of the statewide primary election of the state. Such election shall be held
in accordance with the provisions of R.R.S. 1943, ch. 32, as amended.
(Code 1982, § 1-301)

Sec. 26-2. - City clerk to assist county clerk with place and supplies.
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to assist the county clerk in providing a suitable place for each ward and in providing all
necessary ballots, poll books, tally books and supplies for each city election.
(Code 1982, § 1-302)

Sec. 26-3. - Canvassing board; absent and disabled voters' election board.
The mayor and council shall constitute the canvassing board for all general and special city elections, and the mayor shall be
chairman of such board and shall have the deciding vote when the council shall be evenly divided on any question. This board
shall meet to canvass the returns on the first Monday after any general or special city election. When the board shall meet and
before proceeding to the canvass of the returns, they shall first sit as an absent and disabled voters' election board and, as such
board, shall open, count, record and return all absent and disabled voters' ballots as provided by law. At least 48 hours prior to the
sitting of such board, the city clerk shall post in a conspicuous place in his office a notice stating the day and hour when the board
shall sit as such election board.
(Code 1982, § 1-303)

Sec. 26-4. - Tie votes.
If the result of the canvass shall show that two or more candidates receiving the highest number of votes for councilman have
the same number of votes, the judges of election of the ward in which such tie vote occurs shall be called together forthwith, or at
a time and place to be fixed by the council and decide by lot which shall be elected. If either of such candidates shall refuse or
neglect to appear or to draw his lot, the city clerk shall draw for such candidate and the candidate who shall win the draw shall be
the duly elected candidate for such office.
(Code 1982, § 1-304)

Sec. 26-5. - Certi cates of election.

77/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

At the first regular meeting of the council after any city election, the mayor and council shall cause certificates of election to be
issued under the corporate seal of the city to the persons elected at such election.
(Code 1982, § 1-305)

Sec. 26-6. - Chapter provisions directory.
All the provisions of this chapter whereby certain things are required to be done at designated times are directory and not
mandatory, and no election shall be invalid by reason of anything required in this chapter to be done at a specified time being
done at a later time.
(Code 1982, § 1-306)

Chapter 30 - ENVIRONMENT
FOOTNOTE(S):
(15)

Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 38.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Secs. 30-1—30-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES
FOOTNOTE(S):
(16)

State Law reference— Authority to define, prevent and abate nuisances, R.R.S. 1943, § 18-1720; maintaining a nuisance, R.R.S.

1943, § 28-1321; public health regulations concerning nuisances, R.R.S. 1943, §§ 17-121, 17-123; unlawful pollution, R.R.S. 1943, §
81-1506.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 30-26. - Penalty for violation of article.
Any person who shall commit or permit any nuisance defined by this article within the zoning area of the city shall be fined not
to exceed $100.00 for such offense and as part of such sentence may be required by the court not to commit or permit the
repetition of such nuisance in the future. After the entry of such sentence not to commit or permit such repetition, the court shall
proceed in any case charging a repetition of the same nuisance as in the case of any other contempt of the court.
(Ord. No. 944, § 5(2-303.02), 6-1-92)

Sec. 30-27. - Generally de ned.
A nuisance consists of doing any unlawful act, omitting to perform a duty, suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be
or exist, which act, omission, condition or thing either:
(1)

Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others;

(2)

Is offensive to the senses;

(3)

Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any stream, public
78/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

park, parkway, square, street or highway in the municipality;
(4)

In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of property; or

(5)

Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property, or tends to depreciate the value of
the property of others.

(Code 1982, § 2-301; Ord. No. 944, § 1, 6-1-92)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 30-28. - Speci cally de ned.
The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting of any of the following specific acts, omissions, places,
conditions and things are hereby declared to be nuisances:
(1)

Any odorous, putrid, unsound or unwholesome grain, meat, hides, skins, feathers, vegetable matter, or the
whole or any part of any dead animal, fish or fowl.

(2)

Privies, vaults, cesspools, dumps, pits or like places which are not securely protected from flies or rats, or
which are foul or malodorous.

(3)

Filthy, littered or trash-covered cellars, houseyards, barnyards, stableyards, factory-yards, mill yards, vacant
areas in rear of stores, granaries, vacant lots, houses, buildings or premises.

(4)

Animal manure in any quantity which is not securely protected from flies and the elements, or which is kept or
handled in violation of any ordinance of the municipality.

(5)

Liquid household waste, human excreta, garbage, butcher's trimmings and offal, parts of fish or any waste
vegetable or animal matter in any quantity; provided nothing contained in this subsection shall prevent the
temporary retention of waste in receptacles in a manner provided by the health officer of the municipality, nor
the dumping of nonpurifying waste in a place and manner approved by the health officer.

(6)

Tin cans, bottles, glass, cans, ashes, paper, rags, wood, small pieces of scrap iron, wire metal articles, bric-abrac, building rubble, broken stone or cement, brick, broken crockery, broken glass, broken plaster and all
trash, rubbish or abandoned material, unless the same be kept in covered bins or galvanized iron receptacles,
and any other waste materials when any of such articles or materials create a condition in which flies or rats
may breed or multiply, which may be a fire danger or which are so unsightly as to depreciate property values
in the vicinity thereof.

(7)

The owner or occupant of any lot or piece of ground within the municipality shall keep the lot or piece of
ground and the adjoining street and alleys free of any growth of 12 inches or more in height of weeds, grasses
or worthless vegetation.

(8)

Any unsightly building, billboard or other structure, or any old, abandoned or partially destroyed building or
structure, or any building or structures commenced and left unfinished, or lumber not neatly piled, which
buildings, billboards or other structures are either a fire hazard, a menace to the public health or safety, or are
so unsightly as to depreciate the value of property in the vicinity thereof.

(9)

All places used or maintained as junkyards, dumping grounds, or for the wrecking and dissembling of
automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of any kind; for the storing or leaving of worn-out, wrecked or
abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors or machinery of any kind, or of any of the parts thereof; for the
storing or leaving of any machinery or equipment used by contractors or builders or by other persons, and
any machine, vehicle, or parts of a machine or vehicle which have lost their identity, character, utility or
serviceability as such through deterioration, dismantling, or the ravages of time, are inoperative or unable to

79/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

perform their intended functions, are castoff, discarded or thrown away or left as waste, wreckage or junk;
which places are kept or maintained so as to essentially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or
property by others, or which are so unsightly as to tend to depreciate property values in the vicinity thereof.
(10)

Any and all lots or pieces of ground within the municipality shall be drained or filled so as to prevent stagnant
water or any other nuisance accumulating thereon.

(11)

Stockyards, granaries, mills, pig pens, cattle pens, chicken pens or any other place, building or enclosure in
which animals or fowls of any kind are confined or on which are stored tankage or any other animal or
vegetable matter or on which any animal or vegetable matter including grain is being processed, when such
places in which the animals are confined or the premises on which the vegetable or animal matter is located
are maintained and kept in such a manner that foul and noxious odors are permitted to emanate therefrom to
the annoyance of inhabitants of the municipality, or are maintained and kept in such a manner as to be
injurious to the public health.

(12)

All other nuisances specifically designated elsewhere in this Code.

(Code 1982, § 2-302; Ord. No. 944, § 2, 6-1-92)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 30-29. - Jurisdiction of city.
The mayor and law enforcement officers are directed to take such steps as may be necessary and reasonable to suppress and
prevent such nuisances as are defined by this article within the zoning area of the city.
(Code 1982, § 2-303; Ord. No. 944, § 3, 6-1-92)

Sec. 30-30. - Abatement procedure.
It shall be the duty of every owner, occupant, lessee or mortgagee of real estate in the municipality to keep such real estate
free of public nuisances. Upon determination by the city building and zoning inspector, the chief of police or the fire chief that the
owner, occupant, lessee or mortgagee has failed to keep such real estate free of public nuisances, the city shall thereupon cause
notice to be served upon the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee or agent thereof, by personal service or by certified mail or by
publication. Such notice shall describe the condition as found by the designated officer and state that such condition has been
declared a public nuisance, and that the condition has been declared a public nuisance, and that the condition must be remedied
within 14 days of receipt of the notice or date of publication, whichever is later. Within 14 days after the receipt of such notice, if
the owner, occupant, lessee or mortgagee of the real estate does not request a hearing or fails to comply with the order to abate
and remove the nuisance, the municipality shall have such work done and may levy and assess the costs and expenses of the work
upon the real estate so benefitted in the same manner as other special taxes for improvements are levied and assessed. The
municipality may also direct the law enforcement officers of the municipality to issue a citation to the owner, occupant, lessee or
mortgagee charging them with a violation of the nuisance ordinances of the city.
If said owner, occupant, lessee or mortgagee requests in writing a hearing with the governing body, the governing body shall
fix a time and place at which a hearing will be held. Notice of the hearing shall be give by personal service or certified mail and
require the owner, occupant, lessee or mortgagee to appear before the governing body to show cause why such condition should
not be found to be a public nuisance and remedied. Such notice shall be given not less than seven nor more than 14 days before
the time of the hearing. Upon the date fixed for the hearing and pursuant to the notice, the governing body shall hear all
objections made by the owner, occupant, lessee or mortgagee and shall hear evidence submitted by the municipality. If, after
consideration of all of the evidence, the governing body shall find that the said condition is a public nuisance, it shall, by resolution,
order and direct the owner, occupant, lessee or mortgagee to remedy the said public nuisance at once. Should the owner,

80/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

occupant, lessee or mortgagee refuse or neglect to promptly comply with the order of the governing body, the governing body
shall proceed to cause the abatement of the described public nuisance and may levy and assess the costs and expenses of the
work upon the real estate so benefitted in the same manner as other special taxes for improvements are levied and assessed.
(Ord. No. 944, § 4(2-303.01), 6-1-92; Ord. No. 1016, § 1, 7-1-96)

Sec. 30-31. - Air pollution prohibited.
It shall be a nuisance and unlawful for any person to permit the emission of smoke from any source that is injurious or
offensive to the residents of the municipality in the judgment of the board of health. Air shall be considered to be polluted when
the discharge into the open air of dust, fumes, gases, mist, odors, smoke or any combination thereof is of such character and in a
quantity which to any group of persons interferes with their health, repose or safety or causes severe annoyance or discomfort or
is offensive and objectionable to normal persons and causes injury to real personal property of any kind. The standards for air
pollution established or adopted by the state shall be presumptive evidence as to when the air is deemed to be polluted under this
section. It is unlawful for any such person to permit or cause the escape of the aforesaid nuisances, and the escape of the dust,
fumes, gases, mists, odors and smoke is declared to be a nuisance and shall be summarily abated upon written notice by the
board of health to the violator. Such abatement may be in addition to the penalty for air pollution in the municipality.
(Code 1982, § 2-304; Ord. No. 944, § 6, 6-1-92)

Sec. 30-32. - Water pollution prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or impede without legal authority any river or collection of water, or to corrupt
and render unwholesome or impure any watercourse, stream or other water. The standards for water quality established or
adopted by the state shall be presumptive evidence as to when the water is deemed to be polluted under this section. Such a
corruption of the water in or about the municipality shall constitute a nuisance and shall be summarily abated upon written notice
to the violator by the board of health. The abatement may be in addition to the penalty for water pollution.
(Code 1982, § 2-305; Ord. No. 944, § 7, 6-1-92)

Sec. 30-33. - Keeping hides.
No salted or green hides shall be stored or placed in any warehouse or other building within the city limits so that odors
arising from such hides shall annoy or disturb the occupants of the tenements in the vicinity thereof.
(Code 1982, § 2-403)

Sec. 30-34. - Refuse matter.
No person shall cause or suffer any refuse, animal or vegetable matter, or any foul or nauseous liquors to be discharged out
of or flow from any premises owned or occupied by him or to be thrown into, deposited or left in or upon any street, alley, avenue,
public square, vacant lot or other place in the city.
(Code 1982, § 2-404)

Sec. 30-35. - Keeping certain substances.
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any substance enumerated in section 30-34 which is unsightly, or which is liable to
become putrid, offensive or injurious to the public health to be on any premises in this city, owned or occupied by him, or in his
care, custody or control as agent or otherwise for any person, or to allow any of such substances enumerated in section 30-34 to
be or remain in or upon any alley or street adjoining such premises for more than 24 hours.
(Code 1982, § 2-405)

81/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 30-36. - Cellars, vaults, pools, privies, excavations.
No person shall permit any cellar, vault, private drain, pool, privy, sewer, sink, or excavation upon any premises in the city
owned or occupied by him or in his charge, custody or control as agent for any incorporation or nonresident to become foul,
nauseous, offensive or injurious to public health.
(Code 1982, § 2-406)

Sec. 30-37. - Selling certain articles.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to sell or expose for sale any stale or infected milk, meats, vegetables,
produce, decayed fruits, or food of any kind; or to sell or expose for sale any article of food which is adulterated or mixed with any
substance different from which the article purports to contain, which is either deleterious to health or which would, if known,
reduce the market value below pure and unadulterated articles.
(Code 1982, § 2-407)

Sec. 30-38. - Continuing acts; penalty.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to continue any of the acts or omissions or nuisances mentioned in this
article. In the event that said acts, omissions and nuisances mentioned in this article continue, after having been declared a
nuisance, law enforcement within the city may cite the owner, occupant, lessee or mortgagee with additional violations of this
article. Any violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00.
(Code 1982, § 2-408; Ord. No. 1016, § 2, 7-1-96)

Secs. 30-39—30-50. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - AUTOMOBILES

Sec. 30-51. - Findings of the city council.
The city council finds that junked, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative or abandoned vehicles affect the health, safety and
general welfare of citizens of the city because they:
(1)

Serve as a breeding ground for flies, mosquitoes, rats and other insects and rodents.

(2)

Are a danger to persons, particularly children, because of broken glass, sharp metal protrusions, insecure
mounting on blocks, jacks or other supports.

(3)

Are a ready source of fire and explosion.

(4)

Encourage pilfering and theft.

(5)

Constitute a blighting influence upon the area in which they are located.

(6)

Constitute a fire hazard because they frequently block access for fire equipment to adjacent buildings and
structures.

(Ord. No. 945, § 1, 6-15-92)

Sec. 30-52. - De nitions.
As used in this division, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

82/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Inoperable means a condition of being junked, wrecked, wholly or partially dismantled, discarded, abandoned or unable to
perform the function or purpose for which it was originally constructed.

Vehicle means, without limitation, any automobile, truck, tractor, or motorcycle which, as originally built, contained an engine,
regardless of whether it contains an engine at any other time.
(Ord. No. 945, § 2, 6-15-92)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 30-53. - Vehicle nuisances unlawful; de ned; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit any motor vehicle nuisance within the city.
(1)

A motor vehicle nuisance is any motor vehicle which is not currently registered or pursuant to R.R.S. 1943, ch.
60, art. 3, as amended; or parked in violation of city ordinance; or incapable of moving under it's own power;
or in a junked, wrecked or inoperable condition. Any one of the following conditions shall raise the
presumption that a vehicle is junked, wrecked or inoperable:
a.

Absence of a current registration plate upon the vehicle.

b.

Placement of the vehicle or parts thereof upon jacks, blocks or other supports.

c.

Absence of one or more parts of the vehicle necessary for the lawful operation of the vehicle upon street
or highway.

(2)

The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
a.

Any motor vehicle which is enclosed in a garage or other building;

b.

To the parking or storage, on private property, of a vehicle inoperable for a period of 30 consecutive days
or less; or

c.

To any person conducting a business enterprise in compliance with existing zoning regulations or who
places such vehicles behind screening of sufficient size, strength and density to screen such vehicles from
the view of the public and to prohibit ready access to stored vehicles by children. However, nothing in
this subsection shall be construed to authorize the maintenance of a public nuisance.

(Ord. No. 945, § 3, 6-15-92)

Sec. 30-54. - Complaints; inquiry and inspection.
The police department shall make inquiry and inspection of premises upon receiving a complaint or complaints from
identifiable persons stating that a vehicle nuisance exists and describing the same and where located or is informed that a vehicle
nuisance may exist by the city building and zoning inspector, the fire chief, or their respective designee. The police department
may make such inquiry and inspection when any police officer observes conditions which appear to constitute a vehicle nuisance.
Upon making any inquiry and inspection, the police department shall make a written report of findings.
(Ord. No. 945, § 4, 6-15-92)

Sec. 30-55. - Notice.
Any person found by the police department to be in violation of section 30-53 shall be served a notice of such violation. The
notice shall be served by registered mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested; provided, that if the owner or his agent in
charge of the property is a resident of the city, and can be located, the notice shall be personally served by the police department.
(Ord. No. 945, § 5, 6-15-92)

83/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 30-56. - Notice; contents.
The notice shall state the condition which is in violation of section 30-53. The notice shall also inform the person, corporation,
partnership or association that:
(1)

He, she or they shall have ten days from the date of serving the notice to abate the condition in violation of
section 30-53

(2)

He, she or they have ten days from the date of serving the notice to request a hearing before the city council
on the matter as provided in section 30-59; or

(3)

Failure to abate the condition or to request a hearing within the time allowed may result in prosecution as
provided by section 30-57 and/or abatement of the conditions by the city as provided by section 30-58

(Ord. No. 945, § 6, 6-15-92)

Sec. 30-57. - Failure to comply; penalty.
Should the person fail to comply with the notice to abate the nuisance or request a hearing, the police department may cause
a complaint to be filed in the county court against such person and upon conviction of any violation of provisions of section 30-53,
such person may be fined in an amount not to exceed $100.00. Each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues after
the ten days referred to in section 30-56(1) shall constitute an additional or separate offense.
(Ord. No. 945, § 7, 6-15-92)

Sec. 30-58. - Impoundment.
In addition to or as an alternative to prosecution as provided in section 30-57, the police department may seek to remedy
violations of this section in the following manner. If a person to whom a notice has been delivered pursuant to section 30-55 has
neither alleviated the conditions causing the alleged violation nor requested a hearing before the city council within the time
periods specified in section 30-56, the police department may present a resolution to the city council for adoption authorizing the
police department or other agents of the city to abate the conditions causing the violation. The resolution shall further provide
that the costs incurred by the city shall be charged against the lot or parcel of ground on which the nuisance was located as
provided in section 30-60. A copy of the resolution shall be served upon the person in violation in one of the following ways:
(1)

Personal service upon the person in violation;

(2)

Service by registered mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested; or

(3)

If the whereabouts of such person are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained in the exercise of
reasonable diligence, an affidavit to that effect shall be made by the police department and filed with the city
clerk, and the serving of the resolution shall be made by publishing the same once each week for two
consecutive weeks in the official city newspaper and by posting a copy of the resolution on the premises
where such conditions exist.

(Ord. No. 945, § 8, 6-15-92)

Sec. 30-59. - Hearing.
If a hearing is requested within the ten-day period as provided in section 30-56, such request shall be made in writing to the
city clerk. Failure to make a timely request for a hearing as provided in section 30-56, shall constitute a waiver of the person's right
to contest the findings of the police department before the city council. The hearing shall be held by the city council as soon as
possible after the filing of the request therefor, and the person shall be advised by the city clerk of the time and place of the
hearing at least three days in advance thereof. At any such hearing, the person may be represented by counsel, and the person

84/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

and the city may introduce such witnesses and evidence as is deemed necessary and proper by the city council. The hearing need
not be conducted according to the formal rules of evidence. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall record its
determination of the matter by means of adopting a resolution.
(Ord. No. 945, § 9, 6-15-92)

Sec. 30-60. - Costs assessed.
If the city abates the nuisance pursuant to section 30-58, the cost of abatement shall be charged against the lot or parcel of
ground on which the nuisance was located. The city clerk shall, at the time of certifying other taxes to the county clerk, certify the
costs as provided in this section. The county clerk shall extend the same on the tax roll and it shall be collected by the county
treasurer and paid to the city as other special assessments are collected and paid.
(Ord. No. 945, § 10, 6-15-92)

Sec. 30-61. - Disposition of impounded vehicle.
Any vehicle impounded under this section may be:
(1)

Released to the registered owner upon payment of all costs incurred by the city for removal, towing and
storage; or

(2)

Declared abandoned and disposed of pursuant to R.R.S. 1943, ch. 60, art. 1901 et seq.

(Ord. No. 945, § 11, 6-15-92)

Chapter 34 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
FOOTNOTE(S):
(17)

Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 30; solid waste, ch. 66;

zoning, ch. 94.
(17)

State Law reference— Authority to regulate fire safety, R.R.S. 1943, § 17-130 et seq.; fire hazard abatement, R.R.S. 1943, § 81-

520; fire prevention regulations, R.R.S. 1943, § 17-549; building regulations, R.R.S. 1943, § 17-550.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Secs. 34-1—34-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 34-26. - Under order of state civil defense agency; personnel protected.
(a)

The fire department of the city shall move its fire and other emergency equipment and personnel outside the limits
of the city and place them in immediate operation whenever ordered to do so by the state civil defense agency and
to such place as it shall direct, either in the event of an emergency as defined by the state civil defense act, or in
connection with any program for practice and training.

(b)

The personnel of the fire department of the city shall be considered as fully protected by the Nebraska Workers'
85/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Compensation Law in the course of any such movement and operation of the fire and other emergency equipment
of the city, and the mayor is ordered to arrange with the insurance carrier that the policy of insurance against
liability of the city arising under the Nebraska Workers' Compensation Law shall be amended by rider or otherwise
so as to cover such movement and operation of the fire and other emergency equipment and personnel of the city,
if such insurance policy does not now include that coverage.
(Code 1982, §§ 4-1001, 4-1002)

State law reference— Nebraska Disaster and Civil Defense Act of 1973, R.R.S. 1943, § 81-829.36 et seq.
Secs. 34-27—34-35. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - FIRE CHIEF

Sec. 34-36. - Election; term.
At each annual meeting of the fire department of the city, the fire department shall elect a chief of the department, which
election shall be subject to the approval of the mayor and city council, whose term of office shall be for one year or until his
successor is elected and qualified, unless sooner removed by the fire department or the mayor and city council.
(Code 1982, § 4-101)

Sec. 34-37. - Duties.
(a)

The powers and duties of the fire chief shall be, in addition to his powers and duties provided for in the constitution
and bylaws of the city fire department, as follows: He shall have the overseeing and have charge of the fire
apparatus of the city; shall be responsible that such apparatus be in good working order; shall have charge and
command over all fire companies when in discharge of their duties; and shall make himself acquainted with all
hydrants, gates and valves of the system of waterworks of the city.

(b)

The chief shall have command over all property in the immediate vicinity of any fire, and he is obliged to use
ordinary discretion in the exercise of his power in case of the destruction of any property during the fire.

(c)

The chief shall be ex officio a police officer with powers to appoint one or more assistants, if he deems it necessary
to protect property and the fire apparatus in his charge.

(Code 1982, §§ 4-102—4-104)

Sec. 34-38. - Salary.
The salary of the chief of the fire department shall be $500.00 per year.
(Code 1982, § 4-105; Ord. No. 940, § 1, 3-2-92)

Sec. 34-39. - Bond.
Before entering upon his duties he shall give a bond to the city in the sum of $500.00, signed by at least one good and
sufficient surety, a resident freeholder of the city, to be approved by the mayor and city council, as a condition for the faithful
performance of his duties.
(Code 1982, § 4-106)

Secs. 34-40—34-60. - Reserved.

86/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE

Sec. 34-61. - Adoption of Fire Prevention Codes.
(a)

There is hereby adopted by the mayor and city council for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing
conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the Fire Prevention
Code recommended by the American Insurance Association, being particularly the 1976 edition, which code is filed
in the office of the city clerk. This code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this
article. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city.

(b)

The city also adopts the 1987 edition of the Fire Prevention Code published by the National Fire Protection
Association by reference, a copy of which is on file in the city clerk's office.

(Code 1982, § 4-1101)

Sec. 34-62. - Enforcement.
The codes adopted in this article shall be enforced by the chief of the fire department.
(Code 1982, § 4-1102)

Sec. 34-63. - Penalties for violation of article.
(a)

Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or fail to comply therewith, who shall violate or fail
to comply with any order made pursuant to this article, who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of
specifications or plans submitted and approved pursuant to this article or any certificate or permit issued pursuant
to this article, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed
or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed in this section shall
severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00. The imposition of one penalty for any violation
shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy
such violations or defects within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited
conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.

(b)

The application of the penalty in subsection (a) of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of
prohibited conditions.

(Code 1982, §§ 4-1107.01, 4-1107.02)

Sec. 34-64. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Municipality means the city.
(Code 1982, § 4-1103)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 34-65. - Modi cations.

87/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

The chief of the fire department shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the codes adopted in this article, upon
application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and
substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of the fire
department thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department, and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.
(Code 1982, § 4-1105)

Sec. 34-66. - Appeals.
Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is
claimed that the provisions of this article do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of this article have been misconstrued
or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the fire department to the city council, within 30
days from the date of the decision appealed.
(Code 1982, § 4-1106)

Secs. 34-67—34-69. - Reserved.
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 1126, § 1, adopted June 5, 2006, repealed §§ 34-67—34-69 in their entirety. Formerly, §§ 34-67—34-69 pertained to
fireworks defined, the sale of fireworks restricted to commercial areas, and the lighting of, respectively, and derived from Ord. No.
1065, §§ 1—3, adopted June 5, 2000. Current provisions pertaining to fireworks can now be found in chapter 35
Sec. 34-70. - Purpose.
The purpose of this code is to prescribe regulations consistent with nationally recognized good practice for the safeguarding,
to a reasonable degree, of life and property from the hazards of fire or explosion arising from the storage, handling and use of
hazardous substances, materials, and devices and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the use or occupancy of
building or premises.
(Ord. No. 1082, § 1, 5-8-02)

Sec. 34-71. - Fire Prevention Code—Stoves, etc. to be shielded.
All stoves, ranges, fireplaces, ovens and furnaces within all buildings shall be so placed and protected by sufficient and durable
shields that fire or heat therefrom may not ignite any wall, floor or ceiling of the house, nor the furniture or fixtures therein.
(Ord. No. 1082, § 2, 5-8-02)

Sec. 34-72. - Same—Open burning.
Except as otherwise provided herein, open burning within the city is hereby prohibited. The fire department may, with the
approval of the fire department chief, conduct training or controlled burning of combustible vegetation necessary for public safety.
No "bonfires" shall be set or ignited, except that the fire department chief may approve bonfires for special events within the
city limits.
(Ord. No. 1082, § 3, 5-8-02)

Sec. 34-73. - Same—Homemade oil-burning devices.

88/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

No homemade oil-burning stoves or devises that burn crankcase draining shall be permitted within the city.
(Ord. No. 1082, § 4, 5-8-02)

Sec. 34-74. - Same—Lumber yards restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, establish, open, keep or maintain any lumber yard or place for piling, storing,
keeping or selling any lumber or to keep any lime, lath, shingles, hay, straw or other combustible material on any lot or parcel of
ground within fire zone 1 unless the same is securely kept in a building constructed of brick, stone concrete or other noncombustible material.
(Ord. No. 1082, § 5, 5-8-02)

Sec. 34-75. - Same—Hay, etc., not used for agricultural farming prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, suffer or permit any hay, straw, trash, dry litter or other combustible
substance unhoused or uncovered and unprotected from fire on any lot, lots or parcels of land in the city, that is not used
exclusively for agricultural farming. The term "agricultural farming" as used in this section excludes truck farming, truck patches,
gardens and cultivation of isolated lots not within the outlying districts of the city where general farming is carried on.
(Ord. No. 1082, § 6, 5-8-02)

Sec. 34-76. - Same—Key box.
The fire chief shall have the authority to require or recommend a key box be installed in an accessible location where access to
or within a structure or area is difficult because of security or where immediate access is necessary for life-saving or firefighting
purposes. The key box shall be a type approved by the fire chief and shall contain keys necessary to gain access as required by the
fire department. The owner of the premises shall immediately notify the fire department any time a lock is changed or rekeyed
and a key(s) to that lock is contained in the lock box.
(Ord. No. 1082, § 7, 5-8-02)

Sec. 34-77. - Same—Outdoor replaces.
The term "outdoor fireplaces" shall include portable fireplaces and chimineas. These residential outdoor fireplaces use wood
as a fuel and are used for contained recreational fires located at a private residence for the purpose of outdoor cooking and
personal enjoyment. Outdoor fireplaces do not include barbecue grills that use propane or charcoal as a fuel and used primarily
for outdoor cooking. Portable fireplaces are defined as being commercially designed and intended to confine and control outdoor
wood fires. Chimineas are defined as an outdoor patio fireplace, usually made from clay, intended to confine and control outdoor
wood fires. All outdoor fireplaces shall meet the following requirements:
(1)

Clearances. A minimum ten-foot clearance shall be maintained between the outdoor fireplace and
combustible walls, roofs, fences, decks and other combustible material.

(2)

Construction. Outdoor fireplaces shall be constructed of concrete or approved non-combustible materials. The
fire fuel area and openings shall be completely enclosed by steel screening or an approved non-combustible
screening material with openings in screening to be not larger than ½-inch square. Vent stacks or chimneys
shall have a steel screen cover made of heavy wire mesh or other non-combustible material with openings not
larger than ½-inch square or as approved by the fire chief. Fire fuel areas shall be covered with a steel screen
cover made by heavy wire mesh or other non-combustible material with openings not larger than ½-inch
square. Not permitted are barrels, half barrels, drums or similarly constructed devices.

(3)

Size. The fuel area shall not be larger than three feet in diameter and a height of more than two feet.
89/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(4)

Location. Outdoor fireplaces shall be placed on a stable non-combustible surface such as a concrete pad. Outdoo
not be located on combustible balconies or on any balcony above the first floor that are attached to a multiple fa
three or more living units located one above the other. Outdoor fireplaces shall not be located under any combus
any overhanging part of a structure attached to a multiple family dwelling of three or more living units.

(5)

Type of materials being burnt. Burn untreated wood, Petroleum products, rubbish, grass, leaves, cardboard,
plastics, rubber or any material that may flow out of the containment or cause excessive heat, smoke, or
offensive smell shall not be permitted.

(6)

Amount of materials being burnt. Limit the amount of material being burnt to ensure the flames are confined
inside the fuel area of the outdoor fireplace and the flames do not extend into the chimney or above the
chimney, follow the manufacture's recommendation on the maximum amount of fuel to be used at one time.

(7)

Supervision. Outdoor fireplaces shall be under constant supervision by at least one responsible person of age
18 or older from the ignition of the fire until the fire is completely extinguished and embers are cool and the
fire will not rekindle.

(8)

Provisions for protection. A garden hose connected to a water supply or other approved fire extinguishing
equipment shall be readily available for use.

(9)

Wind and weather conditions. Outdoor fireplaces shall not be operated when winds are blowing over ten mph
and wind direction will cause smoke, embers, or other burning materials to be carried by the wind toward any
building or other combustible materials. Outdoor fireplaces shall not be operated when weather conditions
are extremely dry.

(10)

Maintenance. The owner is responsible to ensure proper maintenance and care is accomplished in accordance
with manufactures instructions. At the minimum the outdoor fireplace will be checked regularly for the
appearance of cracks and other physical deterioration or loose parts.

(11)

Discontinuance. Smoke from any outdoor fireplace shall not create a nuisance for neighboring property
owners. The fire shall be extinguished immediately upon the complaint of the neighboring property owner of
any smoke nuisance. The fire chief is authorized to require outdoor fireplace use to be immediately
discontinued if the use of the outdoor fireplace is determined by the chief to constitute a hazardous condition
to occupants of surrounding property.

(12)

Permit for educational purposes. A site plan showing the location of the fire pit on the property and a detailed
drawing of the construction of the fire pit shall be submitted to the fire department for review. Approved plans
will serve as the permit. A permit will not be required for portable fireplaces or chimineas provided they are
commercially designed and have been approved by an independent testing laboratory.

(Ord. No. 1082, § 8, 5-8-02)

Secs. 34-78—34-85. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS

Sec. 34-86. - Penalty for violation of article.
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be fined in any sum not exceeding $500.00, which shall be in addition
to any specific penalty expenses incurred in the removal or abatement of any cause of danger from fire as provided for in this
article.
(Code 1982, § 4-307)

90/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 34-87. - Unlawful to stack or pile.
(a)

It shall be unlawful for any person to stack or pile any combustible material within the fire limits.

(b)

It shall be unlawful for any person to stack or pile any combustible material within 50 feet of any building not
belonging to himself anywhere within this city.

(Code 1982, §§ 4-301, 4-302)

Sec. 34-88. - Examination of premises by re chief; directions for safety.
It shall be the duty of the city fire chief when directed by the mayor or council to enter any building, lot, yard, or premises in
the city and examine the fire flues, hearths, chimneys, stoves, and fireplaces thereto, ovens, boilers, and apparatuses therein likely
to cause fire; also to examine the places where explosive or combustible material may be lodged. The fire chief shall give such
directions in regard to the several foregoing matters as he shall deem expedient to guard against fire, either as to the removal,
alterations or better care and management of such premises and equipment.
(Code 1982, § 4-303)

Sec. 34-89. - Duties of owners.
Whenever the fire chief shall give directions mentioned in section 34-88 to the owner or occupant of any of the premises in
which any of the matters mentioned in such section shall be contained, it shall be the duty of such owner or occupant within 48
hours to cause such removal or alteration therein at his own expense. In case the owner or occupant shall neglect for 48 hours to
cause such removal or alteration to be made, it shall be the duty of the fire chief forthwith to cause the same to be done at the
expense of the city, and the owner or occupant shall be liable to the city for the expense thereof.
(Code 1982, § 4-304)

Sec. 34-90. - Authority of re chief.
The fire chief of the city shall, when directed by the mayor or council, have the authority to cause chimneys to be burned out
or otherwise cleaned when necessary and forthwith to remove or abate the chimneys, and in case of the refusal or neglect of the
owner or occupant to remove any cause from which any immediate danger of fire may be apprehended and any building erected,
enlarged, moved or allowed to remain in the fire limits contrary to this article at the expense of the person who should have done
the removal or abatement.
(Code 1982, § 4-305)

Sec. 34-91. - Hindering o cer.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or obstruct the city fire chief or other officer of the city in the performance of his
duties under this article.
(Code 1982, § 4-306)

Secs. 34-92—34-110. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - ANHYDROUS AMMONIA AND LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS

Sec. 34-111. - Penalty for violation of article.

91/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Any person guilty of violating any of the provisions of sections 34-112 or 34-113 shall, upon conviction, be fined in any sum not
more than $500.00 and shall be committed to jail until the fine and the costs of prosecution shall be fully paid.
(Code 1982, § 4-902; Ord. No. 869, § 3(4-903), 10-17-83)

Sec. 34-112. - Anhydrous ammonia prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to build, erect, install or maintain within the corporate limits, or within one-half mile of the
corporate limits of the city, any tank or other structure or receptacle for the storage of anhydrous ammonia in any quantity,
provided that this article shall not apply to or affect any such tank, structure or receptacle in operation on October 5, 1959.
(Code 1982, § 4-901; Ord. No. 869, § 1(4-901), 10-17-83)

Sec. 34-113. - Lique ed petroleum gas.
It shall be unlawful to erect and maintain within any commercial district of the city a storage or storage tanks exceeding 250
gallons of total storage capacity, for the storage and resale of liquefied petroleum gas; provided, however, that installation of all
equipment shall be in compliance with all laws and regulations of the state relating to storage and resale of liquefied petroleum
gas, and further provided that no such storage tank shall be located within 75 feet of an existing dwelling or within 25 feet of any
property line.
(Ord. No. 869, § 2(4-902), 10-17-83)

Secs. 34-114—34-135. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - STORAGE OF GASOLINE AND OIL

Sec. 34-136. - Permit required.
(a)

Any person desiring to store or keep above ground, any form of flammable liquid in excess of 60 gallons in one
container, or to replace any facility used for the storage of such flammable liquid must first obtain a permit from
the city council pursuant to the terms of this article. Storage shall not be located within Residential-1, Residential-2,
Residential-3 or Commercial-1 zoning districts.

(b)

Before any aboveground storage of flammable liquids shall be permitted pursuant to this article, the person
desiring to store such flammable liquids must first apply for and obtain a permit from the city council. The city
council shall require the name of the flammable liquid, the exact location of the proposed storage facility, the
amount to be stored, and a complete plan and description of the proposed facility and how it complies with the
provisions of this article. The city council in issuing a permit may prescribe any other rules, regulations and
precautionary measures it deems necessary and expedient so as to not unduly expose the property of others to the
danger of fire. Permit requirements for the initial construction or location of storage facilities shall not apply to
those facilities in existence on the effective date of this ordinance. Provided that any such present use that is
discontinued for a period of 60 days shall not be revived without a permit. If ownership of the property upon which
a storage facility is located shall change any present use shall be forfeited. All granted permits shall be forwarded to
the fire chief of the city.

(c)

The subsequent construction of a building or structure within 50 feet of a preexisting storage facility shall not make
the same unlawful, but in the event of major repair or replacement of such storage facility, all requirements of this
article shall be applicable.

(Ord. No. 946, §§ 1, 3, 4, 6-15-92)

92/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 34-137. - Storage method.
All aboveground storage tanks for flammable liquids shall meet or exceed federal environmental protection agency and state
department of environmental quality regulations concerning type of container, diking and spill control. No storage facility shall be
located closer than 50 feet to any property line or structure. Provided, this section shall not relate to tanks kept and used on
automobiles, tractors, trucks, gas or oil engines.
(Ord. No. 952, § 1, 9-21-92)

Chapter 35 - FIREWORKS

Sec. 35-1. - Fireworks; de nitions.
For the purposes of this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:

Fireworks means any composition or device designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible affect by combustion,
deflagration or detonation and which meets the definition of common or special fireworks set forth by the United States
Department of Transportation in Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations.

Permissible fireworks includes only gold or silver sparklers, vesuvius fountains, spray fountains, torches, color fire cones, star
and comet type color aerial shells without explosive charge for the purpose of making a noise, lady fingers not to exceed seveneighths of an inch in length or one-eighth of an inch in diameter, total explosive composition not to exceed 50 milligrams in weight,
color wheels and those fireworks authorized by the state fire marshal, by regulation, after having been submitted to him/her and
tested to their safety and general use.

Sale includes barter, exchange or gift or offer therefor, and each such transaction made by any person, whether as principal,
proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
(Ord. No. 1126, § 2, 6-5-06)

State law reference— Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-1241.
Sec. 35-2. - Generally.
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, sell, offer for sale, bring into this city, or discharge any pyrotechnics, commonly
known as fireworks other than permissible fireworks; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1)

Any fireworks for purposes of public exhibitions or displays purchased from a licensed distributor or the
holder of a display license to be issued by the state fire marshal, which license shall be good only for the
calendar year in which issued and which shall not authorize the holder to sell or hold for sale any description,
whether soft shell or hard shell;

(2)

Any public exhibition or display under the auspices of the city;

(3)

Any fireworks brought into this state for storage by a licensed distributor and held for sale outside of this
state;

(4)

Any fireworks furnished for agricultural purposes pursuant to written authorization from the state fire marshal
to any holder of a distributor's license; or

(5)

Toy cap pistols or toy caps each of which does not contain more than twenty-five hundredths of a grain of
explosive material.

(Ord. No. 1126, § 2, 6-5-06)

93/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

State law reference— Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-1245.
Sec. 35-3. - Permit to sell permissible reworks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale permissible fireworks in the city without first having made
application for and received a permit to do so from the city clerk. Such permit shall cost $200.00 and the funds received from the
permits will be placed in the fire prevention account of the fire department as a line item for fireworks safety and education
training programs and material. The permit to sell permissible fireworks shall at all time be displayed at the place of business of
the holder thereof. Applicants shall also pay an occupation tax. Such permits shall not be transferable.
(Ord. No. 1126, § 2, 6-5-06)

Sec. 35-4. - Dates of lawful sale.
Permissible fireworks may be sold or offered for sale in the city on June 29 through and including July 4 of each year.
(Ord. No. 1126, § 2, 6-5-06)

State law reference— Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-1249.
Sec. 35-5. - Temporary reworks stands.
(a)

Any person having obtained a permit to sell permissible fireworks may sell or offer for sale such fireworks only from
a temporary stand or enclosure erected or placed on real estate for that purpose. No fireworks shall be sold from
permanent buildings or structures in the city.

(b)

If fireworks are to be sold from a temporary stand or enclosure, such stand or enclosure shall be of wood or steel
frame construction covered with metal or wood.

(c)

Any temporary enclosure or stand shall be permitted only in those areas of the city zoned for business or
manufacturing, and only after a permit is obtained for the sale of permitted fireworks.

(d)

Such temporary enclosures or stands shall be permitted to remain on real estate where permissible fireworks are
sold for only the period beginning on June 25 through and including July 7 of each year.

(e)

Any person, as part of obtaining a permit, must pay an additional $100.00 deposit by separate check. This deposit
will be refundable if the temporary stand is cleaned up and removed by 5:00 p.m. July 7 of that calendar year.

(f)

Any such temporary stand or enclosure shall not be located closer than 25 feet from any building, and at least 100
feet from any station where gasoline and oil for motor vehicles is sold. Such temporary stand or enclosure shall not
exceed 400 square feet in size.

(g)

Only approved electric space heaters with tip-over safety switches may be used for heating. A minimum distance of
three feet of clear space between the face of the space heater to fireworks and other combustible materials must
be maintained.

(Ord. No. 1126, § 2, 6-5-06)

Sec. 35-6. - Age limitation.
Any person who shall sell or offer for sale fireworks in the city, or any person employed by another to sell or offer for sale such
fireworks, must be at least 18 years of age, except that persons who are age 14 through 18 inclusive may, when working in the
direct presence and supervision of an adult 21 years of age or older, sell or offer for sale such fireworks.
(Ord. No. 1126, § 2, 6-5-06)

Sec. 35-7. - Discharging reworks, premises where same are sold.
94/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge fireworks in or upon the premises where fireworks are sold; provided, that,
this regulation shall not be construed to include the use of toy pistols using what is commonly known as caps.
(Ord. No. 1126, § 2, 6-5-06)

Sec. 35-8. - Discharging reworks; endangering property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot off or discharge or ignite any fireworks, rockets, powder, firecrackers or any other
dangerous matter in or about or in the vicinity of any building within the city at any time in such a manner as to expose any
building or other property to danger of fire therefrom.
(Ord. No. 1126, § 2, 6-5-06)

Sec. 35-9. - Discharging reworks; when permissible.
Permissible fireworks may be discharged, exploded or used in the city on June 29 through and including July 4 of each year;
provided, that on such days the discharge and explosion of fireworks shall be permitted during the following times: June 29
through July 2: 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.; July 3 and July 4: 8:00 a.m. to midnight. The sale, discharge or exploding of fireworks within
the city on any dates or times other than as set out in this section shall be unlawful except that persons holding an approved
display permit from the state fire marshal may conduct public exhibitions or displays of fireworks on the dates authorized by the
permit. Permit holder shall file a copy of the permit with the city clerk at least 24 hours prior to the event.
(Ord. No. 1126, § 2, 6-5-06)

Sec. 35-10. - Fire extinguisher.
All fireworks stands or displays shall have a suitable fire extinguisher. Such extinguisher shall be mounted properly with easy
access.
(Ord. No. 1126, § 2, 6-5-06)

Sec. 35-11. - Storage.
Excess fireworks or fireworks not on display shall be stored in an enclosed area no closer than 15 feet to the display.
(Ord. No. 1126, § 2, 6-5-06)

Sec. 35-12. - Rockets prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, display, ignite or shoot off pop bottle rockets or troft rockets.
(Ord. No. 1126, § 2, 6-5-06)

Sec. 35-13. - Throwing recrackers, explosives prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any firecracker, firework or any object which explodes upon contact with another
object:
(1)

From, at, or into a motor vehicle.

(2)

Onto any street, highway or sidewalk.

(3)

At or near any person.

(4)

Into any building.

(5)

Into or at any group of persons.
95/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(Ord. No. 1126, § 2, 6-5-06)

State law reference— Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-1242.
Sec. 35-14. - Prohibited in parks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any fireworks or explosives in any city park.
(Ord. No. 1126, § 2, 6-5-06)

Sec. 35-15. - Weather hazard.
The city council reserves the power to ban or further limit the sale/discharge of fireworks in the event of dry weather or other
weather hazards.
(Ord. No. 1126, § 2, 6-5-06)

Chapter 38 - HEALTH AND SANITATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
(18)

Cross reference— Environment, ch. 30.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Secs. 38-1—38-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF HEALTH

FOOTNOTE(S):
(19)

Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.

Sec. 38-26. - Organization and powers.
(a)

There is hereby created a board of health to consist of four members: the mayor, who shall be chairperson, the
president of the city council, and two other members. One member shall be a physician or health care provider, if
one can be found who is willing to serve. Such physician or health care provider, if one can be found, shall be the
board's medical advisor.

(b)

Health care provider shall mean a person who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by the law of this state
to administer health care in the ordinary course of business or practice of a profession.

(c)

A majority of the board shall constitute quorum and shall enact rules and regulations, which shall have the force
and effect of law, to safeguard the health of the people of such city, may enforce them, and may provide fines and
punishments for the violation thereof.

(d)

The board shall have power to and shall make all needful rules and regulations relating to matters of sanitation of
such city, including the removal of dead animals. The sanitary condition of the streets, alleys, vacant grounds,
stockyards, cattle and hog pens, wells, cisterns, privies, water closets, cesspools, stables, and all buildings and
places not specified where filth, nuisances, or offensive matter is kept or is liable to or does accumulate.

(e)

The board may regulate, suppress, and prevent the occurrence of nuisances and enforce all laws of the state and
ordinances of the city relating to the same or to matters of sanitation of the city.
96/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(f)

The board shall also have control of hospitals, dispensaries, places for treatment of sick, and matters relating to the sa
such restrictions and provisions as may be provided by ordinance of the city.

(g)

The powers of the board of health, herein provided shall extend to the area within one mile of the city's corporate
limits in accordance with Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-1001.

(Code 1982, § 2-101; Ord. No. 1120, § 1, 10-17-05)

Chapter 42 - LIBRARY
FOOTNOTE(S):
(20)

Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.

(20)

State Law reference— Libraries, R.R.S. 1943, § 17-967 et seq.; municipal libraries, R.R.S. 1943, § 51-201 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 42-1. - Free library established.
There is hereby established a free library for the use of the inhabitants of the city, as authorized by the state statutes
governing a free library.
(Code 1982, § 13-201)

Sec. 42-2. - Levy to establish and maintain library.
The city council shall have authority to levy a tax upon all the taxable property in the city for the purpose of establishing and
maintaining the public library referred to in this chapter. The library board shall have exclusive control of expenditures, of all
money collected or donated to the credit of the library fund, and all such taxes levied or collected and all funds donated or in any
way acquired shall be kept for the use of the library, separate and apart from all other funds of the city, and shall be drawn upon
and paid out by the treasurer of such city upon vouchers signed by the president of the library board and authenticated by the
secretary of such board and shall not be used or disbursed for any other purpose or in any other manner. The city administration,
the mayor and city council shall have no authority under any circumstances to control, in any manner whatsoever through the
budgetary process or other means, the selection of materials to be placed in the city library.
(Code 1982, § 13-204; Ord. No. 948, § 1, 7-20-92)

Secs. 42-3—42-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - LIBRARY BOARD

FOOTNOTE(S):
(21) Cross

reference— Administration, ch. 2.

Sec. 42-26. - Appointment; bond.
The public library shall be governed by a board of five directors to be appointed by the mayor and council of the city, who shall
hold their office and perform their duties as directed by law, and each of the directors shall execute a bond running to the city in
the sum of $100.00, for the faithful performance of his duties.
(Code 1982, § 13-202)

97/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 42-27. - General powers.
The library board shall have power to erect, lease, or occupy an appropriate building for the use of such library; to appoint a
suitable librarian and assistants, to fix their compensation and to remove their appointees at pleasure, being also subject to the
policies and procedures set out in the city personnel manual adopted May 20, 1991, and any subsequent amendments thereto. It
shall have the power to establish regulations for the government of such library as may be deemed necessary for its preservation
and to maintain its usefulness and efficiency. It shall have power to fix and impose, by general rules, penalties and forfeitures for
trespasses upon or injury to the library grounds, rooms, books or other property, or for failure to return any book, or for violation
of any bylaw or regulation; and shall have and exercise such power as may be necessary to carry out the spirit and intent of state
statutes in establishing and maintaining a public library and reading room.
(Code 1982, § 13-205; Ord. No. 948, § 2, 7-20-92)

Sec. 42-28. - Terms.
Until such time as this section shall be amended or repealed, the terms of the members of the public library board of the city
shall expire as follows: two in the year 1974 and each four years thereafter; three in the year 1976 and each four years thereafter.
(Code 1982, § 13-202.01)

Sec. 42-29. - Appointment; approval.
Until such time as this section shall be amended or repealed, the members of the public library board shall be nominated by
the mayor and shall be appointed by the approval of such nomination by a majority vote of the city council. The members so
selected shall serve until their successors shall be appointed and have qualified.
(Code 1982, § 13-202.02)

Sec. 42-30. - Bylaws and rules.
The directors shall adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations for their government and for the government of the library as
they may deem necessary, and the rules and regulations may be changed from time to time as necessity demands. All such rules
and regulations are subject to the approval of the mayor and council of the city.
(Code 1982, § 13-203)

Chapter 46 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(22) Cross

reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; planning, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 86; zoning, ch. 94.

(22) State

Law reference— Manufactured homes, recreational vehicles and mobile home parks, R.R.S. 1943, § 71-4601 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 46-1. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

98/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Camper lot means a unit of level, adequately drained ground of definite size, clearly indicated by corner markers for the
placing of a trailer or trailer and tow car.

Campgrounds means any lot or tract of ground upon which two or more campers are placed and shall include any building,
structure or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment of such park.

Manufactured home shall mean (a) a factory-built structure which is to be used as a place for human habitation, which is not
constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than to a permanent site, which
does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles, and which bears a label certifying that it was built in
compliance with National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, 24 C.F.R. 280 et seq., promulgated by the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, or (b) a modular housing unit as defined in R.R.S. 1943 § 71-1557
bearing the seal of the department of health, and meeting the following standards:
(1)

The home shall have no less than 900 square feet of floor area;

(2)

The home shall have no less than an 18-foot exterior width;

(3)

The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of two and one-half inches for each 12 inches of
horizontal run;

(4)

The exterior material shall be of a color, material and scale comparable with those existing in residential sitebuilt, single-family construction;

(5)

The home shall have a nonreflective roof material which is or simulates asphalt or wood shingles, tile or rock;
and

(6)

The home shall have wheels, axles, transporting lights and removable towing apparatus removed.

Manufactured home lot means a designated portion of a manufactured home park designed for the accommodation of one
manufactured home and its accessory buildings or structures for the exclusive use of the occupants.

Manufactured home park means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land which have been so designated and improved that
they contain two or more manufactured home lots available to the general public for the placement thereon of manufactured
homes for occupancy. The term manufactured home park shall not be construed to include manufactured homes, buildings, tents
or other structures temporarily maintained by any individual, corporation, company or other entity on its own premises and used
exclusively to house its own labor force.

Person means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock company or association,
political subdivision, governmental agency or other legal entity, and shall include any trustee, receiver, assignee or other legal
representative thereof.

Recreational vehicle means any vehicle used, or maintained for use as a conveyance upon the highways or city streets, so
designed and constructed as to permit occupancy thereof as a temporary dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons, on
wheels, temporary foundations or jacks.
(Code 1982, § 5-301; Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 2-20-95)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 46-2. - Emergency or temporary stopping of a recreational vehicle or manufactured home.
Emergency or temporary stopping or parking of a recreational vehicle or manufactured home is permitted for not longer than
24 hours, subject to any other regulations or limitations imposed by traffic and parking regulations or ordinances.
(Code 1982, § 5-302.02; Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 2-20-95)

99/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 46-3. - Manufactured homes; location; standards.
(a)

Only manufactured homes as defined in section 46-1 shall be permitted in R1, R2 and R3 districts within the city.

(b)

Any manufactured home located within the zoning jurisdiction of the city shall be located and installed according to
the same standards for foundation system, permanent utility connections, setback and minimum square footage
which would apply to a site-built, single-family dwelling on the same lot.

(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 2-20-95)

Secs. 46-4—46-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS AND CAMPGROUNDS
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 46-26. - Penalty for violation of article.
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this article, whether or not such violation shall be found sufficient by the
city board of health for revocation of any permit or license, shall be punished by fine of not less than $10.00 and not more than
$500.00. Every violation of this article shall be considered a separate offense.
(Code 1982, § 5-313.03; Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 2-20-95)

Sec. 46-27. - Description and speci cations.
(a)

Each campground and manufactured home park shall be located on a well drained site suitable for the purpose and
shall have an entrance and exit marked and easily controlled.

(b)

Each campground and mobile home park shall provide lots with boundaries indicated by markers and shall meet
the following specifications:
(1)

Campgrounds shall provide for lots for campers of an area not less than 480 square feet for each camper, with
a minimum depth of 30 feet. Each camper shall be located not less than ten feet from any other building or
camper and at least three feet from the property line.

(2)

Manufactured home parks shall provide lots for manufactured homes of an area not less than 3,600 square
feet and shall provide a setback of the manufactured home of at least six feet from side and rear lot lines and
15 feet from the front or street lot line.

(c)

The campground and manufactured home park plan shall provide a legal description of the property to be used
and shall contain a map of the property giving the following information:
(1)

The extent and area to be used for campground or manufactured home park purposes.

(2)

Driveways and entrance and exits, roadways and walkways.

(3)

Location of recreational vehicle lots and sites and for manufactured home lots and sites.

(4)

Method and plan of sewage disposal.

(5)

Method and plan of garbage disposal.

(6)

Plan of water supply.

(7)

Plan of electric lighting.

(8)

Location and number of proposed sanitary conveniences, including proposed toilets, washrooms, laundries
and utility rooms, or other buildings used in connection with such campground or manufactured home park.

(Code 1982, §§ 5-305.01—5-305.03; Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 2-20-95)

100/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 46-28. - Zoning.
Campgrounds and manufactured home parks shall be prohibited within the fire zone now established by ordinance within the
city limits.
(Code 1982, § 5-306; Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 2-20-95)

Sec. 46-29. - Water supply.
A sufficient supply of pure healthful drinking water, approved by the state department of health, shall be provided in
convenient locations. No common drinking vessel shall be provided. Waste from all water supply shall be emptied into a drain
connected to an approved disposal system. Water supply for manufactured home parks shall comply with the state uniform
standard codes for manufactured home parks.
(Code 1982, § 5-307; Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 2-20-95)

Sec. 46-30. - Sewage and refuse disposal.
All kitchen sinks, wash basins, lavatories, toilets, bath and shower tubs in any recreational vehicle or manufactured home
located in any campground or manufactured home park shall empty into an approved receptacle or disposal system. Toilets not
connected with an approved disposal system shall not be used, and it shall be unlawful for any person to use or permit the use of
such fixtures. Sewage and refuse disposal for all manufactured home parks shall comply with the state uniform standard code for
manufactured home parks.
(Code 1982, § 5-308; Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 2-20-95)

Sec. 46-31. - Garbage receptacles.
Each campground and each manufactured home park shall provide supervision and equipment sufficient to prevent littering
the ground with rubbish and debris. Flytight metal depositories and tightfitting covers shall be conveniently located for each
recreational vehicle and manufactured home. Depositories shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times.
(Code 1982, § 5-309; Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 2-20-95)

Sec. 46-32. - Registration of guests.
The manager of each campground and manufactured home park shall keep a record of all guests, noting their names,
addresses and automobile license numbers, and shall not destroy such registry until the expiration of two years following the date
of registration.
(Code 1982, § 5-310; Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 2-20-95)

Sec. 46-33. - Plumbing and electrical work in conformance with city codes.
All plumbing installations, alteration, or repair and electrical work performed under this chapter shall be in conformity with the
plumbing code and with the electric code of the city.
(Code 1982, § 5-311.01; Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 2-20-95)

Sec. 46-34. - Communicable diseases reported to city board of health.
It shall be the duty of the person in charge of the operation of each campground and manufactured home park to notify
immediately the city board of health of any communicable diseases in the park.
(Code 1982, § 5-311.02; Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 2-20-95)

101/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Secs. 46-35—46-45. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT

Sec. 46-46. - Required.
(a)

It shall be unlawful for any person within the zoning limits of the city to construct or operate a campground or
manufactured home park without first securing a permit.

(b)

No campground or mobile home park shall be operated within the corporate limits of the city, except as provided in
this chapter.

(Code 1982, §§ 5-303.01, 5-303.02; Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 2-20-95)

Sec. 46-47. - Application.
Application for a campground or manufactured home park permit shall be made at the city light and water office and shall
contain the name of the owner of the park and the name of the person responsible for its operation and maintenance. A
campground and manufactured home park plan shall accompany each application for a campground or manufactured home park
permit giving the information required in section 46-27.
(Code 1982, § 5-304; Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 2-20-95)

Sec. 46-48. - Issuance; fees; duration.
The permit for a campground or manufactured home park shall be obtained from the city council. The permit shall be for a
period of one year and at a fee of $25.00, no part of which will be refunded if the occupancy is terminated at any time prior to the
expiration of the year for which the permit is issued. Application for renewal of permits may be made within 30 days prior to the
expiration at a fee of $20.00 for one year.
(Code 1982, § 5-303.03; Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 2-20-95)

Sec. 46-49. - Inspection for renewal.
Before any renewal of campground and manufactured home park permits, an inspection shall be made by the city
administrator to determine that all requirements of this chapter have been complied with.
(Code 1982, § 5-312; Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 2-20-95)

Sec. 46-50. - Revocation or suspension; nes.
(a)

The city board of health shall have the authority to enter and inspect for health and sanitation purposes any facility
licensed pursuant to this division at any reasonable time.

(b)

If, upon inspection, it shall be found that the permit holder has violated any provisions of this chapter, the city
board of health shall have the power to revoke or suspend any license and order the recreational vehicle or
manufactured home removed or the park closed after notice and proper hearing.

(Code 1982, §§ 5-313.01, 5-313.02; Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 2-20-95)

Secs. 46-51—46-70. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - PARKING OUTSIDE MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS AND CAMPGROUNDS

102/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 46-71. - Permit required; fee; duration.
(a)

It shall be unlawful within the limits of the city for any persons to park any recreational vehicle or manufactured
home on any street, alley or highway or other public place or on any tract of land owned by any person, except as
provided in this article.

(b)

This article shall not apply to persons occupying a manufactured home as a permanent dwelling when such
manufactured home is situated on the occupant's own land.

(c)

A permit shall be obtained from the city council to: Park a camper on the land of another and outside of a duly
established campground.
The permit shall be for a period of one year and at a fee of $10.00, no part of which will be refunded if the occupancy
is terminated at any time prior to the expiration of the year for which the permit is issued. The permit will be granted
only upon the written consent of the owner, legal agent or lessee of the premises for which the permit is issued.

(Code 1982, §§ 5-302.01, 5-302.03, 5-302.04; Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 2-20-95)

Sec. 46-72. - Application for permit.
Application for the permit required in section 46-71 shall be made at the city light and water office and on forms furnished by
the city. The application shall contain the street number or legal description of the property on which the recreational vehicle shall
be parked; the name of the owner of such premises and his permission to park; a statement of the nature and location of sanitary
facilities and that all wastewater from the recreational vehicle shall be emptied into proper sewer connected fixtures. A plat of the
premises on which the camper is to be parked shall accompany the application showing the location of the recreational vehicle in
reference to streets, alleys and nearest buildings.
(Code 1982, § 5-302.05; Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 2-20-95)

Sec. 46-73. - Use of plumbing xtures.
The use of plumbing fixtures installed in any recreational vehicle or manufactured home is prohibited, unless the fixtures
empty into an approved receptacle or disposal system.
(Code 1982, § 5-302.06; Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 2-20-95)

Sec. 46-74. - Parking in re zone prohibited.
The parking of recreational vehicles or manufactured homes within the fire zone now established by ordinance within the city
limits is prohibited.
(Code 1982, § 5-302.07; Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 2-20-95)

Chapter 50 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(23) State

Law reference— Nebraska Criminal Code, R.R.S. 1943, § 28-101 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 50-1. - Costs.
103/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Any person who shall be convicted of violating any ordinance of the city shall pay the costs of prosecution in addition to any
fine levied against him.
(Code 1982, § 6-501)

Sec. 50-2. - Failure to pay ne and costs.
Any person who shall fail to pay a fine or costs of prosecution upon conviction of a misdemeanor shall be committed to the
city jail until his fine and costs are paid or otherwise satisfied as provided by law.
(Code 1982, § 6-502)

Sec. 50-3. - Driving over re hose.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to drive, propel or draw any vehicle over or across or upon any fire hose of
the city which shall for any purpose be laid upon the ground or pavement, whether the fire hose shall be in any street, alley or
public place within the city or on any private property therein. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in any sum not less than $5.00 nor more than $25.00 and
shall be committed to jail until such fine and costs are paid.
(Code 1982, § 6-401)

Secs. 50-4—50-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY

Sec. 50-26. - Penalty for violation of article.
Any person guilty of violating the provisions of section 50-27 shall be fined in a sum not exceeding $500.00.
(Code 1982, § 6-201.01)

Sec. 50-27. - Unlawful shooting.
No person shall fire off or discharge any firearm or fire off or discharge any airgun, B-B gun, gas-operated gun or spring gun,
or any instrument, toy or weapon commonly known as a slingshot, or any other device made for the purpose of throwing or
projecting missiles of any kind by any means whatsoever so as to threaten or assault any person or to injure or endanger another
person's property, at any place within the city, except:
(1)

In cases when peace officers may deem it necessary to use firearms to enforce the ordinances of the city or
the state statutes; and

(2)

Within the area leased, designated and used for practice and demonstration purposes by the Minden Gun and
Rod Club or similar recognized organizations to promote the safe use of firearms.

(Code 1982, § 6-201)

Secs. 50-28—50-40. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - TOBACCO PRODUCTS

104/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

FOOTNOTE(S):
(24) Editor's

note— Ord. No. 1037, §§ 1—4, adopted Feb. 3, 1998, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 7-1—7-4. For purposes

of preserving the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 50-41—50-44.
Sec. 50-41. - Tobacco products; de ned.
Tobacco products shall be defined to mean any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes,
cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, or dipping tobacco.
(Ord. No. 1037, § 1, 2-3-98)

Sec. 50-42. - Tobacco; possession by minor unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to possess any tobacco products; provided that the possession by
a person under the age of 18 years under the direct supervision of the parent or guardian of such person in the privacy of the
parent's or guardian's home shall not be prohibited.
(Ord. No. 1037, § 2, 2-3-98)

Sec. 50-43. - Exceptions.
It shall not be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to sell or handle any unopened container of tobacco products
in the course of his or her employment.
(Ord. No. 1037, § 3, 2-3-98)

Sec. 50-44. - Penalty.
Persons convicted of unlawful possession of tobacco products shall be punished by a monetary fine of not less than $35.00
and not more than $100.00.
(Ord. No. 1037, § 4, 2-3-98)

Chapter 54 - PARKS AND RECREATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
(25) Cross

reference— Administration, ch. 2.

(25) State

Law reference— Authority to provide parks, recreational centers, R.R.S. 1943, § 17-948 et seq.; recreational facilities,

R.R.S. 1943, § 13-304.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Secs. 54-1—54-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - PARKS

Sec. 54-26. - Levy of tax for park fund.

105/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

There shall be levied each year a tax of not less than one mill and not exceeding three mills on the dollar on all the real estate
and personal property within the corporate limits of the city, which levy shall be collected and paid into the city treasury and shall
constitute the park fund of such city. The funds so levied and collected shall be used for the laying out, improving and beautifying
of parks and for the payment of salary and wages of persons employed in such labor.
(Code 1982, § 13-101)

State law reference— Park tax authorized, R.R.S. 1943, § 17-951.
Sec. 54-27. - Management of parks.
The mayor and city council shall have charge of all parks belonging to the city and establish rules for the management, care
and use of the parks. All accounts against such park fund shall be audited and paid as other warrants are paid by the city
treasurer.
(Code 1982, § 13-102)

Sec. 54-28. - Park boundaries.
City's park boundaries are described as follows:
All of lot H in the SE¼ NW¼ of section 7-6-14 except the east 25 feet thereof and a strip of land 25 feet wide along the
south side of the right-of-way of the Burlington Northern Co. (formerly the C.B. & Q. Railroad Co.) across the north side of the
tracts H and M and confirming unto the heirs of Charles Paulsen, now deceased, the following described tract: the east 25 feet
of tract H and all of tract M, except a strip of land 25 feet wide along the south side of the right-of-way of the Burlington
Northern Railroad and across the north side of the tracts H and M, in the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter (SE¼
NW¼) of section 7, township 6, range 14, except the tract deeded to the county by deed recorded in book 50, page 224, of the
records of the county.
(Code 1982, § 13-103)

Secs. 54-29—54-50. - Reserved.

ARTICLE III. - RECREATIONAL CENTERS AND PLAYGROUNDS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(26) State

Law reference— Recreational facilities, R.R.S. 1943, § 13-304.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 54-51. - Designation.
(a)

The swimming pool, picnic grounds, tennis courts, swings, rides, horseshoe courts and slides located at the
American Legion Park shall be designated, maintained and supervised as the American Legion Recreational Center
and Playground.

(b)

The baseball field, tennis courts, picnic grounds and playground equipment located at Jaycee Park will be
designated, maintained and supervised as the Jaycee Park Recreational Center and Playground.

(c)

Such portion of the municipal airport as may be available for use without interfering with the primary purpose of
the airport grounds shall be set aside and designated, maintained and supervised as the Veterans Memorial
106/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Recreation Center. The following facilities are part of the Veterans Memorial Recreation Center: Ollie Bjorklund
Memorial Ballpark, Minden Gun Club, Kearney County Fairgrounds and the Minden Country Club and Golf Course.
(d)

Such additional recreation centers and playgrounds shall be established, maintained and supervised in cooperation
with the other governmental subdivisions wholly or partly within the city as may be feasible.

(Ord. No. 924, § 1(100-101.01), 12-4-89)

Sec. 54-52. - Improvements and maintenance.
(a)

Improvements and maintenance of the various recreational centers will be monitored by the recreation board. The
recreation board will submit plans for improvements to the city council through the presentation of a yearly budget.
Therefore, all improvements and maintenance of the recreational centers will be cooperatively approved and
initiated by the city council, city administrator, recreation director and the recreation board.

(b)

All suggested improvements will first be submitted to the recreation board for approval before being brought to the
city council.

(Ord. No. 924, § 1(100-101.02), 12-4-89)

Sec. 54-53. - Recreation director.
(a)

Necessity; salary. In order for the recreation board to be successful in completing its purpose, a recreation director
is necessary. The recreation director is a salaried individual that is charged with the responsibility of management
and supervision of recreational facilities and programs. His salary will be set by the city administrator and approved
by the city council through the adoption of the recreation budget.

(b)

Duties. The duties of the recreation director are as follows:
(1)

Attend all meetings of the recreation board.

(2)

Assist organizations in building a practice and game schedule to prevent overlapping of facility usage.

(3)

Work with the board and the private sponsors of youth programs to identify facility usage.

(4)

Make arrangements to have all necessary repairs, improvements and additions to parks, fields and other
facilities owned by the city, used for recreation, recommended by the board, and approved by the council.

(5)

Develop a schedule for ballpark maintenance and present it to the recreation board once a year before the
baseball season.

(6)

Report to the council once per quarter on the activities of the recreation board and provide the council with a
master calendar showing facility usage, a maintenance schedule and completed as well as proposed repairs
and improvements.

(7)

Work with the recreation board in meeting their responsibility of coordination of youth and adult activities.

(8)

Coordinate and be involved in repairs that are made by volunteer groups via the recreation board.

(9)

Present a list of individuals to the mayor and council for consideration for appointment to the recreation
board.

(Ord. No. 924, § 1(100-101.03), 12-4-89)

Secs. 54-54—54-65. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - RECREATION BOARD

Sec. 54-66. - Composition; duties.
(a)

Providing opportunities. Recreational activities benefit the community. Through a well-planned recreational
107/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

program the youth of the city are provided with opportunities to excel physically and mentally. The programs aid in
the positive growth of our youth and result in a community with pride that has a strong sense of social
responsibility.
(b)

Responsibilities. At the present time most youth activities are funded by private organizations. This method of
funding should be maintained. The recreation board has not been established for the purpose of funding, but
rather for the purpose of providing the various organizations with a body that has the following responsibilities:
(1)

Identify youth and adult recreational activities that use city facilities.

(2)

Provide a list of the various programs, sponsors, and proposed schedules of the activities to the recreation
director that will assist the director in building a master activities calendar.

(3)

With the aid of the recreation director identify which facilities are to be used by what organization.

(4)

Identify facilities that are in need of repair and suggest improvements or additions to the recreational facilities
of the city.

(5)

Propose a budget to the city that identifies the needs of the recreation program.

(6)

Determine how much money will be spent that in fact does support youth or adult activities and is not used
for facility repair, upgrade or expansion.

(7)

Develop new programs and make recommendations for the improvement of programs, facilities and the
board itself.

(c)

(8)

Provide the recreation director with a list of people that would be willing to serve on the recreation board.

(9)

Assist the recreation director in finding volunteer help for the implementation of minor facility improvements.

Membership. In order for the board to carry out the responsibilities described in subsection (b) of this section it
should consist of a membership that includes a number of organizations. Therefore, the recreation board will
include the recreation director, and seven members that will be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city
council. Four of the appointed members will serve one-year terms and three of the members shall serve two-year
terms. After the initial one-year appointment, the position shall then be for a two-year term.

(d)

Representation; meeting schedule. When considering appointments to the recreation board the mayor may first
consider individuals that represent youth organizations of the city. The board shall meet in the following months:
February, March, April, May, September and October and otherwise as it shall determine. All other meeting dates
and times shall be arranged by the recreation board.

(e)

Officers. The board will elect a president and a secretary who will serve two-year terms. The board will appoint all of
its own committees.

(Ord. No. 924, § 1(100-101.03), 12-4-89; Ord. No. 983, § 1(100-101.03), 1-3-94; Ord. No. 1087, § 1, 6-3-02)

Sec. 54-67. - Financial support.
A budget will be prepared by the recreation board and will be submitted to the city council for approval each year. The budget
will include the salary of the recreation director and the cost of improvements and maintenance of the recreational centers.
(Ord. No. 924, § 1(100-101.04), 12-4-89)

Chapter 58 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(27) Cross

reference— Administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 18.

(27) State

Law reference— Itinerant merchants, R.R.S. 1943, § 75-323 et seq.

108/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 58-1. - Street vendors; selling or vending of merchandise on city streets prohibited; exceptions.
The selling or vending of merchandise, wares, goods, food, drinks, or any other merchandise or materials, is prohibited on the
streets of the city, either from vehicles, whether motorized or not, or by any other method of traveling about the city, except that
the city council may permit the use of public streets and sidewalks within those areas of the city zoned commercial or by business
abutting the street or sidewalk in accordance with the provisions of R.R.S. 1943, § 19-4301.
(Ord. No. 943, § 24(11-102.23), 6-1-92; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 2-7-11)

Sec. 58-2. - Penalty for violations of this article.
Any persons violating any of the provisions of this article, or knowingly filing, or causing to be filed, a false affidavit in
connection with the application as provided in this article, or representing in any way that any permit granted pursuant to this
article is an endorsement of such solicitation, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00.
(Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 2-7-11)

Sec. 58-3. - Expiration of permits.
Any and all permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on December 31 of the year in which such permit was issued.
(Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 2-7-11)

Secs. 58-4—58-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED

FOOTNOTE(S):
(28)

Editor's note— Ord. No. 1165, § 1, adopted Feb. 7, 2011, repealed Ch. 58, Art. II, Divs. 1, 2, §§ 58-26, 58-27, 58-41—58-45, in its

entirety. Former Art. II pertained to Charitable Solicitations. See Code Comparative Table for derivation.
Secs. 58-26—58-65. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - PEDDLERS
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 58-66. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Peddler means any individual, whether a resident of this city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any
other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, for the sale of, as well as the selling,
offering for sale or taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any
109/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for service to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual
has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or not or whether he is collecting advance payments on such
sales or not; provided that such definition shall include any person who, for himself, or for another person, hires, leases, uses or
occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodginghouse, apartment, shop, parking lot, parking space
or any other place, whether public or private, within this city. The word "peddler" shall include the term "canvasser," "solicitor,"
"transient or itinerant merchant or vendor" or "transient or itinerant photographer."
(Ord. No. 943, § 1(11-102), 6-1-92)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 58-67. - Exceptions to article.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following:
(1)

Sales made to dealers or permanent merchants by commercial travelers selling in the usual course of
business;

(2)

Sheriffs, constables, bona fide assignees, receivers or trustees in bankruptcy or other public officers selling
goods, wares and merchandise according to law;

(3)

Solicitations, sales or distributions made by nonprofit, charitable, educational or religious organizations which
may have their principal place of activity within this city. These organizations not having their principal place of
activity in this city shall register at the office of the city clerk prior to the initiation of any solicitation.

(Ord. No. 943, § 2(11-102.01), 6-1-92; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 2-7-11)

Sec. 58-68. - Location of business restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any farmer, truck grower or others who produce, hawk or peddle products of the farm, fruit or other
staples of food to park their conveyances or erect a place of business for the purpose of selling such products upon public streets,
parks, ways or areas within the city.
(Ord. No. 943, § 3(11-102.02), 6-1-92)

Sec. 58-69. - Entrance to premises restricted.
Going on private premises; nuisances. The practice of going in and upon private residences or public property in the city by
solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors of merchandise and services, not having been requested
or invited to do so by the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of private residences, for the purpose of soliciting orders for
the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, or for the purpose of disposing of, peddling or hawking the same, is hereby declared to
be a nuisance and unlawful unless a solicitors business permit is acquired pursuant to this section.
(Ord. No. 943, § 4(11-102.03), 6-1-92; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 2-7-11)

Sec. 58-70. - Refusing to leave.
(a)

Any peddler who enters upon premises owned, leased or rented by another and refuses to leave such premises
after having been notified by the owner or occupant of such premises, or his agent, to leave the same and not
return to such premises, shall be deemed guilty of an offense punishable as provided in section 1-8 of this Code.

(b)

The law enforcement officers of the city [are] hereby required and directed to suppress all unlawful nuisances
described in the foregoing section and are empowered upon proper complaint to arrest in the manner authorized
by law any and all persons complained of engaged in such unlawful practices.

(Ord. No. 943, § 5(11-102.04), 6-1-92; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 2-7-11)

110/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 58-71. - Reserved.
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 1049, § 1, adopted July 6, 1998, repealed § 58-71, which pertained to misrepresentation by a peddler and derived from
Ord. No. 943, § 6(11-102.05), adopted June 1, 1992.
Sec. 58-72. - Reserved.
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 1049, § 1, adopted July 6, 1998, repealed § 58-72, which pertained to hours of operation by a peddler and derived from
Ord. No. 943, § 7(11-102.06), adopted June 1, 1992.
Secs. 58-73—58-85. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT

Sec. 58-86. - Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a peddler within this city without first obtaining a permit to do so.
(Ord. No. 943, § 8(11-102.07), 6-1-92; Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 7-6-98; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 2-7-11)

Sec. 58-87. - Application.
Peddlers shall be required to give the following information on a form to be furnished by the city clerk:
(1)

The company whom they represent, including the name of the company, the home office address and
telephone number of said company;

(2)

The product or product line which they are selling;

(3)

The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the individuals who are in the city, or will be in the city, who
are representing the company and the product or product line which they are selling.

(4)

Valid driver's license including photo ID, or in the event the person or persons do not have a valid driver's
license, then a state photo ID.

(5)

Vehicle information including the make, year and license number of the vehicle or vehicles that will be
operating within the city;

(6)

Copies of any appropriate permits issued by any city, state or federal governmental agency including but not
limited to health permits, federal and state ID numbers for taxing purposes or any other purposes.

(7)

By making said application the peddler agrees to allow the City of Minden to conduct any appropriate
background checks deemed necessary for consideration of the application and agree to sign any required
waivers of liability documents.

(8)

Any background checks shall be completed and permits issued within seven (7) business days of the
application being filed.

(Ord. No. 943, § 9(11-102.08), 6-1-92; Ord. No. 1049, § 3, 7-6-98; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 2-7-11)

Sec. 58-88. - Reserved.

111/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Editor's note—
Ord. No. 1049, § 4, adopted July 6, 1998, repealed § 58-88, which pertained to identification required by an applicant and derived
from Ord. No. 943, § 10(11-102.09), adopted June 1, 1992.
Sec. 58-89. - Application fee.
To defray the city's expenses in processing the application of the peddler, the applicant shall pay an application fee of $50.00
at the time of filing his application.
(Ord. No. 958, § 11(1-102.10), 12-21-92; Ord. No. 1049, § 5, 7-6-98; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 2-7-11)

Sec. 58-90. - Reserved.
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 1049, § 6, adopted July 6, 1998, repealed § 58-90, which pertained to false information and derived from Ord. No. 943, §
12(11-102.11), adopted June 1, 1992.
Sec. 58-91. - Reserved.
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 1049, § 6, adopted July 6, 1998, repealed § 58-91, which pertained to bonds and derived from Ord. No. 943, § 14(11102.13), adopted June 1, 1992.
Sec. 58-92. - Reserved.
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 1049, § 6, adopted July 6, 1998, repealed § 58-92, which pertained to service of process and derived from Ord. No. 943, §
15(11-102.14), adopted June 1, 1992.
Sec. 58-93. - Reserved.
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 1049, § 6, adopted July 6, 1998, repealed § 58-93, which pertained to the investigation of applicant and business and
derived from Ord. No. 943, § 16(11-102.15), adopted June 1, 1992.
Sec. 58-94. - Reserved.
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 1049, § 6, adopted July 6, 1998, repealed § 58-94, which pertained to denial of permits and derived from Ord. No. 943, §
17(11-102.16), adopted June 1, 1992.
Sec. 58-95. - Reserved.
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 1049, § 6, adopted July 6, 1998, repealed § 58-95, which pertained to issuance of permits and derived from Ord. No. 943, §
18(11-102.17), adopted June 1, 1992.

112/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 58-96. - Reserved.
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 1049, § 6, adopted July 6, 1998, repealed § 58-96, which pertained to the contents of permits and derived from Ord. No.
943, § 19(11-102.18), adopted June 1, 1992.
Sec. 58-97. - Record.
The city clerk shall keep a permanent record of applications filed with the city under the provisions of this chapter in
accordance with the Nebraska Public Records Retention Act.
(Ord. No. 943, § 20(11-102.19), 6-1-92; Ord. No. 1049, § 7, 7-6-98; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 2-7-11)

Sec. 58-98. - Reserved.
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 1049, § 8, adopted July 6, 1998, repealed § 58-98, which pertained to display of permits and derived from Ord. No. 943, §
21(11-102.20), adopted June 1, 1992.
Sec. 58-99. - Reserved.
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 1049, § 8, adopted July 6, 1998, repealed § 58-99, which pertained to the duration of permits and derived from Ord. No.
943, § 22(11-102.21), adopted June 1, 1992.
Sec. 58-100. - Reserved.
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 1049, § 8, adopted July 6, 1998, repealed § 58-100, which pertained to revocation of permits and derived from Ord. No.
943, § 23(11-102.22), adopted June 1, 1992.
Secs. 58-101—58-120. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 58-121. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
(1)

Transient merchant means any person that:
a.

Engages, either in one location or in traveling from place to place, in a temporary business of selling
and/or delivering goods, wares, merchandise, commodities, products of any kind or nature, or services
within the city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, rents, leases, uses or occupies any
building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, or boat, room in hotels or motels, lodginghouses,

113/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

apartments, shops, or any other premises, including street, alley, parking lot or other public building,
facility or place within the city, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either
privately or at public auction; or
b.

Sells, offers or exhibits for sale any goods, wares, merchandise, commodities, products or services during
the course of or any time within six months after a lecture or public meeting on or presentation of such
goods, wares, services, franchises, business opportunities, contracts or distributorships.

(2)

Subsection (1) notwithstanding, however, a transient merchant, for the purposes of this section, shall not
include the following:
a.

A person who shall occupy any of the places described in subsection (1)(a) of this section for the purpose
of conducting a permanent business therein; provided, however, that no person shall be relieved from
the provisions of this article by reason of rental or lease of space on the premises of a permanent
merchant or by a temporary association with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer or by
conducting such temporary or transient business in connection with, or as a part of, or in the name of
any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer.

b.

Any sales of merchandise damaged by smoke or fire, or of bankrupt concerns, where such stocks have
bene acquired from merchants of the city regularly engaged in business; provided, however, that no such
stocks of merchandise shall be augmented by new goods.

c.

A person exhibiting goods for sale concurrent with and as an adjunct to a group display, meeting or
convention duly authorized to be held in a publicly owned building and authorized and permitted
pursuant to this article.

d.

A person who sells his own property which was not acquired for resale, barter or exchange and who does
not conduct such sales or act as a participant by furnishing goods in such a sale more than twice during
any calendar year.

e.

Art exhibits where participating artists sell their original works and which do not including any sales of
artworks purchased elsewhere and held for resale, providing such art exhibits are sponsored by a
responsible civil or nonprofit organization.

f.

Itinerant merchants as defined by R.R.S. 1943 § 75-323 et seq., as amended, and by this article, and
peddlers, canvassers or solicitors as defined by this chapter.

g.

Garage sales held at private residences but no more than twice a year.

h.

The provisions of this article shall not apply to commercial travelers or selling agents in the usual course
of commercial business; nor to a bona fide sales of goods, wares or merchadise for future delivery in
interstate commerce, or where no license fee or occupation tax may be collected under the provisions of
the Constitution or laws of the United States, nor to any sales of goods, wares or merchandise, or
exhibition thereof on the grounds of any agricultural society or county fair association during the
continuance of any annual fair or exposition held by such society, fair board, fair association, or civic
organization; nor to any sales by any other nonprofit organization or society acting for charities, religious
or other public or civil purposes.

i.

The promotor, sponsor or other person organizing a convention, show or sale, which convention, show
or sale includes ten or more transient or local dealers, merchants or exhibitors, shall pay a display license
fee of $50.00 and obtain a display license in accordance with the provisions of this article.

j.

Conventions or religious, civic, charitable or benevolent groups, nonprofit trade associations, concerts
and cultural events shall be exempt from this article.

(Ord. No. 943, § 25(11-102.24), 6-1-92; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 2-7-11)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
114/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Secs. 58-122—58-130. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS

Sec. 58-131. - Transient merchant permit.
It shall be unlawful for any person or for any agent, servant or employee of any person to engage in, carry on or conduct the
business of a transient merchant without first obtaining a permit to do so. The information required in the application shall be the
same as that required in section 58-87.
(Ord. No. 943, § 26(11-102.25), 6-1-92; Ord. No. 1049, § 9, 7-6-98; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 2-7-11)

Sec. 58-132. - Reserved.
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 1049, § 10, adopted July 6, 1998, repealed § 58-132, which pertained to display permits and derived from Ord. No. 943, §
27(11-102.26), adopted June 1, 1992.
Sec. 58-133. - Reserved.
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 1049, § 10, adopted July 6, 1998, repealed § 58-133, which pertained to hearings by council to determine identity and
derived from Ord. No. 943, § 28(11-102.27), adopted June 1, 1992.
Sec. 58-134. - Record.
The city clerk shall keep a permanent record of all applications filed with the city.
(Ord. No. 1049, § 11, 7-6-98; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 2-7-11)

Sec. 58-135. - Registration fee.
To defray the city's expense in processing the application of the transient merchant and the display license fee, the applicant
shall pay a registration fee of $50.00 at the time of filing his application.
(Ord. No. 1049, § 12, 7-6-98; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 2-7-11)

Chapter 62 - PLANNING
FOOTNOTE(S):
(29) Cross

reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 46;

utilities, ch. 86; zoning, ch. 94.
(29) State

Law reference— Effect of regulations of municipalities outside corporate limits, R.R.S. 1943, § 18-1716; community

redevelopment, R.R.S. 1943, § 18-2101 et seq.; city planning and zoning, R.R.S. 1943, § 19-901 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

115/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 62-1. - Authority to adopt municipal plan.
The city shall be authorized to make, adopt, amend, extend, and carry out a municipal plan as authorized by law.
(Code 1982, § 15-101)

State law reference— Municipal plans, R.R.S. 1943, §§ 18-1302, 18-1306; comprehensive development plan, R.R.S. 1943, § 19-903.
Secs. 62-2—62-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION

FOOTNOTE(S):
(30)

Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.

(30)

State Law reference— Municipal planning commission, R.R.S. 1943, § 19-924 et seq.

Sec. 62-26. - Creation; membership.
A commission to be known as city planning commission is created which shall consist of nine members who shall represent
insofar as is feasible different professions, interests or occupations in the city and who shall be appointed by the mayor by and
with the approval of a three-fourths vote of the council.
(Code 1982, § 15-102)

State law reference— Appointments, R.R.S. 1943, § 19-926.
Sec. 62-27. - Compensation.
All members of the city planning commission shall serve as such without compensation and shall hold no other municipal
office.
(Code 1982, § 15-103)

Sec. 62-28. - Terms.
The term of each member of the city planning commission shall be three years, except that three members of the first
commission shall be appointed to serve for a term of one year, three to serve for the term of two years, and three to serve for the
term of three years. All members shall hold office until their successors are appointed. All members, may, after a public hearing
before the city council, be removed by the mayor, by and with the consent of a three-fourths vote of the council, for inefficiency,
neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office or other good and sufficient cause. Vacancies on the commission occurring other than
through the expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor.
(Code 1982, § 15-104)

Sec. 62-29. - Chairman; meetings; rules; records to be kept.
The city planning commission shall elect its chairman from its members and create and fill such other of its offices as it may
determine. The term of the chairman shall be for one year and he shall be eligible for re-election. The commission shall hold at
least one regular meeting in each calendar quarter. The chairperson may call for a meeting when necessary to deal with business
before the commission. It shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions,
findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record.
116/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(Code 1982, § 15-105; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 4-21-97)

Sec. 62-30. - Powers.
The chairman of the commission shall have the power to administer an oath to any person concerning any matter submitted
to the commission or coming within the powers and duties of the commission. The commission may further issue process to
compel the attendance of persons before it and shall have the power to subpoena books, records and papers if necessary, which
process shall be served the same as processes issued out of the city police court.
(Code 1982, § 15-109)

Sec. 62-31. - Expenditures.
The council may provide the funds, equipment and accommodations necessary for the work of the commission, but the
expenditures of the commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for that purpose by the council, and
no expenditures nor agreements for expenditures shall be valid or legal in excess of such amount. Such commission shall have the
authority and the power to accept and receive donations of cash or property, gifts, bequests and grants and, with the approval of
the council, may use such nonappropriated assets as the commission shall deem beneficial and advantageous to the city.
(Code 1982, § 15-106)

Sec. 62-32. - Function.
It shall be the function and duty of the commission to make and adopt plans for the physical development of the municipality,
including any areas outside of its boundaries but within its statutory authority which, in the commission's judgment, bear relation
to the planning of the municipality.
(Code 1982, § 15-107)

State law reference— Powers and duty, R.R.S. 1943, § 19-929.
Sec. 62-33. - Programs.
The commission, from time to time, shall recommend to the appropriate public officials programs for public structures and
improvements and for the financing thereof. It shall be the function and duty of the commission to further consult and advise with
public officials and agencies, civic organizations, public utility companies, educational, professional and other
organizations and with citizens with relation to the promulgation and carrying out of the plan. The commission shall
have the power to delegate authority to any of the groups named in this section to conduct studies and make surveys
for the commission if it deems expedient.
(Code 1982, § 15-108)

Secs. 62-34—62-50. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY

FOOTNOTE(S):
(31) Editor's

note— Ord. No. 1090, § 1, adopted November 7, 2002, changed the title of article III from "Community Development

Authority" to "Community Redevelopment Authority." The historical notation of the sections has been retained for reference
purposes.

117/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 62-51. - Community Redevelopment Authority of the City of Minden created.
There is hereby created the Community Redevelopment Authority of the City of Minden, pursuant to Nebraska Revised
Statutes Section 18-2101-01.
(Ord. No. 1074, § 1, 5-23-01; Ord. No. 1090, § 1, 11-7-02)

Editor's note—
Ord. No. 1090, § 1, adopted November 7, 2002, changed the title of § 62-51 from "Community Development Authority of the City of
Minden created" to "Community Redevelopment Authority of the City of Minden created." The historical notation has been
retained for reference purposes.
Sec. 62-52. - Powers.
The Community Redevelopment Authority of the City of Minden shall have all of the powers set forth in Nebraska Revised
Statutes Section 18-2101 through 18-2154 and any additional powers granted by the legislature of the State of Nebraska from time
to time for community redevelopment authorities.
(Ord. No. 1074, § 2, 5-23-01; Ord. No. 1090, § 1, 11-7-02)

Sec. 62-53. - Administration; terms.
The affairs of the Community Redevelopment Authority of the City of Minden shall be administered by the community
redevelopment authority board of directors appointed by the mayor of the City of Minden with the consent of the city council of
the City of Minden. The terms of office of the members of the authority initially appointed shall be for one year, two years, three
years, four years and five years, as designated by the mayor, in making the respective appointments. As the terms of the members
of the authority expire, the mayor with the approval of the governing body of the city, shall appoint or reappoint a member of the
authority for a term of five years to succeed the member whose term expires.
(Ord. No. 1074, § 3, 5-23-01; Ord. No. 1090, § 1, 11-7-02)

Sec. 62-54. - Election of o cers.
The members of the Community Redevelopment Authority of the City of Minden shall organize by electing one of its members
chairperson and another vice-chairperson and one of the members as secretary of the authority and such other officers and
employees as may be desired, and shall fix the term of office and qualifications of each. The authority shall also have the power to
employ legal counsel.
(Ord. No. 1074, § 4, 5-23-01; Ord. No. 1090, § 1, 11-7-02)

Chapter 66 - SOLID WASTE
FOOTNOTE(S):
(32) Cross

reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34.

(32) State

Law reference— Garbage disposal, R.R.S. 1943, § 19-2101 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 66-1. - Post-closure care—Reserve special fund.

118/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

The city shall reserve a special fund for the purpose of paying the annual post-closure care costs for the municipal solid waste
disposal area (landfill) identified in the postclosure care cost estimate provided to the Nebraska Department of Environmental
Quality (NDEQ). The post-closure landfill fund shall be kept in a separate account reserved for the specific purpose of assuring
post-closure care costs.
(Ord. No. 1025, § 1, 11-18-96)

Sec. 66-2. - Same—Default.
In the event of abandonment or default by the city of its obligations for post-closure care, these funds shall be made available
to the NDEQ for post-closure care of the municipal landfill upon presentation to the city, by the NDEQ director, a signed statement
certifying that certain funds are due and payable to the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality pursuant to regulations
issued under authority of the Nebraska Environmental Protection Act (Reissue Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, § 81-1501 et
seq.), the Integrated Solid Waste Management Act (Reissue Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, § 13-2001 et seq.) as amended,
and Title 132-Integrated Solid Waste Management Regulations.
(Ord. No. 1025, § 2, 11-18-96)

Sec. 66-3. - Same—Costs.
The city shall pay the costs of the post-closure care each year for 18 years following the closure of the municipal landfill, and to
fund and maintain the post-closure care account each year at an amount equal to twice the annual post-closure care cost estimate
submitted to the NDEQ.
(Ord. No. 1025, § 3, 11-18-96)

Sec. 66-4. - Same—Update cost estimate.
The city shall update the post-closure care cost estimate each year during the postclosure care period for inflation, and any
time the post-closure care plan changes.
(Ord. No. 1025, § 4, 11-18-96)

Sec. 66-5. - Same—Account.
The funds in the post-closure care account shall be kept on deposit in a bank account insured by the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation or shall be secured in the manner provided by deposits of other funds of the city. Monies credited to said
account may, to the extent permitted by law, be invested in direct obligations of or obligations the principal and interest of which
was guaranteed by the United States Government, and which shall be readily convertible into cash. The city shall provide the
NDEQ with suitable evidence of such investments, including copies of any certificates of deposit, escrow agreement, or other
investment documents, and annual reports of the account balance.
(Ord. No. 1025, § 5, 11-18-96)

Sec. 66-6. - Same—Budget.
The city will separately identify the post-closure care obligation in its fiscal year budget or in its comprehensive annual
financial report. The amount in the post-closure care account may increase or decrease to match any adjustment to the identified
cost estimate which may be required.
(Ord. No. 1025, § 6, 11-18-96)

Sec. 66-7. - Same—Costs remain outstanding.
119/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

So long as post-closure care costs remain outstanding, the city shall maintain said account and will administer the same in
accordance with the provisions contained in the ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1025, § 7, 11-18-96)

Sec. 66-8. - Same—Account inviolate against claims.
The post-closure care account shall be and remain inviolate against the claims of all other creditors, it being the intent of
sections 66-1 through 66-12 that the account established will ensure:
(1)

That the assured amount of funds will be available in a timely manner for post-closure care activities of the
municipal landfill; and

(2)

The post-closure care account shall be invested by the city in the manner provided by law; and

(3)

To assure for the prompt payment of the amounts requested by the NDEQ for post-closure care under the
provisions of sections 66-1 through 66-12 to cover the post-closure care costs, the "full faith, credit and
resources of the city are hereby irrevocably pledged"; and

(4)

The director of public works is directed to produce an annual report for transmittal to the NDEQ, containing
the following information concerning the municipal landfill:
a.

As appropriate, a revised post-closure care cost estimate as specified in Title 132-Chapter 8;

b.

Status, including current balance of the post-closure care account; and

c.

A copy of the latest independently audited year-end financial statement of the city.

(Ord. No. 1025, § 8, 11-18-96)

Sec. 66-9. - Modi cations; written consent of NDEQ.
The provisions of sections 66-1 through 66-12 may only be modified, amended or repealed with the written consent of the
Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality, or upon submission of an alternate financial assurance mechanism approved by
the director of the NDEQ. A true and correct copy of any such amendatory or supplemental ordinance and of sections 66-1
through 66-12 shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and in the municipal landfill operating record.
(Ord. No. 1025, § 9, 11-18-96)

Sec. 66-10. - Contract between city and NDEQ.
The provisions of sections 66-1 through 66-12 shall, in addition, constitute a contract between the city and the NDEQ, and the
NDEQ may by suit, action, mandamus, injunction or other proceedings either at law or in equity, enforce or compel performance
of all duties and obligations required by sections 66-1 through 66-12 to be done and performed by the city.
(Ord. No. 1025, § 10, 11-18-96)

Sec. 66-11. - Maintain level of assurance.
If for any reason, including default, the city ceases at any time to maintain the level of assurance required by sections 66-1
through 66-12, the city shall notify the NDEQ by certified mail within 30 days and shall obtain alternate coverage within 60 days
after the receipt of notice by the NDEQ.
(Ord. No. 1025, § 11, 11-18-96)

Sec. 66-12. - Severability.

120/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of sections 66-1 through 66-12 shall be held invalid, such holding shall not effect
the validity or constitutionality of any other provisions of sections 66-1 through 66-12.
(Ord. No. 1025, § 12, 11-18-96)

Secs. 66-13—66-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 66-26. - Penalty for violation of article.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall upon conviction be fined in any sum not more than
$500.00 and shall be adjudged to pay the costs of prosecution and shall be committed to jail until such fine and costs are paid.
(Code 1982, § 2-207)

Sec. 66-27. - Purpose of article.
The purpose of this article is to protect the health, lives and property of the residents and inhabitants of the city by providing
safe and sanitary means of disposal of trash and garbage at a reasonable cost. Any person who shall consider that he is unjustly
treated or that anything unjust, unfair or improper is done in the enforcement of this article may make complaint in writing and
deliver the complaint to the city clerk. The clerk will present the complaint to the mayor and council, and the complaining party will
be notified of the time set for a hearing and a full and fair consideration. Such relief will be given as the council shall find to be fair
and just.
(Code 1982, § 2-205)

Sec. 66-28. - Authority to transport and dispose.
The transportation and disposal of trash, garbage and waste material shall be provided for and done under the direction of
the city mayor and council according to the provisions of this article and under the rules and regulations to be established by the
mayor and council.
(Code 1982, § 2-201)

Sec. 66-29. - Fees.
The mayor and council are authorized to fix fees to be charged for the collection, transportation and disposal of all trash,
garbage and waste material. The fees shall be reasonable and consistent with the service performed and shall be based upon the
cost to the city of such service. In determining the cost of service, proper allowance shall be made for the cost of labor, machinery,
bookkeeping, billing, supervision and any other cost or expense properly charged to the collection and disposal of garbage and
waste matter. Whenever experience shows that the fees charged are insufficient to pay all of the costs described in this section,
then the fees shall be increased to such amounts as will reimburse the city for its costs. Whenever the fees charged are found to
be more than sufficient to pay the costs, then they shall be reduced accordingly. Until changed by resolution adopted by the city
council, the fees for collection and disposal of garbage and other waste material shall be payable quarterly and in advance on
January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 and shall be billed to the customers on the same card, together with their monthly light
bills.
(Code 1982, § 2-202)

121/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 66-30. - Persons authorized to haul.
It shall be unlawful for any person, except the city, to haul for hire any garbage, waste paper, tin cans, bottles or other waste
and discarded material within the city or away from the city; provided, however, that any person who desires to may haul or
transport his own garbage and waste in accordance with the rules and regulations prescribed by the mayor and council for the
transportation and disposal of garbage and waste material. If any person shall desire to haul or transport his own garbage and
waste material, he may deliver such garbage and waste material to the city dump between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. or
as set by order of the
city administrator on any day but Sundays and holidays. At all other times the gate to the city dump will be locked,
and it will be unlawful to make any deliveries there except at times stated in this section or to dump any trash or
garbage over the fence or along the road.
(Code 1982, § 2-203)

Sec. 66-31. - Garbage care before collection.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or leave any garbage, waste paper, tin cans, bottles or other waste and discarded
material except tree limbs and other material which will not blow away or be attractive to dogs upon any street or alley within the
city, or to keep or expose the same on any private premises within the city unless the same shall be placed beyond the reach of
dogs and insects, or securely enclosed within a covered container, which is entirely dogproof and insectproof, and which
containers shall be approved by the city.
(Code 1982, § 2-204; Ord. No. 1035, § 1, 10-20-97)

Sec. 66-32. - Yard waste.
(a)

All yard waste consisting of grass clippings, leaves, brush and tree branches shall no longer be accepted for disposal
in the pit by the city landfill effective June 1, 1993.

(b)

Such yard waste will be accepted at the city landfill for deposit on the compost pile or the burn pile so long as such
yard waste is separated according to its content and is not in plastic bags or other such containers.

(Ord. No. 963, § 1, 5-3-93)

Sec. 66-33. - Newsprint prohibited from waste stream.
It shall be unlawful for any person, business or entity of any kind to deposit newsprint in any of the approved collection
containers within the city.
(Ord. No. 1062, § 1, 12-6-99)

Secs. 66-34—66-45. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - BURNING

Sec. 66-46. - Generally.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of or burn any solid waste or rubbish, as defined by the laws of the state or by
the rules and regulations issued by the state environmental control council, except in the manner provided for collection,
transportation and disposal of trash, garbage and waste material by this chapter; provided, however, nothing contained in this

122/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

section shall prohibit the burning of wood, coal, paper and paper products in a furnace, indoor fireplace or incinerator which
complies with the fire and building codes of the city.
(Code 1982, § 16-101; Ord. No. 1083, § 1, 5-8-02)

Sec. 66-47. - Old, abandoned, useless motor vehicles.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the chief of the fire department may authorize the burning out of the interiors
of old, abandoned or useless motor vehicles at such places within the city as he shall determine to be suitable and, at such times
as may be least harmful to the environment and public safety, in connection with any organized cleanup campaign for the removal
of old, abandoned and useless motor vehicles from the community; provided, however, that such burning shall be done under the
supervision of the city fire department and shall be done in such a manner as to comply with all rules and regulations of the state
environmental control council.
(Code 1982, § 16-101.01)

Sec. 66-48. - Penalty for violation of division.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this division shall upon conviction be fined in any sum not more than
$500.00 and shall be ordered to pay the costs of prosecution and shall be committed to jail until such fine and costs are paid.
(Code 1982, § 16-102)

Chapter 70 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
FOOTNOTE(S):
(33)

Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; traffic and vehicles, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 86; vegetation, ch. 90;

zoning, ch. 94.
(33)

State Law reference— Overseer of streets, R.R.S. 1943, § 17-119; grading and repair, R.R.S. 1943, § 17-508 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Secs. 70-1—70-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALKS

Sec. 70-26. - Penalty for violation of article.
If any contractor, owner, lessee, or person shall hereafter build or construct or repair a sidewalk within the city, contrary to the
provisions of this article, the city administrator shall at once, and he is hereby authorized to remove the sidewalk without notice,
and such contractor, owner, lessee, or person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
in any sum not more than $500.00 and costs of prosecution.
(Code 1982, § 9-105)

Sec. 70-27. - Material and thickness.
All sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete and no other material. Such concrete walks shall be not less than four inches in
thickness.
123/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(Code 1982, § 9-101)

State law reference— Construction of sidewalks, R.R.S. 1943, § 17-523 et seq.
Sec. 70-28. - Line and grade.
All sidewalks shall be parallel with the adjoining lot line and upon such grade as may be established by the city administrator
or the city engineer until such time as a permanent grade shall be established by ordinance. No sidewalks shall be constructed
until such grade has been established. Whenever sidewalks shall be laid along a paved street, they shall be laid to a grade sloping
evenly from the lot line to the curb on a slope of approximately three-eighths inch to the foot.
(Code 1982, § 9-102)

Sec. 70-29. - Width.
All sidewalks in the city shall be not less than four feet wide except that along the east end of lots 4, 5, and 6, block 12; the
south side of block 21, the east end of lots 4, 5, and 6, block 21; the west end of lots 7, 8, and south half of 9, block 28; the south
side of lot 7 in block 28; the north side of lot 12, block 29, as far back as 70 feet; the north side of lot 12, block 30; the west end of
lot 12, block 30; the east end of lot 1, block 19; the north side of block 19; the east end of lots 1, 2, 3, and north half of 4, block 14;
and the east side of block 13, sidewalks shall all be 12 feet in width; and that along the west side of block 29, sidewalks shall be 9½
feet in width; and that opposite or along the west ends of lots 7, 8, and 9, block 21; the west ends of lots 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12,
block 19; the east ends of the south half of lot 4 and lots 5 and 6, block 14; the north side of lot 1, block 14; the south side of lot 6,
block 13; the north side of lot 1, block 13; the south side of lot 6, block 12, sidewalks shall be eight feet wide; that opposite or along
the east ends of lots 1, 2, and 3, block 12; the west ends of lots 10, 11, and 12, block 21; the east ends of lots 1, 2, 3, block 21 and
along the east side of blocks 22, 23, 24, and 19, sidewalks shall all be six feet wide; all of the specifically described property in this
section is located in the original town of Minden, Nebraska.
(Code 1982, § 9-103)

Sec. 70-30. - Condemnation.
No sidewalk heretofore constructed of any material other than concrete shall be repaired in any manner except replacement
with concrete, in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(Code 1982, § 9-104)

Sec. 70-31. - Walks out of repair.
(a)

Whenever any sidewalk within the limits of the city shall become broken or out of repair, it shall be the duty of the
city administrator to serve a notice upon the owner or occupant, or their agent, of lots fronting on such sidewalk,
when they are residents of the city, or found within the city, directing him or them to repair such broken or
defective sidewalk within five days. If dangerous to life and limb, it shall be the duty of the city administrator to
cause such sidewalk to be repaired, and the costs thereof, as reported to the council and approved, shall be
certified to the proper officer and shall, together with a 20 percent penalty, be charged and collected as special
assessments on such lot.

(b)

Whenever any sidewalk shall be out of repair so as to endanger life or limb of persons walking thereon, and when
the owners of the property are absent, or cannot be found or are nonresidents of the city, it shall be the duty of the
city administrator to post a notice on the property directing the owner of the lot fronting on such sidewalk to repair
the sidewalk within five days from the date of such notice. If the sidewalk is not repaired by the owner the city shall

124/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

cause such sidewalk to be repaired, and the costs thereof, with such 20 percent penalty, when reported to the city
council and approved, shall be certified to the proper officer, and charged and collected as special assessments on
such lot.
(Code 1982, §§ 9-201, 9-202; Ord. No. 995, § 1, 9-20-94)

Secs. 70-32—70-50. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - OBSTRUCTIONS

Sec. 70-51. - Penalty for violation of article.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, or who shall refuse or neglect to comply with the
requirements thereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof, shall be fined in any sum not
exceeding $100.00 and be committed until such fine and costs are fully paid.
(Code 1982, § 9-506)

Sec. 70-52. - Permanent; temporary; penalty.
(a)

Permanent. It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to erect or maintain any building or structure,
including plants or planters of any kind, in such manner as to be unsafe, injurious or annoying to the public, or to
allow any obstructions which are hanging or overlapping the sidewalk which cause pedestrians to alter their
forward progress, or to allow any sidewalk, curbstone, gutter, awning or awning posts to be placed or remain in a
dangerous condition or to place or allow to remain on any sidewalk or street any obstruction injurious to the public
use of the streets and sidewalks. Any such obstruction shall be positioned so that there remains a minimum unified
unobstructed space of 60 percent of the total sidewalk space between the obstruction and the face of the building
and further provided that there remains unobstructed a minimum of three feet between the curb and the
obstruction, and further, if any obstacle is placed against the face of a building the obstacle may not extend more
than two feet from the face of the building while meeting the requirements of this section. Any sidewalk
beautification project not complying with these guidelines shall be submitted to the city chamber's community
improvement committee for approval, with final recommendation being submitted to the city council for approval.

(b)

Temporary obstructions in sidewalk space. It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to erect, maintain or
allow to remain on any public sidewalk, or on any portion of the area between the lot line and curbline of any street,
any stand, vehicle, merchandise, machinery or any other obstruction injurious to, inconvenient to or inconsistent
with the public use of that area; provided that a reasonable time be allowed to remove goods, wares and
merchandise being received and shipped; and further provided that any merchant may occupy sidewalk space for
the purpose of conducting sales from the sidewalk area and displaying goods thereon, subject to the following:
(1)

The merchant may place tables, racks, wares and displays of merchandise, extending outward from his
business premises onto the public sidewalk, so long as at least the outer four feet in width of the sidewalk
remains unobstructed at all times, to allow normal pedestrian use.

(2)

The merchant may not delegate, assign, rent, lease or sell this privilege to others. The city council may grant
exceptions to the prohibitions contained in this section on a case-by-case basis.

(c)

Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall, on conviction thereof, be fined in
any sum not to exceed $100.00 for each and every offense, pay costs of prosecution and shall stand committed
until such fine and costs are paid.

(d)

Exceptions. The city council may grant exceptions to the prohibitions of this article on a case-by-case basis.

(Ord. No. 960, § 1, 2-1-93)

125/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

State law reference— Sidewalk obstructions, R.R.S. 1943, § 39-704.
Sec. 70-53. - Snow and ice.
It shall be unlawful for the occupant or the owner of any lot within the city to suffer or permit snow, sleet, mud, ice, slush or
other substance to accumulate and remain on the abutting sidewalk for a period of time in excess of twenty-four (24) hours after
the cessation of a storm. Snow removed from private property shall not be placed in or upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks
or other public ways; provided, except that in the C-1 business district of the city, snow from sidewalks may be pushed into the
gutter of the street outside the curbline.
(Code 1982, § 9-504; Ord. No. 1154, § 1, 11-16-2009)

Sec. 70-54. - Obstructing travel.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the public travel on any sidewalk, street or alley within the city in any
manner whatever.
(Code 1982, § 9-505)

Sec. 70-55. - Encumbering streets and sidewalks, generally.
It shall be unlawful for the occupant or the owner of any lot within the city to deposit, suffer or permit leaves, branches,
accumulations or piles of grass clipping or yard waste, gravel, rock, dirt or aggregate of any kind on the sidewalks, rights of way,
streets or gutters of the city, or allow such materials to remain on the locations described herein.
(Ord. No. 1154, § 2, 11-16-2009)

Secs. 70-56—70-75. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - NUMBERING STREETS AND BUILDINGS

Sec. 70-76. - Penalty for violation of this article.
All persons failing to comply with this article shall be fined in any sum not exceeding $500.00.
(Code 1982, § 9-608)

Sec. 70-77. - North and south.
For the purpose of numbering business houses and dwellings on all streets and avenues running north and south, what is
known as First Street shall be taken as a base from which to commence numbering the streets crossing such avenues, and likewise
Brown Avenue shall be a base from which to commence numbering all streets and avenues crossing such street.
(Code 1982, § 9-602)

Sec. 70-78. - East and west.
Each street and avenue running west from Brown Avenue shall, before the regular name or number, have the word "West"
added thereto, and all streets and avenues running east of Brown Avenue shall have before the regular name or number the word
"East" added thereto. Each street and avenue running south from First Street shall have before the regular name or number the
word "South" added thereto, and all streets and avenues running north of First Street shall have before the name or number the
word "North" added thereto.
126/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(Code 1982, § 9-603)

Sec. 70-79. - Odd and even.
The south and west sides of all streets and avenues shall have odd numbers only, and the north and east sides of all streets
and avenues shall have even numbers only.
(Code 1982, § 9-604)

Sec. 70-80. - Within blocks.
All numbers in any block shall have for their first digit the figure corresponding to the number of blocks such block is distant
from the base street or avenue.
(Code 1982, § 9-605)

Sec. 70-81. - Commencing with zero.
All numbers in all blocks shall have for their last two digits commencing with figures zero and two for the first 11 feet nearest
to the base street or avenue on the north and east sides and commencing with the figures zero and one for the first 11 feet
nearest to the base street on the south and west sides, and thereafter continue consecutively for each additional 11 feet or
fractional part thereof the next odd or even number until the farther side of the block is reached. Should a block continue across a
street, then such numbers shall continue until it reaches the farther side extended of the street opposite which it crosses. Zero
shall be used only until the tenth number when it shall be replaced by the figure one and serially thereafter.
(Code 1982, § 9-606)

Sec. 70-82. - Displaying numbers.
(a)

All owners who may be requested by the mayor or post office department to affix numbers in a conspicuous place
on the house, dwelling or business building shall do so where the numbers may be readily seen.

(b)

The city shall, on all sidewalks hereafter constructed, mark the name of the street in such manner at each corner
that it can be readily read by pedestrians who pass over the walk.

(Code 1982, §§ 9-607.01, 9-607.02)

Chapter 74 - SUBDIVISIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(34) Cross

reference— Zoning, ch. 94.

(34) State

Law reference— Subdivision platting, R.R.S. 1943, § 19-916 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sec. 74-1. - Title.
This chapter shall be known, referred to, and cited as the "City of Minden Subdivision Ordinance".
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(1-1), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-2. - Purpose and intent.

127/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

The purpose of these regulations is to provide for the orderly, efficient, and integrated development of the community; the
safety and convenience of the public; to ensure planned developments are feasible and are coordinated with the comprehensive
plan of the city; to provide for the proper location, width, and construction of streets, the establishment of building lines, provision
of open spaces, utilities, drainage, the avoidance of congestion of population, and the compatibility of street and lot layout; to
require and fix the extent to which and the manner in which streets shall be improved, and water, sewer, surface water
management facilities and other utilities shall be installed and financed, including off-site improvements where warranted by the
public interest; to provide for and secure the actual construction of such physical improvements herein referred to as
improvements; and to establish both the city and developer financial and technical responsibilities.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(1-2), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-3. - Jurisdiction.
These regulations shall apply to all land located within the city and within one mile thereof.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(1-3), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-4. - Applicability.
The owner or owners of any land located within the jurisdiction of these regulations who propose to divide said land into two
or more lots, blocks, tracts or parcels, when the smallest parcel created is ten acres or less in area, or any owner of any land
establishing any street, alley, park or other property intended for public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots, tracts
or parcels of land fronting (hereon or adjacent thereto, shall cause a plat to be made in accordance with these regulations, unless
exempted under section 74-5.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(1-4), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-5. - Exemptions.
These regulations shall not apply in the following instances:
(1)

The division of land for agricultural purposes into parcels or tracts of more than ten acres and not involving
any new streets or easements of access.

(2)

A previously platted lot which may be divided as a minor subdivision within the provisions of this chapter.

(3)

Land used for adjusting street or railroad right-of-way, a drainage easement or other public utilities subject to
local, state or federal regulations, where no new street or easement of access is involved.

(4)

Whenever any lot, parcel, or tract to land located within the area governed by these regulations has been
subdivided, resubdivided or replatted such action being of record, prior to adoption of these regulations or
amendments thereto.

(5)

Any transfer of title by operation of eminent domain or court ordered partition or decree.

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(1-5), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-6. - Approvals necessary for acceptance of subdivision plats.
All plans, plats or replats of land laid out in building lots, and the streets, alleys or other portions to be dedicated for public
use, or for the use of purchasers or owners of the lots adjacent thereto shall be submitted to the planning commission for its
consideration. The commission's recommendation shall be submitted to the council for its review and action, except that minor
subdivisions may be approved upon review by the public works supervisor, public utilities superintendent and the city
administrator or his/her authorized representative.
128/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1, 2-3-97)

Secs. 74-7—74-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION

Sec. 74-26. - Duties of the city administrator or his/her designated representative.
(a)

Maintain permanent and current records with respect to these regulations including amendments thereto.

(b)

File copies of all preliminary and final plats together with application therefor upon receipt from a subdivider.

(c)

Forward copies of preliminary and final plats to the planning commission at appropriate intervals before meetings.

(d)

Transmit final plats and planning commission recommendations to the council for its action.

(e)

Provide notice of intent to plat to owner of record of land adjacent to property being considered for subdivision, or
resubdivision, subject to requirements of section 5-102.1.

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(2-1), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-27. - Duties of the planning commission.
(a)

Review and approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove preliminary plats.

(b)

Review and approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove final plats and forward recommendations to the
council.

(c)

Make other determinations and decisions as may be required of the commission from time to time by these
regulations.

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(2-2), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-28. - Duties of the mayor and the council.
(a)

Consider appeals of the decision of the planning commission relative to plats.

(b)

Consider planning commission recommendations on final plats and approve or disapprove same.

(c)

Take other actions from time to time including the consideration of amendments to these regulations.

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(2-3), 2-3-97)

Secs. 74-29—74-35. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - DEFINITIONS

Sec. 74-36. - Words and terms.
Words and terms as used in these regulations are defined as follows:

Alley: A public way which affords only a secondary or service access to abutting property.
Block: A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highway, streets, streams, railroad right-of-way or parks, etc., or
a combination of both.

Building and zoning division: A division of the administration department of the city.
City: The City of Minden, Nebraska.
129/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Council: Council of the City of Minden, Nebraska.
City engineer: The city engineer of the City of Minden retained by the council for the recommendation, advice, and
implementation of engineering work as requested by the city. As defined, this may include a direct hire, professional engineer
and/or professional engineer(s) retained by the council as consultant(s).

City administrator: The chief administrative officer (CAO) of the City of Minden, Nebraska.
City planning staff: The city staff organization with principle responsibility for reviewing developers' plans and plats,
developing recommendations for the city's development, and advising the planning commission and council on land use
development, zoning and platting matters. The city planning staff is headed by the city administrator, and typically includes the
public utilities superintendent, public works supervisor, building inspector, and city engineer.

Comprehensive plan: The plan for the improvement and development of the City of Minden, Nebraska, as adopted by the
city's planning commission and council, in accordance with the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city.

Cul-de-sac: A short street with one end open to traffic and the other end terminated by a vehicular turn around.
Dead-end street: A street with one end open to traffic and the other end terminating without a vehicular turn around.
Dead-end street, temporary: A street with one end open to traffic and the other end terminating at the boundary line of the
subdivision, but will be required to be extended at a later date to provide access to abutting land.

Dedication: A grant of land by the owner to the public for public use.
Design: The location and alignment of streets, grades and widths of streets, alignment and width of easements, alignment and
rights-of-way and public works standards for water, drainage and sanitary sewers, and the layout of lots.

Easement: A grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation, or persons, of the use of a strip or parcel of land for
specified purposes.

Final plat: A plan or map prepared in accordance with the provisions of these regulations and those of any applicable local
regulation, which plat is prepared to be placed on record in the office of the registrar of deeds of the county.

Frontage: That portion of a lot which abuts a public street. A through lot may have multiple frontages.
General obligation: A debt incurred by the city or a SID by the issuance of general obligation bonds to finance certain public
capital improvements in a subdivision.

Governing body: The mayor and council of the city.
Improvements: Street grading, street surfacing and paving, curbs and gutters, street lights, street signs, sidewalks, crosswalks,
water mains and lines, fire hydrants, sanitary sewers, storm drainage facilities, culverts, manholes, bridges, public utilities, or other
installations as designated by the council or its specific approval authority.

Lot: A portion of land within the subdivision, or other parcel of land, intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for
development, or both.

Lot depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. For unusual lot shapes, the lot depth will be
determined by the city planning staff.

Lot, corner: A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. A corner lot shall be deemed to front on that street
on which it has its least dimension unless otherwise specified by the city administrator.

130/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Lot, flag: Flag lots, being those lots landlocked from public right-of-way, except for a narrow tract of land of less width than
required under the assigned zoning.

Lot line: The boundary of a lot.
Lot, nonconforming: A lot which was lawfully created under prior zoning when different area or dimension requirements were
enforced and does not currently conform to the zoning district space limits now applied. Lots created through a procedure which
did nor did not conform to the applicable city subdivision requirements enforced at that specific time shall also be considered
nonconforming.

Lot, out: A portion of a lot, typically separated from the rest of the lot by a right-of-way or easement, which is not designated
for building or occupancy.

Lot of record: Shall mean an independent lot as shown in the records of and recognized by the register of deeds.
Lot, through: A lot extending continuously between two parallel or approximately parallel streets.
Lot width: The distance between side lot lines measured at the rear of the required front yard on a line parallel to the street
right-of-way or platted building line, whichever provides the greater setback.

Minor subdivision: A subdivision of previously platted lots wherein a portion of one platted lot is added to a portion or all of an
adjacent platted lot, or where one platted lot is divided into two parts.

Monument: An identification marker established by a land survey and set by a registered land surveyor at each section corner,
angle point, lot corner, block corner, street centerline, or other point.

Open space: An area of land or water or combination thereof planned for passive or active recreation, but does not include
areas used for streets, alleys, driveways or private roads, off-street parking or loading areas, or required front, rear or side yards.

Pedestrian way: A right-of-way or easement dedicated for public use by persons on foot.
Planning commission: The duly appointed planning commission of the city.
Preapplication meeting: A required meeting between the developer and the city planning staff prior to the submission of a
preliminary plat.

Preliminary plat: A map made for the purpose of showing the design of a proposed subdivision and the existing physical
conditions in and around it.

Public works department: A department of the city with responsibilities for managing the city's public works efforts.
Public works plan: A plan which demonstrates feasibility of the proposed development in regard to public works related
considerations. This plan is required by article VI of this chapter.

Public utilities plan: A plan which demonstrates feasibility of the proposed development in regard to public utilities related
considerations. This plan is required by article VI of this chapter.

Public works standards: The standards for streets, sanitary sewers, sidewalks, storm drainage structures and other public
works elements, adopted by the council.

Public utilities standards: The standards for electrical, water, and sewer utility structures and other public utilities elements,
adopted by the council.

Register of deeds: The Register of Deeds of Kearney County.

131/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Replat: A map which delineates the subdivision of land which has been previously recorded as a plat in the office of register of
deeds.

Sanitary and improvement district (SID): A special taxing body created by the district court for the purpose of constructing,
financing, and maintaining capital improvements such as streets, sewers, sidewalks, utilities and parks in a subdivision until such
time as the subdivision is annexed by the city.

Setback line or building line: A line on a plat generally parallel to the street right-of-way, indicating the limit beyond which
buildings or structures may not be placed.

Special assessment: A lien assessed on private property on the basis of special benefit for a portion of public capital
improvements in a subdivision.

Street types defined:
Collector: A public street which has an alignment and capacity to collect and carry local traffic at low speed from the local
street networks to the major street system.

Frontage: A street dedicated adjacent to and parallel to a major street with limited or controlled access and dedicated to
provide frontage access to abutting properties.

Local: A public street which serves low speed local traffic and primarily provides access to individual properties in the
community.

Major arterial: A public street that has an alignment and capacity to carry all types of vehicular traffic continuously
through or around a community, or between major traffic generators within a community.

Other arterial: A public street that has an alignment and capacity to carry traffic at greater volumes and high speeds than
occurs on local and collector streets.

Private: A vehicular right-of-way providing access to a number of individual properties and which is owned and maintained
by an entity other than city or county government.

Public: A right-of-way dedicated to the public for use as a principal access to properties adjacent thereto.
Subdivider: A person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association who causes the land to be divided for himself/herself or
others.

Subdivision: The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more lots, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of ownership or building development, except that the division of land shall not be considered a
subdivision when the smallest parcel created is more than ten acres in area. The term "subdivision" includes "resubdivision", and
the term "resubdivision" as used herein, shall include any further subdivision of a lot or parcel of land previously subdivided
except as set out in section 74-5.

U.S.G.S.: United States Geological Survey.
Utilities department: A department of the city with responsibilities for managing the city's utilities efforts.
Zoning ordinance: The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Minden, as amended.
Vacation: The exercise of a public entity's discretionary power in the public interest by direct action to terminate or
discontinue the public easement or fee title interest in streets, alleys, or other public rights-of-way; and the discretionary power or
mandatory exercise of municipal authority to discontinue or terminate all or part of an existing plat.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(3-1), 2-3-97)

132/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

ARTICLE IV. - MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS

Sec. 74-37. - General.
No subdivision plat shall be approved unless it conforms to the minimum design standards in this article.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(4-1), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-38. - Blocks.
Intersection streets (which determine block length) shall be provided at such intervals as to serve cross traffic adequately and
to meet existing streets in the neighborhood. In residential districts, where no streets or roadways are platted or exist, the blocks
shall not exceed 792 feet in length. In blocks longer than 600 feet, pedestrian ways or easements through the block may be
required by the planning commission and council if deemed necessary, for convenient pedestrian circulation. Such pedestrian
easements shall have a width of not less than ten feet. Blocks for business development shall not exceed 400 feet in length.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(4-2), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-39. - Streets and alleys.
(a)

Relationship to adjoining street systems: The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provisions for
the continuation of the principal existing streets in adjoining additions (or their reasonable projection where
intervening land is not platted) insofar as they may be necessary for convenient access and circulation. The width of
such streets in new subdivisions shall be not less than the minimum established in subsection (j). Whenever there
exists a dedicated or platted half street or alley adjacent to the tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street or
alley shall be platted and dedicated as a public street or alley.

(b)

Street names: Streets shall be named and numbered in accordance with a city-wide coordinate system, such names
and numbers to be assigned by the city staff and approved by the council.

(c)

Major streets: Arterial and collector streets shall be designate through or adjacent to subdivisions in keeping with
the major street plan adopted by the planning commission.

(d)

Local streets: Local streets shall be designed to provide convenient and safe access to all lots abutting thereon, shall
have an alignment to discourage rapid through traffic, and be capable of accommodating surface water and require
minimum disturbance of natural features.

(e)

Cul-de-sac: Cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed 600 feet in length, unless otherwise approved by the city
administrator, and shall be provided at the closed end with either an off-set or symmetric circular turn-around
having an outside pavement diameter of at least 80 feet and a right-of-way diameter of 100 feet.

(f)

Intersections: Under normal conditions, streets shall be laid out to intersect at right angles.

(g)

Streets adjacent to a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway: Where lots will front or side, but do not back
on railroad right-of-way or limited access highways, a frontage road may be required parallel and adjacent to said
right-of-way. The location and design of such access street or frontage road shall be such that safe and convenient
traffic movements at intersections are maintained.

(h)

Half streets: Half streets shall be avoided except where they are essential to the reasonable development of the
subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations, or, when the planning commission finds
that it will be practical to require the dedication of the other half of the street within a reasonable time.

(i)

Alleys: Alleys are not required in residential areas but may be required in business blocks. The platted width of an
alley shall be not less than 20 feet.

133/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(j)

Minimum requirements:

Street

Major

Other

Local

Local

Cul-de-sac

Description

Arterial

Arterial

Collector

Street

Street

Service

Through

Local

Local

Light

Very Light

Tra c

Through

Through

Local

No Through

35 mph+

25—35 mph

25 mph

25 mph

15 mph

48′

36—48′

36′

36′

36′

80′

66′—80′

66′

56′

56′

100′

80—100′

80′

60′

N/A

8%

8%

8%

10%

10%

500′

300′

200′

200′

200′

600′

400′

200′

200′

200′

Note 3

8″

6″

6″

6″

Design
Speed
Min. Paving
Width (Back
of Curb)
Min. Rightof-Way
Width
Min. Rightof-Way 150′
Adjacent to
Major
Intersections
Maximum
Gradient
Minimum
Radii of
Horizontal
Curves
Minimum
Sight
Distance on
Vert. Curves
Concrete
Pavement
Thickness

(k)

Additional minimum requirements include:
134/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Alleys:
Minimum right-of-way width—20 feet
Paving thickness—Six inches
Pedestrian Way:
Minimum right-of-way—Ten feet
Street gradients: 0.4%
(l)

Additional right-of-way requirements: When existing or anticipated traffic on arterial and collector streets warrants
greater widths of right-of-way, the additional width shall be dedicated by the subdivider.

(m)

Street alignment: On streets with reverse curves, a minimum tangent of 100 feet shall be provided between curves
to permit a smooth flow of traffic.

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(4-3), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-40. - Lots.
(a)

Minimum lot width shall be as set out in the Zoning Ordinance. Corner lots shall be at least 15 feet wider than the
average lot in the block. Said width shall be measured at the building setback line.

(b)

The minimum lot depth shall be as follows: In District R-1 through R-3.

(c)

The maximum depth of residential lots shall generally not exceed two and one-half times the width thereof, except
in the case of planned zoning.

(d)

Minimum lot area shall be subject to the Zoning Ordinance of the district in which the subdivision is located and the
minimum design standards of this regulation. The more restrictive of the regulations shall govern.

(e)

Generally all side lot lines shall bear 60 to 90 degrees from the tangent of a curved street.

(f)

Front building or setback lines shall be shown on the final plat for all lots in the subdivision and shall not be less
than the setbacks required by the Zoning Ordinance or any other regulations adopted by the council. Corner lots
shall show side yard setback lines on the final plat.

(g)

Residential double frontage lots shall be avoided except where lots abut an arterial. No access shall be provided to
a lot from an arterial when the lot backs onto that arterial.

(h)

Every lot shall abut on a street other than an alley except where planned zoning is in effect and provides for other
means of access. Residential lots which front on a major arterial street shall have a depth and a yard area adequate
to allow a motor vehicle to avoid backing into said street.

(i)

The subdivision or resubdivision of a tract or lot shall not be permitted where the subdivision or resubdivision
places an existing permanent structure in violation of the requirements of the zoning regulations or the minimum
design standards of these regulations.

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(4-4), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-41. - Easements.
Where alleys are not provided, permanent easements of not less than six feet in width shall be provided on each side of all
rear lot lines, and on side lot lines, where necessary, for utility poles, wire, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water mains,
and other utilities. These easements shall provide for a continuous right-of-way at least 12 feet in width. Permanent easements
shall not be obstructed by structures and shall be kept in a condition allowing easy access by maintenance personnel and
equipment. Wider easements may be required by the city planning staff based on the specific circumstances of the development
involved.
135/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(4-5), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-42. - Stormwater management.
All subdivisions shall be designed in a manner that assures that stormwater will be collected and discharged without damage
to property or peril to human safety. Stormwater shall be handled in underground conduits, open waterways, or detention basins,
in keeping with the Stormwater Design Manual adopted by the city. If a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way or
channel, then a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way shall be provided. Such easement or right-of-way shall conform
substantially to the lines of such watercourse and shall be of such width and construction as may be necessary to provide
adequate stormwater drainage and maintenance access. The minimum width for drainage easements shall be not less than 15
feet for closed conduits and 20 feet for open channels with additional width of not less than ten feet for construction and
maintenance.
(1)

Developers are responsible for complying with all applicable stormwater permit requirements for the state
department of environmental quality, as well as any other applicable requirements. The developer shall
provide a copy of all permit applications to the director of public works for documentation purposes.

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(4-6), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-43. - Access control.
In the interest of public safety and for the preservation of the traffic carrying capacity of the street system, the planning
commission may recommend restrictions to the council. The council shall have the authority to restrict and regulate points of
access to all property from the public streets system. Such restrictions shall be indicated on the final plat.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(4-7), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-44. - Parks, school sites and playgrounds.
Suitable sites for parks, schools, playgrounds or other public requirements shall be carefully considered and indicated on the
preliminary plat, so that they can be compared with the comprehensive city plan, and it can be determined which of such sites, if
any, should be indicated on the final plat.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(4-8), 2-3-97)

Secs. 74-45—74-50. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - PRELIMINARY PLATS

Sec. 74-51. - Preliminary plat procedures.
All preliminary plats shall be prepared in conformance with the provisions of this chapter and in conformance with the city
comprehensive plan. The subdivider shall be responsible for such conformance.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(5-1), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-52. - Preapplication meeting.
A preapplication meeting between the applicant or their representative, the city planning staff, and other city departments, as
necessary, will be required prior to the submission of an application for approval of a preliminary plat. No application for
preliminary plat will be accepted by the city planning staff until after the preapplication meeting. The applicant shall schedule the
preapplication meeting through the building and zoning division.
136/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(1)

The purpose of the preapplication meeting is to:
a.

Review policies, procedures and forms required by the city for the filing of plats.

b.

Determine availability of city improvements.

c.

Review the comprehensive plan requirements for major streets, land use, parks, schools and public open
spaces.

d.

Review the zoning requirements for the property in question and adjacent properties.

e.

Review special right-of-way and setback requirements for arterial, collector and local streets.

f.

Discuss the applicant's request, and consider feasibility of the proposed development.

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(5-2), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-53. - Application.
After reaching the preliminary conclusions regarding the requirements and feasibility for the proposed subdivision, the
subdivider may submit a preliminary plat together with any supplementary information necessary to the building and zoning
division. The subdivider shall submit the preliminary plat at least 21 calendar days prior the regularly scheduled planning
commission meeting at which the preliminary plat will be considered. The following items are required for submission of the
preliminary plat:
a.

Ten copies of the preliminary plat.

b.

A filing fee of $50.00 plus $1.00 for each lot shall accompany the filing of each preliminary plot. The
preliminary plat shall not be accepted for filing until the filing fee has been paid by the subdivider. A complete,
written list of the names and mailing addresses of all owners of record of all land being subdivided.

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(5-3), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-54. - Application review.
Upon submittal of the preliminary plat, the city planning staff will administratively review the plat to ensure compliance with
this chapter. Should the required information not be shown or presented, the city planning staff has the right to require
submission of the remaining required information prior to their conceptual review of the plat and submission of the plat and their
recommendations to the planning commission, unless otherwise determined by the city administrator or his/her designated
representative.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(5-4), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-55. - Content of preliminary plats.
The preliminary plat shall show and contain the following information:
a.

The proposed name of the subdivision. The name shall not duplicate or closely resemble the name or names
of any existing subdivision in the community, unless it is an extension of an existing subdivision.

b.

A location map showing the boundary lines of the subdivision with reference to section, township and range
lines.

c.

The names and addresses of the developer, owner, and the person or firm who prepared the plats.

d.

Scale of the plats, one inch equals 100 feet or one inch equals 200 feet. A bar scale shall be included on the
drawing.

e.

Date of preparation and north point.

f.

Boundary lines of the property accurately shown plus a legal description.
137/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

g.

Existing conditions:
(1)

Location, width and name of platted streets or other public ways, railroads and utility rights-of-way,
parks, other public open spaces, and driveways within 100 feet of the proposed subdivision.

(2)

Location of all existing sewers, water mains, gas mains, culverts, or other underground installations,
within the proposed subdivision and all such utilities outside the proposed subdivision if they are
proposed sources for serving the subdivision.

(3)

Names of subdivisions together with arrangement of streets and lots within 200 feet of the proposed
subdivision.

(4)

Topography (unless specifically waived) with contour intervals of one foot to five feet, based on U.S.G.S.
datum. Where the land is too flat for one foot contours, spot elevations shall be provided.

(5)

Location of watercourses, bridges, wooded areas, lakes, ravines, drainage easements, surface drainage
detention structures, and such other features as may be pertinent to the subdivision.

h.

The proposed arrangement of lots and their size.

i.

Location and width of proposed rights-of-way for streets, alleys, pedestrian ways and easements.

j.

The proposed method of sewage disposal, water supply and drainage.

k.

Approximate gradients of streets. All grades shall be based on U.S.G.S. datum.

l.

Location and dimensions of proposed parks, playgrounds, churches, school sites or other special uses of land
to be considered for reservation or dedication for public use.

m.

The proposed use of land.

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(5-5), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-56. - Preliminary agreement on improvements.
A draft agreement, prepared by the subdivider using the format prescribed by the city shall be submitted with the preliminary
plat. Such agreement shall state estimated costs of development, the proposed methods of financing the various improvements to
be installed in, and in support of, the subdivision, the approximate timing and stages of the installation, the name of the design
engineer or firm and any anticipated participation by the city.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(5-6), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-57. - Planning commission action on the preliminary plat.
Within 60 days after the submission of a preliminary plat, the planning commission shall approve or disapprove the plat. The
60-day period may be extended with the consent of the applicant action by the commission shall be conveyed to the subdivider in
writing within ten days after the official planning commission meeting at which the plat was acted upon. In case the plat is
disapproved, the subdivider shall be notified of the reasons for such action and what requirements shall be necessary to meet the
approval of the planning commission. The approval of the preliminary plat constitutes only an authorization to proceed with the
final plat.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(5-7), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-58. - Appeal to council.
If the planning commission rejects a preliminary plate the applicant may submit the plat to the council. All records and reports
relative to the plat shall be likewise sent to the council by the city administrator or his/her authorized representative. The council
may make such findings and determinations as they deem reasonable and in the best interests of the public.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(5-8), 2-3-97)

138/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 74-59. - Termination of preliminary plat approval.
The approval of a preliminary plat shall remain in effect for an indefinite period of time, except that the planning commission
may, after a period of six months, and upon notice to the subdivider or current owner of the land, rescind the plat approval.
Substantial change in the character of the surrounding land, major changes in development policy or discovery of flaws or
oversight in the original approval are typical examples of reasons for rescinding approval for a preliminary plat.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(5-9), 2-3-97)

Secs. 74-60—74-65. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - PUBLIC WORKS PLANS

Sec. 74-66. - Submission.
Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission, the subdivider shall prepare and submit a public
works/utilities plan to the building and zoning division, to include the following:
a.

Five prints of preliminary plans and elevations of all proposed and existing public streets within or accessing
the development area.

b.

Five prints of preliminary plans and profiles of proposed and existing sanitary sewers and any related
structures within or accessing the development area.

c.

Five prints of preliminary stormwater plans including culverts, bridges, underground pipe, improved channels,
natural waterways to be retained, drainage easement, detention ponds if needed and general pattern of
easements necessary to accommodate said facilities.

d.

Five prints of a preliminary water supply and distribution plan.

e.

Five prints of a preliminary sanitary sewer system plan.

f.

Five prints of a preliminary electrical supply and distribution plan.

g.

Profile of any or all of the above may also be required if deemed necessary by the city planning staff.

The public works/utilities plan demonstrates the development's feasibility. Portions of the list in this paragraph may
be waived at the discretion of the city administrator, provided the city administrator is satisfied that the development
is feasible.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(6-1), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-67. - Action on public works/utilities plan.
The city planning staff will perform a technical review of the public works/utilities plan as to conformance with the city
comprehensive plan, development standards and policies, specific site conditions, and feasibility. Copies of the plan may, at the
discretion of the city planning staff, be sent for review to utility companies and other agencies having an interest in the project and
their response shall be incorporated in the review of the plans by the city planning staff. Upon completion of the review and
conferences with the subdivider, the city engineer shall prepare and submit to the city planning staff a recommendation for
approval or disapproval of all or portions of the public works plan. Within a reasonable time, the director of public works, or
his/her representative, will notify the subdivider of the review findings and provide suggestions relative to resolving any
deficiencies. The final plat shall not be approved by the planning commission until a report has been received from the city
administrator stating that the public works/utilities plan is satisfactory and the proposed development is feasible.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(6-2), 2-3-97)

139/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Secs. 74-68—74-75. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. - FINAL PLAT

Sec. 74-76. - Final plat procedures.
The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved and may be comprised of only that portion of the approved
preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at the time.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(7-1), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-77. - Application.
A final plat shall be submitted to the building and zoning division at least 21 calendar days prior to the planning commission
meeting at which the plat will be considered. The following items are required for submission of the final plat:
a.

The original, or a print on mylar or similar film, and ten paper prints.

b.

A filing fee of $50.00 plus $1.00 for each lot shall accompany the filing of each final plat. The final plat shall not
be accepted for filing until the filing fee has been paid by the subdivider.

c.

The final plat, prepared for recording purposes, shall be drawn at a scale of one inch per 100 feet. The sheet
size shall be 18 inches by 24 inches. The top of the sheet shall be north.

d.

Written statement listing all owners of record of the land being subdivided.

e.

A subdivision agreement signed by the applicant shall be required prior to council approval of the final plat for
all subdivisions which include the installation of improvements. Subdivision agreements will be processed
concurrently with the final plat and will require the approval of the council prior to the letting of any contracts
for the construction of improvements. In the event that the applicant requires no special conditions other than
obligation to comply with the existing ordinances of the city, the requirements for execution of a separate
agreement may be waived by the director of public works and the "resolution" signature block on the final plat
shall meet the requirement of this paragraph.

f.

The subdivider shall contact all utilities companies and said companies shall designate required casements on
the preliminary plat. The utilities companies shall provide written documentation to the city that the plat has
been reviewed for easements. All required casements shall be shown on the final plat prior to final approval
by the city council.

g.

Any other supplemental material as specified in this chapter.

h.

Any other supplemental material that the city planning staff determines is necessary for assuring feasibility of
the development.

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(7-2), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-78. - Application review.
Upon submittal of the final plat, the city planning staff will administratively review the plat to ensure compliance with this
chapter. Should the required information not be shown or presented, the city planning staff has the right to require submission of
the remaining required information prior to their conceptual review of the plat and submission of the plat and their
recommendations to the planning commission, unless determined by the director of public works.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(7-3), 2-3-97)

140/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 74-79. - Content of nal plats.
The final plat shall show and contain the following information:
a.

Name of the subdivision.

b.

Location of section, township, range, county and state, including the descriptive boundaries of the subdivision.
The allowable error of closure and positional accuracy of the boundary traverse or any other portion of the
final plat shall be in accordance with the current standards for property boundary surveys.

c.

The location of existing monuments or bench marks, which are pertinent to the final plat, shall be shown and
described on the final plat. Location of such monuments shall be shown in reference to existing official
monuments or the nearest established street lines, including bearings and distances to such reference points
and monuments.

d.

The location of lot lines, streets, street center lines, alleys, parks and other features, with accurate dimensions
in feet and decimals of feet with the length of radii on all curves, and other information necessary to
reproduce the plat on the ground.

e.

Lots shall be numbered clearly and in an orderly pattern within each block. Blocks shall be likewise numbered.

f.

The exact locations, widths and names of all streets and alleys to be dedicated.

g.

Boundary lines of any area other than streets or alleys, including utility easements, that are to be dedicated for
public use.

h.

Building setback lines on the front and side streets with dimensions.

i.

Scale of the plat (one inch equals 100 feet) including a bar scale, date of preparation, and north point.

j.

Statement dedicating all easements, streets, alleys and all other public areas, unless previously dedicated.

k.

The following certificates, which may be combined where appropriate:
(1)

A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title, or other interest in the land
subdivided, and consenting to the preparation and recording of the plat.

(2)

A certificate signed and acknowledged as above dedicating or reserving all parcels of land shown on the
final plat and intended for any public or private use including those parcels which are intended for the
exclusive use of the lot owners of the subdivision.

(3)

A certificate signed by the registered land surveyor responsible for the survey and final map. The
signature of the surveyor shall be accompanied by his/her seal.

(4)

The acknowledgment of a notary public according to the statutory short forms of acknowledgment as
prescribed by section 64-206 R.R.S.

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(7-4), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-80. - Planning commission review.
In reviewing the final plat, the planning commission shall consider the following:
a.

Conformity with the comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, and preliminary plat. Any recommendations of
the city planning staff and/or other agencies involved in the review of the plat.

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(7-5), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-81. - Revision submission requirements.
In the event that the applicant is required by the planning commission to make revisions to the final plat prior to action from
the planning commission, the following shall be resubmitted:
141/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

a.

The original, or a print on mylar or similar film, and ten paper prints.
b.

Any other information required by the planning commission.

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(7-6), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-82. - Planning commission action.
The planning commission shall, within a reasonable time, act on the plat. Planning commission action shall be expressed by a
recommendation of approval or disapproval to the council. If disapproval is recommended, the planning commission shall state
their reasons. After the planning commission recommendation has been made, the final plat shall be forwarded to the council by
the city planning staff.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(7-7), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-83. - Council action.
The final plat presented to the council shall be identical to the plat acted upon by the planning commission. Upon approval of
the final plat by the council, certificates of approval by the planning commission and by the council shall be signed by the chairman
of the planning commission; and the president of the council and city clerk, respectively. The remaining certificates on the final
plat shall also be executed.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(7-8), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-84. - Approved nal plat ling.
The subdivider shall file the final plat with the county register of deeds and county assessor, in compliance with their
respective procedures.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(7-9), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-85. - Final plat approval time limits.
Approval of the final plat shall become null and void 90 days from the date of council approval if the subdivider docs not file
the final plat with the register of deeds and county assessor, as provided in section 7-9 of this chapter. It shall be the responsibility
of the subdivider to furnish the building and zoning division documentation of compliance within the 90-day period. Thirty-day
extensions may be granted by the council upon written request of the subdivider and submittal of the required fee.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(7-10), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-86. - Property pins.
Upon acceptance by council of a final plat, all property pins shall be installed by the developer's licensed surveyor, prior to the
creation of water, sewer and paving districts. The property pins shall be five-eighths-inch by 24-inch steel rod.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(7-11), 2-3-97)

Secs. 74-87—74-90. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. - SUBDIVISION FINANCING

Sec. 74-91. - District improvement.
Whenever subdivision improvements are requested, the council may create a district for each type of improvement.
142/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(8-1), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-92. - Improvement procedure.
With the exception of districts created to advance public projects for, or at the request of, political subdivisions as that term is
defined at section 13-903 R.R.S., all developers will be required to deposit with the city, within 30 days after the council accepts the
engineer's estimate for the project, 50 percent of the total estimated cost of the improvements outlined in section 74-93 shall be
assessed to the property within the district. Assessments levied against new subdivisions shall draw interest at a rate
approximately two percent above the projected rate of interest of the bond required for the project.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(8-2), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-93. - Developer obligation.
The following improvements shall be an obligation of the developer and all costs of said improvements, less any deposits paid
to the city shall be assessed to the property within the district:
a.

Paving: Thirty-six-foot wide, six-inch Portland cement concrete slab in place, curb in place, excavation or fill,
grading, and the portion of "T" intersections abutting building lots.

b.

Water: Eight-inch diameter water mains and services installed at the time of construction.

c.

Sanitary sewer: Eight-inch diameter sanitary sewer mains; manholes, fittings, and stub outs installed at the
time of construction.

d.

Electrical: Shall be located underground, basic requirements shall be set after review of subdivision plans.

e.

Storm sewer: Adequately sized storm sewer systems (if the system is piped, the developer shall be responsible
for up to 24-inch diameter pipe) that provide effective runoff for stormwater generated on the development
site as well as stormwater traveling across the site. Storm sewers shall be installed before the streets are
graded and paved.

f.

Engineering: Engineering costs shall include engineering for paving, water, sanitary sewer, and storm sewer.

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(8-3), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-94. - City obligation.
The following improvements shall be an obligation of the city and are subject to any plans or policies as may be adopted by
the city from time to time, budgetary constraints and considerations, and design and construction schedules:
a.

Paving: Costs for paving intersections (except the portion of "T" intersections abutting building lots), slab width
in excess of 36 feet, and slab thickness in excess of six inches.

b.

Water: Additional costs for water mains over eight inches in diameter, valves, fittings, booster pumps and fire
hydrants.

c.

Sanitary sewer: Additional costs for sanitary sewer mains over eight inches in diameter. Costs for sewage
treatment plants and lift stations will be paid for by the city, provided the council approves their installation.

d.

Storm sewer: Additional costs for storm sewers over 24 inches in diameter. Storm sewer shall be installed
before the streets are graded and paved.

e.

Street signs: Street signs of equal design and quality to the signs typically being installed by the public works
department.

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(8-4), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-95. - Non-contiguous developments.
143/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Developments which are contiguous to existing improvements (water, storm and sanitary sewer, electrical, streets, etc.) are
strongly encouraged. Developments are considered non-contiguous to existing improvements when either (1) the improvement is
not immediately accessible to the development or (2) the improvements which are immediately accessible to the development do
not have the available capacity to serve the development and other existing improvements must be extended to the development
in order to supply the development. In cases of non-contiguous developments, the following shall apply:
a.

When developments require extension of improvements to developments not contiguous to existing
improvements, the developer and city shall negotiate the allocation of cost.

b.

The city may create improvement districts and levy special assessments to pay for such improvements if it is in
the best interest of the city.

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(8-5), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-96. - Building permits.
A building permit may be issued to a new building in a new development only after the aforementioned improvements have
been installed, or, when the city certifies that sufficient planning has been completed to assure completion of the improvements
before the completed construction of said building(s). "Sufficient planning shall mean award of contract to a contractor by the city
for the improvements. No building permit shall be issued for a building on a corner lot until such time as all improvements are
installed on both street for the entire length of said lot. No building shall be occupied until all improvements are in place and an
occupancy permit has been issued by the building official.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(8-6), 2-3-97)

Secs. 74-97—74-105. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. - EXCEPTIONS

Sec. 74-106. - Subdivisions within the one-mile jurisdiction.
When a subdivision lies entirely outside and docs not abut the city but is within the one-mile jurisdiction, the following
conditions shall be met:
a.

If the subdivision is in district R-1, R-2 or R-3 the procedures and requirements of article IV shall prevail.

b.

If the subdivision is a large lot subdivision in district A-1 all streets shall be surfaced with a minimum of six
inches of gravel to a width of not less than 25 feet. Sidewalks, curbs, storm sewers, sanitary sewers and water
systems are not required. No building permit shall be issued for a lot until the street, or both streets in the
case of a corner lot, are so improved the entire length of the block.

c.

If the subdivision is a rural standard lot subdivision in district AR-2, the following conditions shall be met:
(1)

All street shall be surfaced with not less than five inches of hot mix asphaltic or Portland cement concrete
over a compacted base and to a width of 25 feet. This surface shall be installed and paid for by the
subdivider and shall be in place prior to the issuance of any building permits.

(2)

All lots shall be served by a sewer collection system and treatment plant approved by the state. The
system shall be installed, in operation, and approved by the state prior to issuance of a building permit.
All associated costs shall be the responsibility of the developer.

(3)

Curbs, sidewalks, water supply systems and storm sewers are not required in this zoning district.

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(9-1), 2-3-97)

144/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Secs. 74-107—74-115. - Reserved.
ARTICLE X. - VACATIONS

Sec. 74-116. - Vacations.
Vacations may be requested for rights-of-way streets, alleys, plats and easements.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(10-1), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-117. - Application.
All requests for vacation shall be submitted to the building and zoning division, for review and recommendation by the city
planning staff. The city planning staff will forward the requests for review and approval to the planning and zoning commission
and council. A fee of $50.00 shall be paid with the application to the building and zoning division. After approval of the vacation
request by the council, the city will file the vacation action with the county register of deeds. If the council does not approve the
vacation request, a portion of the application fee, in the amount of $25.00 will be refunded to the requester.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(10-2), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-118. - Vacation of portions of street rights-of-way.
(1)

Request may be made for vacating portions of street rights-of-way. Standard vacations will be of equal amounts on
both sides of a street for a minimum of a block length corresponding to the petitioner's request and subject to the
following standards:

(2)

a.

Rights-of-way in excess of 100 feet shall be vacated to no less than 100 feet.

b.

One hundred-foot rights-of-way shall be vacated to no less than 80 feet.

c.

Eighty-foot rights-of-way shall be vacated to no less than 66 feet.

d.

Sixty-six-foot rights-of-way shall be vacated to no less than 56 feet.

e.

Rights-of-way of 56 feet or less shall not be vacated to a narrower width.

Petition content: The applicant's petition shall contain a written request giving the legal description of property
abutting the portion of right-of-way for which the petition is filed. Such application shall contain a statement of
ownership with mailing address for abutting property. The request shall also include a plat or survey showing the
width of the street, the portion of the street to be vacated and abutting property with legal description.

(3)

Vacation action: Should the city planning staff and the planning commission decide the request is in the best public
interest and recommend approval, the following policy shall apply:
a.

The planning commission will recommend to council that the petition be approved and that the vacation
include the entire length of the block on one side of the street only, followed by vacation of an equal footage
on the opposite side of the street at a subsequent time (this will allow the approved vacated right-of-way to
revert to abutting property owners on both sides of street for entire length of block).

b.

The city planning staff will:
(1)

Place the petitioner's request and any additional right-of-way to be vacated on same side of street on the
next upcoming council agenda.

(2)

Place the request for action on the opposite side of the street on the following council agenda for
approval.

(4)

Purpose: This will assure:
145/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

a.

Even vacation on both sides of the street for the entire block, keeping the paved portion of the street (generally) i
the right-of-way.

b.

Assure that the vacated street right-of-way reverts to abutting property owners.

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(10-3), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-119. - Vacation of street (not vacated as a portion of a plat vacation).
Applicant shall submit a petition and a survey showing all portions of street requested for vacation and abutting property with
legal descriptions. Such application shall contain a statement of ownership with mailing address of all lands abutting those
portions of street.
(1)

A street may be vacated and remain the property of the city or may be sold for a price agreed upon by a threefourths majority vote of the council.

(2)

The city may require that an easement be granted or maintained as a part of the vacation ordinance.

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(10-4), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-120. - Alley vacation.
An alley may be vacated with ownership reverting to the owners of the adjacent real estate, one-half of alley to owner on each
side. However, when an alley is taken wholly from one or more lots, its vacation shall revert the ownership to the abutting,
property and become part of that property. When a portion of an alley is vacated only one side of its center, the title to the
property shall vest in the owner of the abutting property and become part of that property.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(10-5), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-121. - Vacation of subdivision plats of portions of subdivision plats.
An existing plat or portion of an existing plat must be vacated by ordinance prior to replatting, after hearings by the planning
commission and council upon petition by the owners of such lands.
(1)

The ordinance granting the vacation shall specify if any public highways, streets, alleys or other public grounds
are to be retained by the municipality. If the municipality does not retain any such lands, ownership shall
revert to abutting lot owners.

(2)

Any vacation approved shall, at the owner's expense be certified to the register of deeds and be so recorded.
The register of deeds shall then note such vacation on the plat by writing in plain, legible letters. Suds notation
shall also contain a reference to the volume and page in which the ordinance of vacation is recorded. The
owners of the lands vacated shall cause the same to be replatted in accordance with the requirements of this
subdivision ordinance.

(3)

Where a plat or portion of a plat is vacated where water, sewer and paving are already installed, ii shall be the
responsibility of the petitioner to provide water and sewer to any newly created lots in the manner prescribed
by the utilities department.

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(10-6), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-122. - Easement relocation.
Easement vacation and rededication require approval by the planning commission and council. Applicant shall submit for city
planning staff review and action a signed petition a utility release indicating all public utility companies have no objection to
vacation of an existing public utility easement and a survey including legal description showing the public utility easement to be
vacated as well as the location and legal description of any newly dedicated utility easement.
146/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(10-7), 2-3-97)

Secs. 74-123—74-130. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XI. - MINOR SUBDIVISIONS

Sec. 74-131. - Minor subdivisions.
A subdivision of previously platted lots wherein a portion of one platted lot is added to a portion or all of an adjacent platted
lot, or where one platted lot is divided into two parts. This definition shall be applied only once to any subdividing transaction or
conveyance involving any specific lot or pair of lots. Transactions or conveyances classified as minor subdivisions are hereby
denied not to constitute "subdivision development" as defined by section 19-929 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes, as amended.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(11-1), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-132. - Conditions of approval.
The following conditions shall apply:
a.

All required improvements shall have been installed.

b.

No new dedication of public rights-of-way or easement can be involved.

c.

Such subdivision shall comply with the Zoning Ordinance requirements concerning minimum areas and
dimensions of lots and blocks.

d.

A survey of the lot(s) to be subdivided and abutting lots must show all existing structures, building setbacks,
and utility easements shall accompany the request for minor subdivision approval.

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(11-2), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-133. - Application.
All applications for minor subdivisions shall be submitted to the building and zoning division, on the form provided by that
division. At a minimum, the application shall contain the following:
a.

Legal description of the property.

b.

A survey attached to the application showing proposed lots; and all existing structures, fences and building
setbacks on lots affected.

c.

A fee of $25.00 shall accompany the application.

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(11-3), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-134. - City council action on minor subdivisions.
Following review of the application, the city planning staff will provide their recommendation to the city council who will
approve or disapprove the application.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(11-4), 2-3-97)

Secs. 74-135—74-140. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XII. - RETROACTIVE WAIVER OF 120-DAY OBJECTION PERIOD FOR CONVEYANCES NOT IN COMPLIANCE WITH SUBDIVISION
APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS
147/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 74-141. - Waiver.
The mayor and the council of the city hereby retroactively waive the 120-day period provided by LB 235 of the First Session,
Eighty-Sixth Legislature of the State of Nebraska, subject to the approval of each conveyance by the city administrator or an official
designated by him/her. The request for such approval shall be submitted to the building and zoning division for their review and
recommendation.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(12-1), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-142. - Disapproval of waiver.
In the event that the city administrator or his/her designated official disapproves the subject conveyance for any reason
whatsoever, the application for waiver or notice of conveyance shall be presented to the council for review and determination.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(12-2), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-143. - Public hearing for denial.
In the event that the council refuses to approve the said application for waiver or the conveyance for which notice has been
received, the council shall set the question for a public hearing at which the council shall either waive or deny the subject
conveyance.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(12-3), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-144. - Procedure policy.
This procedure shall be used only for conveyance which occurred prior to June 24, 1992.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(12-4), 2-3-97)

Sec. 74-145. - Application.
All applications for minor subdivisions shall be submitted to the building and zoning division, on the form provided by that
division. At a minimum, the application shall contain the following:
a.

Legal description of the property.

b.

A survey attached to the application showing subject lot; and all existing structures, fences and building
setbacks on lots affected.

c.

A fee of $25.00 shall accompany the application.

(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(12-5), 2-3-97)

ARTICLE XIII. - SALE OF PLATTED LOTS AND LANDS BEFORE APPROVAL PROHIBITED—PENALTY

Sec. 74-146. - Penalty.
Any person whether as owner proprietor or as the agent, attorney or representative of any owner or proprietor of land, who
shall plat or subdivide any tract of land within the corporate limits of the city or within one mile thereof, or who shall sell transfer,
deed or convey, contract or agree to sell, transfer or offer for sale or construct any buildings or improvements thereon, any lot or
piece of ground in any addition or subdivision within the corporate limits, or within one mile thereof, without having first obtained
148/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

the acceptance and approval of the final plat or map thereof by the planning commission and by the council, and any person who
shall violate, or who shall fail or neglect, or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of the preceding sections of this chapter, as
now existing or as hereafter amended, shall upon conviction, be fined a sum not to exceed $100.00 for any one offense. The
offering for sale, contracting to sell or selling of each lot or piece of ground shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense, each
day such violation continues after notice of violation is given to the offender may be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 1027, § 1(13-1), 2-3-97)

Chapter 78 - TAXATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
(35) Cross

reference— Administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 18.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Secs. 78-1—78-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - SALES TAX

Sec. 78-26. - Imposed.
Based on the approval by a majority of the electors of the city voting in the state general election on November 3, 1992,
pursuant to R.R.S. 1943, §§ 77-2701 through 77-27,135, 77-27,185 and 77-27,186 (Reissue 1990), known and cited as the Nebraska
Revenue Act of 1967, and pursuant to R.S. Supp., 1990, §§ 77-27,142 through 77-27,148, known and cited as the Local Option
Revenue Act, a sales tax of one percent shall be imposed, within the corporate limits of the city as the corporate limits may from
time to time be extended or changed, upon the same transactions on which the state is authorized to impose a sales tax under the
provisions of the aforementioned statutes of the state as the same may from time to time be amended, such sales tax to become
effective for the city on and after April 1, 1993, and with the proceeds derived therefrom to be allocated to the general fund in the
city.
(Ord. No. 956, § 1, 11-23-92)

Sec. 78-27. - Procedures.
The administration of the sales tax imposed by the terms of this article, the making of returns for the ascertainment and the
assessment of taxes, the provision for tax claims and remedies, the laws governing consumption of sales, penalties and
collections, and for the disposition and distribution of sales tax so imposed and collected shall be governed by the provisions of
R.S. Supp., 1990, §§ 77-27,142 through 77-27,148 and by R.S. Supp., 1990, §§ 77-2701 through 77-27,135.
(Ord. No. 956, § 2, 11-23-92)

Chapter 82 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
FOOTNOTE(S):
(36)

Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70.

(36)

State Law reference— Nebraska Rules of the Road, R.R.S. 1943, § 39-601 et seq.

149/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 82-1. - Penalty for violation of chapter.
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction
thereof be fined in any sum not more than $500.00 and shall be committed to jail until such fine and costs of prosecution are paid.
(Code 1982, § 5-113)

Sec. 82-2. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Congested district means that part of the city between and including Third Street and Sixth Street between and including
Kearney Avenue and Nebraska Avenue.

Motor vehicle shall mean every self-propelled land vehicle, not operated upon rails, except mopeds, self-propelled chairs used
by persons who are disabled, and electric personal assistive mobility devices.

Trucks means any vehicle designed to carry passengers or cargo which has two axles or greater and has a minimum of six
wheels attached to the axles.

Trailers means any vehicle or wagon designed to be hauled or pulled by another motorized vehicle or draft animal and
designed for carrying people, property, goods or material of any kind.
(Code 1982, § 5-111; Ord. No. 1132, 4-2-07)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 82-3. - Stop signs and signals.
(a)

The driver of any vehicle on approaching any stop sign, placed either by the state department of public works or by
direction of the city council, shall fully stop such vehicle before entering such intersection and in entering such
intersection shall give the right-of-way to vehicles moving along the intersecting street.

(b)

That stop signs shall be placed at the north and south approaches at the intersections where 4th Street meets
Hubbard Avenue and Hull Avenue in the City of Minden, Kearney County, Nebraska.

(c)

That stop signs shall be placed on the north and south approaches of the intersections where 5th Street meets
Hubbard Avenue, Hull Avenue and Kearney Avenue in the City of Minden, Kearney County, Nebraska.

(d)

That stop signs shall be placed on the north bound approach (St. Clair Street) of Blaine Avenue.

(Code 1982, § 5-106; Ord. No. 1151, § 1, 7-21-09)

State law reference— Traffic regulation by local authority, R.R.S. 1943, § 39-697 et seq.
Sec. 82-4. - Stop signals.
The driver of any vehicle shall come to a complete stop at any intersection where there shall be a traffic light erected, when
such light shall show red, and shall not proceed until such light shall show green; however the drive may turn right after coming to
a complete stop on a red light.
(Code 1982, § 5-107; Ord. No. 1132, 4-2-07)

150/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 82-5. - First Street.
First Street in the city between Brown Avenue in the city to the west city limits of the city is designated as a main thoroughfare
and stop signs shall be erected on all intersecting streets crossing First Street between Brown Avenue and the west city limits; all
as provided for by R.R.S. 1943, § 17-512, as amended.
(Code 1982, § 9-801)

Sec. 82-6. - Colorado Avenue.
Colorado Avenue in the city between U.S. Highways 6 and 34 and the north city limits in the city is designated as a main
thoroughfare and stop signs shall be erected on all intersecting streets crossing Colorado Avenue between U.S. Highways 6 and 34
and the north city limits, all as provided for by R.R.S. 1943, § 17-521, as amended.
(Code 1982, § 9-802)

Sec. 82-7. - Turns.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a U-turn or complete turn at any intersection where there is a sign in
the center indicating "No U-Turn." Such signs shall be placed at such intersections as the city council may direct. No driver of any
vehicle shall turn the vehicle around in any street except in an intersection.
(Code 1982, § 5-108)

Sec. 82-8. - Obedience to police o cers' directions.
The driver of any vehicle shall immediately stop the vehicle at a signal or command from any police officer of the city and shall
obey the commands and directions of any such officer as to the operation and management of such vehicle.
(Code 1982, § 5-109)

Sec. 82-9. - Intoxicated persons prohibited from driving.
It shall be unlawful for any intoxicated person to drive or operate any motor-driven vehicle within the corporate limits of the
city.
(Code 1982, § 5-110; Ord. No. 1132, 4-2-07)

Editor's note—
Ord. No. 1132, adopted April 2, 2007, changed the title of § 82-9 from "Minors and intoxicated persons prohibited from driving" to
"Intoxicated persons prohibited from driving."
Sec. 82-10. - One-way streets.
Park Avenue from Fifth Street to Third Street shall be a one-way street going north to south.
(Ord. No. 1023, § 2, 11-4-96)

Editor's note—
Ordinance No. 1023, § 2, adopted November 4, 1996, added § 82-110. However, in order to provide better classification, such
provisions were redesignated as § 82-10, at the discretion of the editor.
Secs. 82-11—82-30. - Reserved.

151/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

ARTICLE II. - VEHICLE EQUIPMENT

Sec. 82-31. - Brakes; lights; mu ers.
(a)

No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon any of the streets of the city unless the vehicle is equipped with
proper and sufficient brakes; two headlights if a four-wheeled vehicle and one headlight if a two- or three-wheeled
vehicle; a red taillight; and a muffler. If such muffler is equipped with a cutout, such cutout must be kept closed.
Headlights and taillights must be kept burning whenever any vehicle is driven on the streets of the city any time
between one hour after sunset and one hour before sunrise and whenever it is sufficiently dark to obscure vision.

(b)

It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon the streets of the city unless such motor vehicle
is equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise
and annoying smoke.

(Code 1982, §§ 5-104.01, 5-104.02)

Secs. 82-32—82-50. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES GENERALLY

Sec. 82-51. - Control of vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motor vehicle within the city in a careless manner or without due
regard to other vehicles and pedestrians, or without keeping such vehicle under control so as to prevent collision with other
vehicles or running into pedestrians.
(Code 1982, § 5-101)

Sec. 82-52. - Keep to right; passing.
All moving vehicles shall be kept to the right of the center of the street along which they are moving except in turning to the
left in an intersection. When any vehicle shall turn to the left in an intersection, it shall enter such intersection to the right of the
center of the street from which it enters and shall leave the intersection to the right of the center of the street on which it leaves.
(Code 1982, § 5-102; Ord. No. 1132, 4-2-07)

Sec. 82-53. - Backing of vehicles in a congested district.
Vehicles shall not be backed on any street within the congested district except in backing away from the curb or out of a
parking space sufficiently far to proceed forward, and shall not obstruct forward moving vehicles longer than is reasonably
necessary to back out and proceed forward. In the congested district where the parking space is all occupied, a vehicle may stop in
the space for moving vehicles long enough to load and unload passengers and goods, and in such case the driver shall only stop
his vehicle so that other vehicles going the same direction can pass to his left.
(Code 1982, § 5-103.02)

Sec. 82-54. - Bicycles.
(a)

No person shall ride any bicycle or other vehicle across or upon any sidewalk within a distance of 100 feet of any
other person upon such sidewalk.

(b)

Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall on conviction thereof be fined in any sum not
152/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

to exceed $100.00 for each and every offense and pay costs of prosecution and shall stand committed until such
fine and costs are paid.
(Code 1982, §§ 9-402, 9-403)

Sec. 82-55. - Engine brakes—De nition.
An engine brake is hereby defined as a device that converts a power producing engine into a power absorbing air compressor
resulting in a net energy loss.
(Ord. No. 1019, § 1, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 7-5-00)

Sec. 82-56. - Same—Use unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to use engine brakes within the city limits of the City of Minden, Kearney County, Nebraska.
(Ord. No. 1019, § 2, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 1066, § 2, 7-5-00)

Sec. 82-57. - Same—Penalty for use.
In the event that anyone uses engine brakes within the City of Minden, Kearney County, Nebraska, and is convicted of such,
they shall be fined the sum of $100.00 and ordered to pay the costs of such prosecution.
(Ord. No. 1025, § 3, 11-18-96; Ord. No. 1066, § 3, 7-5-00)

Sec. 82-58. - Operation of trucks on Second Street.
It shall be unlawful for any semi-truck and trailer combination used in the transportation of passengers or property to travel
on Second Street between Brown Avenue and Colorado at any time of day in the city.
(Ord. No. 1141, § 1, 3-17-08)

Secs. 82-59—82-75. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - SPEED RESTRICTIONS

Sec. 82-76. - Speci ed areas.
(a)

It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle upon the streets of the city at a greater speed than
is reasonable and proper under existing conditions for the safety of persons and property, and in no event a speed
greater than:
(1)

Congested area: Twenty miles per hour. The congested area is defined as that portion of Fourth Street from
Nebraska Avenue to Kearney Avenue, that portion of Fifth Street from Nebraska Avenue to Kearney Avenue,
that portion of Colorado Avenue from Third Street to Sixth Street, and that portion of Minden Avenue from
Third Street to Sixth Street.

(2)

First Street: Twenty-five miles per hour from a point 697 feet east of the centerline of Garber Avenue to the
centerline of Gilman Avenue, and 35 miles per hour from the centerline of Gilman Avenue to the west city
limits.

(3)

Brown Avenue (Highway 10): Forty-five miles per hour from a point 1,000 feet south of the centerline of
Hastings Avenue to the centerline of St. Clair Avenue; 35 miles per hour from the centerline of St. Clair Avenue
to the centerline of 13th Street, and 45 miles per hour from the centerline of 13th Street to a point 300 feet
north of the centerline of 17th Street.
153/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(4)

State and Federal Highways No. 6 and 34: Forty-five miles per hour from a point 200 feet west of the centerline of
Avenue to a point 100 feet west of the centerline of Smith Avenue; 35 miles per hour from a point 100 feet west o
of Smith Avenue to a point 200 feet east of the east line of Kearney Avenue; and 45 miles per hour from a point 2
the east line of Kearney Avenue to the centerline of Garber Avenue; provided, however, if at any time or for any r
highways, or either of them, are detoured or relocated upon any city street, the speed limit for the portion of the
detoured or relocated shall be the same as the speed limit then established for such city streets.

(5)

All other streets within the corporate limits: Twenty-five miles per hour, except as designated by ordinance by
the city council. When any street within the city shall be designated as having a speed other than 25 miles per
hour, the speed on that street shall be posted with signs informing the public of such speed as soon as
practicable.

(b)

This section shall not apply to members of the fire department, physicians or ambulance drivers driving in response
to an emergency requiring greater speed, or to members of the city police or the office of the county sheriff in the
exercise of official duties requiring a greater speed.

(Code 1982, §§ 5-105.01, 5-105.02; Ord. No. 894, § 1, 2-16-87; Ord. No. 896, § 1, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 6-1-98)

Sec. 82-77. - Speed limits on Ninth Street.
The speed limit on Ninth Street between Garber Avenue and Kearney Avenue shall be no greater than 15 miles per hour from
May 1 until September 30 of each year commencing with 1998. At all other times from that set out in this ordinance the speed limit
shall be 25 miles per hour on Ninth Street between Garber Avenue and Kearney Avenue.
(Ord. No. 1048, § 1, 6-1-98)

Sec. 82-78. - Speed limits on designated streets.
The speed limit on the following streets shall be no greater than 20 miles per hour:
Fifth Street from Gilman Avenue to Smith Avenue.
Fourth Street from Yates Avenue to Smith Avenue.
Third Street from Gilman Avenue to Smith Avenue.
Second Street from Park Avenue to Smith Avenue.
First Street from Blaine Avenue to Smith Avenue.
Gilman Avenue from Fifth Street to First Street.
Park Avenue from Fifth Street to First Street.
Yates Avenue from Fifth Street to First Street.
Smith Avenue from Fifth Street to First Street.
Colorado Avenue from First Street to Sixth Street.
Minden Avenue from First Street to Sixth Street.
Third Street from Colorado Avenue to Minden Avenue.
Second Street from Colorado Avenue to Minden Avenue.
Fourth Street from Colorado Avenue to Minden Avenue.

154/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Fifth Street from Colorado Avenue to Minden Avenue.
Sixth Street from Colorado Avenue to Minden Avenue.
(Ord. No. 1067, § 1, 8-7-00)

Sec. 82-79. - Speed limit on Nebraska Avenue.
The speed limit on Nebraska Avenue from Hastings Street to the south city limits of the City of Minden, Kearney County,
Nebraska shall be no greater than 15 miles per hour.
(Ord. No. 1069, § 1, 10-16-00)

Sec. 82-80. - Speed limit on First Street.
The speed limit on First Street from 31 Road to Sears Avenue in the City of Minden, Kearney County, Nebraska shall be no
greater than 35 miles per hour, and further the speed limit on First Street from Sears Avenue to Brown Avenue in the City of
Minden, Kearney County, Nebraska shall be no greater that 25 miles per hour.
(Ord. No. 1115, § 1, 7-6-04)

Secs. 82-81—82-95. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - STANDING, STOPPING AND PARKING

Sec. 82-96. - Penalty for violation of article.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, upon conviction thereof, be fined in any sum not exceeding
$500.00.
(Code 1982, § 5-113; Ord. No. 874, § 3, 6-4-84; Ord. No. 1132, 4-2-07)

Sec. 82-97. - In congested district.
(a)

It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave any vehicle within the congested district, except within two feet
of the curb on the righthand side of the street or within a marked parking space.

(b)

Wherever parking spaces are marked by lines painted on pavement or curb, vehicles shall not be parked except
within and between such lines.

(c)

In no event shall any vehicle be parked on any street or alley longer than 24 hours.

(d)

No vehicle shall be parked at any time in a space where there is a no parking sign or where the curb is painted with
colored paint to indicate no parking.

(e)

Wherever there shall be a sign placed by the authority of the mayor and council or the police indicating limited
parking time, then it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle at such a place for a longer period than the
time indicated.

(Code 1982, § 5-103.01; Ord. No. 870, § 1, 12-19-83)

Sec. 82-98. - Parking or storage of vehicles, trucks and trailers in residential districts prohibited; exceptions.
(a)

Parking; designation. The governing body may, by resolution, designate any street, or portion thereof where
vehicles, trucks and trailers shall be parked parallel with and adjacent to the curb or at an angle so as to have the
right front wheel at the curb.
155/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(b)

Parking; areas. The governing body may, by resolution, set aside any street, alley, public way, or portion thereof where
parking of a particular kind or class of vehicle, truck or trailer shall be prohibited, or where the parking of any vehicle, t
trailer shall be prohibited. No vehicle, truck or trailer prohibited from parking thereon shall stand or be parked adjacen
curb of said street, alley, public way, or portion thereof, longer than a period of time necessary to load and unload frei
passengers.

(c)

Parking; alleys. No vehicle, truck or trailer shall be parked in any alley, except for the purpose of loading or
unloading during the time necessary to load or unload, which shall not exceed the maximum limit of ½ hour. Every
vehicle, truck or trailer while loading or unloading in any alley shall be parked in such manner as will cause the least
obstruction possible to traffic in such alley.

(d)

Parking; unloading; freight vehicles. Vehicles, trucks and trailers of an over-all length of less than 20 feet, including
load, while discharging or loading freight may back to the curb, but shall occupy as little of the street as possible.
(1)

Except as provided hereafter, no semi-truck and trailer combination, licensed or unlicensed, shall be parked
on the municipality's streets in R-1, R-2, and R-3 except for purposes of repair or service at a commercial repair
facility.

(2)

No semi-truck, truck, licensed or unlicensed, or any power unit on any trailer designed to be attached to,
propelled or drawn by mechanical power may be parked on any street with a power unit in operation at any
such time in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 district, except to load or unload or for repair or service at a commercial
repair facility.

(3)

Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, no semi-truck and trailer combination used in the
transportation of passengers or property, may be parked on any street designated by the governing body as
an emergency route within the corporate limits except for purposes of loading and unloading and except for
repair or service at a commercial repair facility.

(4)

The governing body shall have the power, by resolution, to allow parking of semi-truck and trailer
combinations in portions of districts R-1, R-2, and R-3.

(Ord. No. 874, §§ 1(5-104.04), 2(5-103.05), 6-4-84; Ord. No. 998, § 1, 11-7-94; Ord. No. 1005, § 3, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 10-21-96; Ord. No. 1122, § 1,
2-7-06; Ord. No. 1124, § 1, 3-6-06; Ord. No. 1132, 4-2-07)

Sec. 82-99. - Parking prohibited on certain streets.
(a)

It shall be lawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to park the motor vehicle or to stop the motor vehicle for the
purpose of loading or unloading goods of any kind on Brown Avenue or on First Street within the City of Minden.
(1)

It shall also be lawful for vehicles owned by the City of Minden, Nebraska to stop on any street within the City
of Minden, Nebraska for any lawful municipal purpose or the delivery of any essential municipal services.

(2)

It shall also be lawful to momentarily park or stand a vehicle whether occupied or not at Kearney County
Health Services, 727 East First Street, Minden, Nebraska in order to load or unload passengers, merchandise
or freight.

(b)

It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to park the vehicle on the south side of Second Street
between Colorado Avenue and Minden Avenue.

(c)

It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to park such motor vehicle on Third Street between Colorado
Avenue and Nebraska Avenue or along the north side of Third Street from Nebraska Avenue to Brown Avenue.

(d)

It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to park such motor vehicle on the east side of Park Avenue
between Third Street and Fifth Street between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.

(e)

It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to park such motor vehicle on the north side of Eighth Street
between Hull Avenue and Garber Avenue.

(f)

It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to park the motor vehicle on the east side of Colorado
Avenue between Sixth Street and Ninth Street.
156/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(g)

That there shall be no parking on the west side of Park Avenue from First Street to Third Street during the hours of
7:45 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 3:45 p.m., on days when school is in session.

(h)

That there shall be no parking on the south side of Fifth Street from Park Avenue to Gilman Avenue during the
hours of 7:45 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 3:45 p.m., on days when school is in session.

(i)

No parking areas designated on Hawthorne and Logan Streets in the city. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any
motor vehicle to park such motor vehicle on the east one-half of Hawthorne Street on the south side of Hawthorne
Street only between Logan Street and Blaine Street. Further it shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle
to park such motor vehicle on either the east or west side of Logan Street as Logan Street lies between Holland
Street and Hawthorne Street. All of said streets are in the city.

(j)

Parallel parking area designated on Minden Avenue in the city. Parallel parking only shall be allowed on the west
side of Minden Avenue from the north right-of-way line of U.S. Highway Six and Thirty-four to the north right-of-way
of Eleventh Street, now vacated. All of said streets are in the city.

(k)

Parking is hereby prohibited on the east and west side of Park Avenue from Fifth Street south, 230 feet. The city
shall also have the right to tow vehicles that violate this no parking zone. All of said streets are in the city.

(Code 1982, § 5.103.03; Ord. No. 914, § 1, 9-19-88; Ord. No. 959, § 1, 3-1-93; Ord. No. 1012, § 1, 10-16-95; Ord. No. 1023, § 1, 11-4-96; Ord. No. 1080, § 1,
11-19-01; Ord. No. 1107, § 1, 10-20-03; Ord. No. 1162, § 1, 10-4-10; Ord. No. 1166, § 1, 5-2-11)

Sec. 82-100. - Abandoned vehicles generally.
(a)

Nuisance. It is hereby expressly found and determined that the unrestricted parking or storage of vehicles or trailer
on the public streets or on city property is an obstruction and hazard to the proper and efficient flow of traffic and
use of the streets and city property and constitutes a nuisance to the citizens and residents of the city.

(b)

Restricted on city property. No person shall park or leave standing any unlicensed vehicle or trailer on any street,
sidewalk, and terrace or on any city property at any time for any period of time.

(c)

Trailers, except those described in subsection (d). It shall be unlawful for any trailers, licensed or unlicensed,
attached or unattached, to be parked on any street or right-of-way in the city, Kearney County, Nebraska between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. on any day of the week. This prohibition shall not apply to those licensed trailers
described in subsection (d).

(d)

Exceptions. Licensed trailers being used in the remodeling or new construction of buildings will be exempt from
subsection (3) only if the trailer is identified and marked with the name of the contractor or construction company
and has affixed to the rear of the trailer at least 100 square inches or reflector tape.
(1)

No person shall park or leave standing any licensed vehicle or trailer on any sidewalk or no parking zone at
any time for any period of time.

(2)

No person shall park or leave standing any licensed vehicle or trailer on any terrace. A terrace shall be defined
as the space on each side of a street between the property line and the curb.

(3)

No person shall park or leave standing any licensed vehicle on the traveled portion of any street or on city
property for more than 72 hours.

(4)

Any vehicle or trailer so parked or left standing where so prohibited or for more than the permitted time limits
shall be presumed abandoned.

(5)

Any person who shall violate this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00
and not more than $100.00, shall pay the costs of prosecution and shall pay such charges for removal and
storage of such vehicle or trailer as may from time to time be set by the resolution of the city council.

(Ord. No. 980, §§ 1(5-123), 2(5-124), (5-124.01—5-124.06), 12-20-93; Ord. No. 1132, 4-2-07)

Sec. 82-101. - Truck or trailer parking.

157/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

That truck or trailer parking is hereby prohibited on the south side of Sixth Street from Minden Avenue to the alley between
Colorado Avenue and Minden Avenue.
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 5-15-95)

Secs. 82-102, 82-102.1. - Reserved.
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 1132, adopted April 2, 2007, repealed §§ 82-102 and 82-102.1 in their entirety. Formerly, §§ 82-102 and 82-102.1
pertained to trucks defined and trailers defined, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. 1006, §§ 2, 3, adopted May 15, 1995, and
Ord. No. 1005, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 19, 1995.
Sec. 82-103. - Straight farm trucks in fall harvest season.
Sections 82-98, 82-102 through 82-103 shall not be enforced for straight farm trucks involved in the fall harvest season from
September 15 to November 15 of each year. All other provisions of these sections, as applied to truck trailers, semitrailers, trailers
or any combination thereof or any motor vehicle trailer combination having a length of 25 feet or more, shall remain in full force
and effect.
(Ord. No. 1005, § 4, 6-19-95)

Secs. 82-104—82-120. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - SNOW EMERGENCY

Sec. 82-121. - Routes.
The mayor, city administrator and/or chief of police is hereby authorized to establish snow emergency routes upon any street
or highway of the city and shall, at his discretion, place appropriate signs, marks, lines, signals or other traffic control devices
indicating the existence of snow emergency routes. The designation of any street, highway or portion thereof as a snow
emergency route shall in no way affect any previous designation of that street or highway as an arterial or other road designation.
(Ord. No. 979, § 2(5-114), 12-6-93)

Sec. 82-122. - Declaration.
Whenever the mayor, city administrator and/or chief of police shall find, on the basis of falling snow, sleet or freezing rain or
on the basis of an official forecast by the U.S. Weather Bureau of snow, sleet or freezing rain, that weather conditions will make it
necessary that motor vehicle traffic be expedited and that parking on city snow emergency routes be prohibited or restricted for
snow plowing and other purposes, the mayor, city administrator and/or chief of police may place into effect a parking prohibition
on all snow emergency routes by declaring that emergency conditions exist. In such declaration of emergency conditions, the
mayor, city administrator and/or chief of police shall state the time that such emergency shall be in effect and from the time so
designated, all parking of vehicles on snow emergency routes shall be prohibited. While the prohibition is in effect, no person shall
park or allow to remain parked any vehicle on any portion of a snow emergency route. Once in effect, the parking prohibition
imposed under this section shall remain in effect until terminated by declaration of the mayor, city administrator and/or chief of
police. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to permit parking at any time or place where it is forbidden by any
other provision of law.
(Ord. No. 979, § 3(5-115), 12-6-93)

158/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 82-123. - Noti cation of media.
(a)

The mayor, city administrator and/or chief of police shall cause each declaration of a snow emergency made by him,
pursuant to this article, to be publicly announced by means of broadcast or telecast from broadcasting stations with
a normal operating range covering the city, and he may cause such declaration to be further announced in a
newspaper of general circulation when feasible. Each announcement shall describe the action taken by the mayor,
city administrator and/or chief of police, including the time it became or will become effective, and shall specify the
streets or areas affected. The mayor, city administrator and/or chief of police shall make or cause to be made a
record of each time and date when any declaration is announced to the public by issuing an executive order as
soon after the declaring of an emergency as is feasible.

(b)

Whenever the mayor, city administrator and/or chief of police shall find that some or all of the conditions which
gave rise to a parking prohibition placed in effect pursuant to the provisions of this article no longer exist, he may
declare the prohibition terminated, in whole or in part, effective immediately upon announcement or at a later
specified time.

(Ord. No. 979, § 4(5-116), 12-6-93)

Sec. 82-124. - Arterial street parking prohibited.
Whenever the mayor, city administrator and/or chief of police shall find, on the basis of falling snow, sleet or freezing rain, or
on the basis of an official forecast by the U.S. Weather Bureau of snow, sleet or freezing rain, that weather conditions will make it
necessary that motor vehicle traffic be expedited and that parking on city arterial streets be prohibited or restricted for snow
plowing and other purposes, the mayor, city administrator and/or chief of police may put into effect a parking prohibition on all
streets designated as arterial streets in the code or by resolution of the mayor and council declaring that an emergency exists and
that all parking on such streets so designated will be prohibited. In such declaration the mayor, city administrator and/or chief of
police shall state the date and time on which such parking prohibition shall take effect. The prohibition against parking shall
remain in effect until terminated by announcement of the mayor, city administrator and/or chief of police.
(Ord. No. 979, § 5(5-117), 12-6-93)

Sec. 82-125. - Residential street parking.
Whenever the mayor, city administrator and/or chief of police shall find, on the basis of accumulated snow, that conditions
make it necessary that parking on residential streets be prohibited or restricted for snow plowing and other purposes, he may put
into effect a parking prohibition on parts of or on all residential streets by declaring that parking be prohibited on one side of the
residential streets, designating either the odd or even address numbered side, at his discretion. In such declaration the mayor, city
administrator and/or chief of police shall state the date and time on which such parking prohibition shall take effect. The
prohibition shall remain in effect until terminated by announcement of the mayor, city administrator and/or chief of police, who
may then declare that there shall be in effect a parking prohibition on the opposite side of those residential streets designated
above, which prohibition shall remain in effect until terminated by announcement of the mayor, city administrator and/or chief of
police.
(Ord. No. 979, § 6(5-118), 12-6-93)

Sec. 82-126. - Stalled vehicles.
Whenever a motor vehicle or trailer becomes stalled for any reason, whether or not in violation of this article, on any snow
emergency route on which there is a parking prohibition in effect, the person operating such vehicle shall take immediate action to
have the vehicle towed or pushed off the roadway of such snow emergency route, either on to the nearest cross street which is

159/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

not a snow emergency route, or other appropriate location. No person shall abandon or leave a motor vehicle or trailer in the
roadway of a snow emergency route, except for the purpose of securing assistance during the actual time necessary to go to a
nearby telephone or to a nearby garage, gasoline station or other place of assistance and return without delay.
(Ord. No. 979, § 7(5-119), 12-6-93; Ord. No. 1132, 4-2-07)

Sec. 82-127. - Precedence of provisions.
Any provision of this article which becomes effective by declaration of the mayor, city administrator and/or chief of police
upon the occurrence of a snow emergency, while temporarily in effect, shall take precedence over conflicting provisions of law
normally in effect; except, that it shall not take precedence over provisions of law relating to traffic accidents, emergency travel of
authorized emergency vehicles, or emergency traffic directions by a police officer.
(Ord. No. 979, § 8(5-120), 12-6-93)

Sec. 82-128. - Police authority.
Members of the police department are hereby authorized to remove or have removed a vehicle or trailer from a street to
another place or location on a street or to a lot, garage or other similar facility designated by the police department when:
(1)

The vehicle or trailer is parked on a snow emergency route on which a parking prohibition is in effect.

(2)

The vehicle or trailer is stalled on a snow emergency route on which there is a parking prohibition in effect and
the person who is operating the vehicle does not appear to be removing it in accordance with the provisions of
this article.

(3)

The vehicle or trailer is parked or stalled on an arterial route on which there is a parking prohibition in effect
and is interfering or about to interfere with snow removal operations.

(4)

The vehicle or trailer is parked on any street in violation of any parking prohibition or provision of law
contained in this article and is interfering or about to interfere with snow removal operations.

(Ord. No. 979, § 9(5-121.04), 12-6-93; Ord. No. 1132, 4-2-07)

Sec. 82-129. - Violations, penalties.
(a)

Each 24 hour period commencing with the declaration of a snow emergency shall be deemed to be a separate day.
Every day or part thereof that any violation of any provision of this article shall continue beyond the first day shall
constitute a separate offense and may be charged as a second or subsequent offense.

(b)

Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of at least
$10.00 and not exceeding $100.00 if such violation be a first offense; or at least $15.00 and not exceeding $100.00 if
such violation be a second offense and charged as such; or at least $20.00 and not exceeding $100.00 if such
violation is a third or subsequent offense and charged as such; and shall pay the costs of prosecution.

(c)

Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall also, if his motor vehicle or trailer was removed by or
at the request of the city, pay such charges for removal and storage as are from time to time set by resolution of
the mayor and council.

(Ord. No. 979, § 10(5-122.02), 12-6-93; Ord. No. 1132, 4-2-07)

Secs. 82-130—82-150. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. - RAILROADS

160/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 82-151. - Obstructing crossings.
It is unlawful to obstruct any street or any crossing, duly opened and used by the public, for more than ten minutes at a time
by any railroad by leaving thereon any engine, car, truck, or train.
(Code 1982, § 5-201)

Chapter 86 - UTILITIES
FOOTNOTE(S):
(37) Cross

reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 46; planning, ch. 62; streets,

sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; zoning, ch. 94.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Secs. 86-1—86-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - SEWERS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(38) State

Law reference— Sewers and drains, R.R.S. 1943, § 17-145; sewer system rules, R.R.S. 1943, § 18-503; sewerage systems,

R.R.S. 1943, § 17-913 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 86-26. - Penalty for violation of article.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall upon conviction be fined in any sum not less than $25.00 or more than
$500.00 and shall be committed to jail until the fine and costs shall be paid.
(Code 1982, § 10-904)

Sec. 86-27. - User charge; lien; special tax.
All charges for the use of the city sewer system and for sewer connections shall be made to and collected from the owners of
the premises where such connections exist and shall be a lien upon the premises and real estate until paid. The city may proceed
to collect the charges, when due, by civil action in court, and all amounts past due and unpaid on July 1 of each year shall be levied
as special taxes against the property against which they are charged, and shall be certified by the city clerk to the county clerk to
be collected as other special taxes are collected, all in a manner prescribed by law.
(Code 1982, § 10-1003)

Sec. 86-28. - Grease traps required where grease discharged.
All waste material containing grease such as waste material from creameries, hotel kitchens, restaurant kitchens and any
other place or establishment having waste matter containing grease must be discharged through a grease trap approved by the
sewer commissioner.
(Code 1982, § 10-901)

161/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 86-29. - Steam pipes.
All steam exhaust, blow-off or drip pipes must not be connected with house drains, soil, waste or vent pipes within any
building but must be discharged into an open tank or condenser from which safe siphon connection to the sewer outside the
building must be made.
(Code 1982, § 10-902)

Sec. 86-30. - Wash racks.
All garages and other buildings of any kind having a wash rack on which motor vehicles are washed and connected with the
city sewer shall be provided with and so cared for that no mud or sand shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer system.
(Code 1982, § 10-903)

Secs. 86-31—86-40. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - SEWER COMMISSIONER

Sec. 86-41. - O ce held by water commissioner.
The city water commissioner shall be ex officio the sewer commissioner for the city and shall not be required to give any
additional bond except the bond required of him as water commissioner.
(Code 1982, § 10-801)

Sec. 86-42. - Duties.
It shall be the duty of the sewer commissioner, subject to the supervision of the mayor and the city council, to have the
general management of the city sewer system, to collect all moneys receivable by the city on account of the sewer system and to
faithfully account for and to pay the moneys over to the city treasurer, taking his receipt therefor in duplicate, filing one of the
same with the city clerk. He shall make a detailed report to the city council once every month of the condition of the sewer system;
of all moneys, machinery, supplies, improvements, repairs, and expenses thereof; and no moneys shall be expended for
improvements, repairs or extensions of the sewer system except on the recommendation of the sewer commissioner. The sewer
commissioner shall have the management and control of the sewage disposal plant and all appurtenances and appliances of the
plant, and shall operate the disposal plant and perform such other duties as may be from time to time required of him by the
mayor and council.
(Code 1982, § 10-802)

Sec. 86-43. - Salary.
The salary of the sewer commissioner shall be agreed upon between the appointee and the council, and the council shall
employ such laborers and clerks as they may deem necessary upon the written recommendation of the sewer commissioner.
(Code 1982, § 10-803)

Secs. 86-44—86-55. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - RATES

162/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 86-56. - Set by resolution.
The mayor and council shall have the power at any time by resolution to adjust or amend the rates to be charged for sewer
consumers using city sewer services. Charges may be billed by the city water and sewer department on a monthly basis. Each
separate water customer using the sewer system shall constitute a separate user of the sewer. Such charges shall be payable
within six months after sewer services become available, whether or not actual connection is made.
(Code 1982, § 10-1001; Ord. No. 950, § 1, 9-8-92)

Secs. 86-57—86-75. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL SYSTEM
FOOTNOTE(S):
(39)

State Law reference— State electrical act, R.R.S. 1943, § 81-2101 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 86-76. - Wiring installed according to regulation.
(a)

The wiring of each house and building within the city for electric lights shall be done under and according to the
rules and regulations adopted for electric wiring by the National Fire Underwriters Association of the United States,
which rules and regulations are on file with the light commissioner and are hereby adopted by the city.

(b)

Any person about to do or perform any wiring within the city shall first notify the light commissioner thereof as to
the building and place where such wiring is proposed to be done and obtain his consent therefor. After the wiring is
so done and performed by such person, the light commissioner shall be notified thereof and given an opportunity
to examine and approve the wiring. Any wiring for electric lights in any building in the city found by the light
commissioner to be done or existing in violation of the rules and regulations referred to in this section shall be
ordered by him changed to conform to such regulations. On failure of the person owning such house or building to
so change such wiring within ten days after receiving the notice, the supply of light of such person shall be shut off.

(c)

All wiring and work in and around the light system shall be skillfully done and in a manner required by the light
commissioner and shall be subject to his approval. The quality and pattern of all appurtenances shall also be
subject to his approval.

(d)

No installation of industrial or residential electrical wiring from the mast head to the finished outlet shall be
performed within the zoning limits of the city except by a licensed electrician. For purposes of this article a licensed
electrician who has obtained a license from the state shall be authorized to perform the wiring.

(Code 1982, §§ 12-110.01—12-110.04)

Sec. 86-77. - Injuring system; penalty for violation of section.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, injure or destroy any wires, poles, machinery, lamp or any appliance, apparatus,
appurtenances or fixtures in or about the electric light system or connected therewith, and it shall be unlawful to post an
advertisement or other device upon, or drive any nail or other substance into any electric light pole. Any person found guilty of
violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined in any sum not exceeding $500.00 and pay costs of prosecution.
(Code 1982, § 12-117)

Sec. 86-78. - Work to be done by authorized persons.
163/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

It shall be unlawful for any electrician, or other person to do any work upon any of the wires, poles, lamps or any part of the
system, or to make any addition, alteration or change whatever in or about the light system without first notifying the light
commissioner and receiving his written consent thereto. All such work, must, in all cases, be done either by the light
commissioner, or his duly authorized agent, or some electrician duly authorized under the ordinances of the city.
(Code 1982, § 12-109)

Sec. 86-79. - Access to system.
The various persons employed by the light department and every person delegated for that purpose by the light
commissioner must have free access at all proper hours of the day to all parts of every building or premises to which electric light
is delivered to examine the lines and fixtures or for any other purpose in connection therewith.
(Code 1982, § 12-112)

Sec. 86-80. - Application for current.
The application for electric light service must be made in writing upon a blank form furnished by the light commissioner, and
the application shall state the location of the house or building and whether it is a residence or business place.
(Code 1982, § 12-111)

Sec. 86-81. - Hours of service.
Current shall be delivered to consumers 24 hours a day, except for inevitable accident or unavoidable casualty. Wherever in
this article kw is used with reference to rates it shall be construed to mean kwh.
(Code 1982, § 12-118)

Sec. 86-82. - Discontinuance of service.
The city reserves the right to stop the supply of electric light without any preliminary notice for any violation of the rules and
requirements. Such supply will not be restored except upon the payment of all back charges, and payment of $1.00 as the expense
of shutting off the light and turning it on. The city also reserves the right to shut off electric lights for all necessary purposes, and
the city does not guarantee the delivery of the electric light except when its system and connections are in good working order.
(Code 1982, § 12-113)

Sec. 86-83. - Consumer contracts not transferable.
Contracts are not transferable and any person wishing to change from one location to another shall make a new application
and sign a new contract. If any consumer shall sell, dispose of, or leave the premises, or such premises shall be destroyed by fire,
he shall at once notify the office of the light department, and shall cause the electric current to be shut off from the premises. If
such consumer shall fail to give such notice, he shall be charged for such electric current until the light department is otherwise
advised of such change.
(Code 1982, § 12-114)

Sec. 86-84. - Rates.
The mayor and council shall have power at any time by a majority vote of the members of the council with the approval of the
mayor, to adjust or amend rates to be charged for electric current for light and power purposes.
(Code 1982, § 12-123)

164/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 86-85. - Bills to be rendered for service.
The city water and light department shall render bills to all customers for light services. Electric service will be discontinued if
bills are not paid within 20 days after the due date.
(Code 1982, § 12-102.02)

Sec. 86-86. - Bills due date.
Light bills shall be due and payable on the first day of each month, provided that the light commissioner may, whenever in his
judgment he deems it advisable or necessary, declare any light bill due at any time and proceed to collect the bill.
(Code 1982, § 12-108)

Sec. 86-87. - Moneys collected kept in electric light fund.
All moneys collected from the consumers of current and all taxes levied for street light and maintenance shall be kept by the
city treasurer in an independent fund to be known as the electric light fund.
(Code 1982, § 12-122)

Sec. 86-88. - [Net metering policies adopted.]
Pursuant to R.R.S. 1943, §§ 70-2001 to 70-2005, city finds and declares it to be in the public interest and in the interest of the
customers of the city's electric utility that the city adopt net metering policies.
(Ord. No. 1164, § 1, 12-6-10)

Sec. 86-89. - [Consumption o set.]
The city shall allow a customer generator's retail electricity consumption to be offset by the electricity generated from eligible
energy resources on the customer generator side of the meter that are interconnected with the facilities of the municipality owned
utility.
(Ord. No. 1164, § 1, 12-6-10)

Sec. 86-90. - ["Avoided costs" provision rate.]
The city shall provide for "avoided costs" as the new rate for the net metering services; along with certain uniform standards
and procedures for privately owned electrical generation to be net metered.
(Ord. No. 1164, § 1, 12-6-10)

Sec. 86-91. - [Interconnection.]
Pursuant to R.R.S. 1943, §§ 70-2001 to 70-2005, the city shall interconnect the qualified facility of any customer generator that
enters into an interconnection agreement, satisfies the requirement for a qualified facility and pays for costs incurred by the city.
(Ord. No. 1164, § 1, 12-6-10)

Sec. 86-92. - [Net metering process documents.]
Attached to this article and approved as if fully set out in this chapter are the following documents to be used in the net
metering process:

165/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(1)

Net Metering Glossary of Terms;

(2)

Net Metering Interconnection Agreement;

(3)

Net Metering Application for Interconnection;

(4)

Net Metering Certificate of Completion;

(5)

Technical Requirements.

(Ord. No. 1164, § 1, 12-6-10)

Secs. 86-93—86-100. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - ELECTRIC LIGHT COMMISSIONER

Sec. 86-101. - Duties; salary; removal.
The water commissioner of the city shall be ex officio the electric light commissioner, and shall, under the direction of the
mayor and council, have the control and management of the electric light system of the city. The council may, from time to time
when deemed advisable, authorize the appointment of such clerks, assistants and help as may be deemed necessary, and such
appointments shall be made by the commissioner and confirmed by the council. The light commissioner shall receive a salary as
fixed by the mayor and council, and he may be removed at any time by a three-fourths vote of the council.
(Code 1982, § 12-101)

Sec. 86-102. - Collection of money.
The electric light commissioner shall collect all money receivable by the city on account of the system of electric lights and
shall faithfully account for and pay the money over to the city treasurer at the end of each and every week, taking his receipt
therefor in duplicate and filing one with the city clerk.
(Code 1982, § 12-102.01)

Sec. 86-103. - Reports to council.
At the first regular meeting of each month of the city council, the electric light commissioner shall present a report to the
council of the condition of the electric light system, recommending such improvement and repairs and extensions thereof as he
may deem proper. Such report shall be accompanied with a statement of the receipts and expenditures of the light system for the
previous month, and he shall also submit a list of all delinquent light bills.
(Code 1982, § 12-103)

Sec. 86-104. - Management of employees.
Subject only to the control and direction of the mayor and city council, the electric light commissioner shall have the
management of all employees of the light department, and they shall obey his orders.
(Code 1982, § 12-104)

Sec. 86-105. - Purchases.
The electric light commissioner shall not purchase any materials or supplies or employ any help for the light department,
except upon the authority of the mayor and council or the purchasing committee thereof.
(Code 1982, § 12-105)

166/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 86-106. - Consumers' accounts.
The light commissioner shall keep a full and correct account with each electric light consumer and shall issue duplicate
receipts for all money collected from each consumer, one of which shall be given to the person from whom the money is collected
and the other retained by the commissioner in his office. The books and papers kept by the light commissioner shall at all times be
open to the inspection of the mayor and council.
(Code 1982, § 12-106)

Secs. 86-107—86-115. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - METERS

Sec. 86-116. - Required.
All consumers of electric light are required to use light at meter rates and are required to install a light meter of a kind
approved by the mayor and council. No person other than the light commissioner or a duly authorized electrician shall be allowed
to set light meters, and the location of such meters shall be designated by the light commissioner. The commissioner shall have
the right to go upon the premises of the consumers of light for that purpose, and if any consumer refuses to allow the
commissioner to do so, such consumer shall not be permitted to connect with the light system, or if already connected, his light
shall be turned off.
(Code 1982, § 12-107)

Sec. 86-117. - Repair.
Should a consumer's meter get out of repair or fail to register properly, the consumer will be charged for electric current
during the time such meter is out of order or repair at the average monthly consumption shown by the meter when in order for
the previous six months, or fraction thereof, if the meter has not been used for six months.
(Code 1982, § 12-115)

Sec. 86-118. - Rental.
Single-phase, 110-220, three-wire meters only may be rented from the city at a rental of $0.50 per month, three-phase meters
at $0.50 per month, and when so rented such meters do not become the property of the consumer. One dollar shall be charged
for installation for rent of meters, and nothing for taking them out.
(Code 1982, § 12-120)

Sec. 86-119. - Demand meters.
If a consumer desires a demand meter to be installed he shall have the right to request that such service be provided by the
city. The requirements for demand meter service shall be set by resolution of the city council.
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 5-2-94)

Secs. 86-120—86-130. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - INTERCONNECTIONS WITH OTHER FACILITIES

167/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 86-131. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Avoided costs means the incremental costs to an electric utility of electric energy or capacity, or both, which, but for the
purchase from qualifying facilities, such utility would generate itself or purchase from another source.

Cogeneration facility means a facility which produces electric energy and steam or other forms of useful energy, such as heat,
which are used for industrial, commercial, heating, or cooling purposes.

Interconnection costs mean the reasonable costs of connection, switching, metering, transmission, distribution, safety
provisions, and administrative costs incurred by the electric utility directly necessary to permit interconnected operations with a
qualifying facility, to the extent such costs are in excess of the corresponding costs which the electric utility would have incurred if
it had not engaged in interconnected operations, but instead generated an equivalent amount of electric energy itself or
purchased an equivalent amount of electric energy or capacity from other sources. Interconnection costs do not include any costs
involved in the calculation of avoided costs.

Qualifying cogeneration facility means a cogeneration facility that meets the requirements of the federal energy regulatory
commission regarding ownership, fuel use, and operating and efficiency standards.

Qualifying small power production facility means a small power production facility that meets the requirements of the federal
energy regulatory commission regarding ownership, fuel use, fuel efficiency and reliability.

Small power production facility means a facility which produces electric energy solely by the use, as a primary energy source,
of biomass, waste, renewable resources, or any combination thereof totaling not greater than 80 megawatts at one site.
(Code 1982, § 12-124)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 86-132. - With qualifying facilities.
(a)

Qualifying facilities desiring to interconnect with the electric system of the city shall make application to the
department of utilities for such interconnection. Applicants shall use forms as are prescribed by the city and shall
furnish all information requested.

(b)

The city shall establish reasonable standards to be met by qualifying facilities to ensure system safety and reliability
of interconnection operations. Such standards may include but shall not be limited to the following areas: power
factor, voltage regulation, fault, overcurrent, over-under voltage protection, harmonics, synchronization, and
isolation.

(c)

Interconnection costs associated with the interconnection with a qualifying facility shall be paid for by such
qualifying facility. Qualifying facilities shall be required to execute contractual agreements with the city before any
interconnection is established.

(Code 1982, § 12-125)

Sec. 86-133. - Rates for sales of electric energy to qualifying facilities.
Rates for sales of electric energy to qualifying facilities shall be those current standard rates adopted from time to time by
resolution of the mayor and city council which apply to other customers of the utility in the same classifications of electric service.
(Code 1982, § 12-126)

168/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 86-134. - Rates for purchases of electric energy from qualifying facilities.
(a)

Rates for purchases of electric energy from qualifying facilities shall be established by resolution of the mayor and
city council.

(b)

Such rates shall be just and reasonable to the electric consumer of the utility and in the public interest, shall not
discriminate against qualifying cogeneration and small power production facilities, and shall be related to avoided
costs. However, in no case is the utility required to pay more than the avoided costs.

(c)

Standard rates shall be established for purchases from qualifying facilities with a design capacity of 100 kilowatts or
less. Rates for purchases from qualifying facilities with a design capacity over 100 kilowatts may be standard rates
or may be by individual contracts, the terms of which are fair and reasonable.

(Code 1982, § 12-127)

Secs. 86-135—86-155. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - WATER
FOOTNOTE(S):
(40)

State Law reference— Water service districts, R.R.S. 1943, § 17-970 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 86-156. - Penalty for violation of article.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be fined in any sum not exceeding $500.00.
(Code 1982, § 12-335)

Sec. 86-157. - Fluoridation of water required.
Fluoride shall be added to the water of the city in the manner provided for by the laws of the state.
(Code 1982, § 100-102)

State law reference— Fluoride added to water supply, R.R.S. 1943, § 71-3305.
Sec. 86-158. - Willful damage of waterworks xtures prohibited.
No person shall willfully or carelessly break, injure or deface, interfere with, or disturb machinery, apparatus, fixtures or
appurtenances of the waterworks of the city or any public hydrant, hose, water supply or service pipes, or any part thereof, or
commit any act tending to obstruct or impair the use of any of the properties mentioned in this section.
(Code 1982, § 12-334)

Sec. 86-159. - Plumbing.
All plumbing shall be skillfully done and in a manner required by the water commissioner and shall be subject to his inspection
and approval. The quality and pattern of all appurtenances shall, in like manner, be subject to his approval. Within 48 hours after
the completion of any attachment or connection, the plumber shall make and return to the water commissioner a full report of his
work together with description and plat of all such apparatus and arrangements for using the water, which plat shall show the
exact locations, by measurement from the lot line, of the stopcock, meter and service pipes and any other and further particulars
169/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

called for by the water commissioner. The water will not be turned on in any service pipe until complete returns are made by the
plumber. It shall be unlawful for any plumber or pipefitter to do any work upon the pipes or appurtenances of the waterworks
system of the city until such plumber or pipefitter shall have procured a license or permit as provided in this article.
(Code 1982, § 12-318)

Sec. 86-160. - Plumbers' charges.
No licensed plumber or pipefitter shall make exorbitant charges for material furnished or work done by him, and any person
feeling aggrieved at any charges made by him shall make complaint thereof to the water commissioner, who shall thereupon
investigate and report to the city council. Any plumber or pipefitter who shall, after the council shall have determined him guilty of
such exorbitant charges, fail for ten days thereafter to return the excess which may be so adjudged by the council shall have his
license revoked.
(Code 1982, § 12-319)

Sec. 86-161. - Application for user's permit.
Every person desiring a supply of water must make application for a permit therefor to the water commissioner upon blanks
to be furnished for that purpose.
(Code 1982, § 12-302)

Sec. 86-162. - Permits.
All applications for permits to use water must be made to the utilities superintendent. Such applicant shall state the side of the
street or if on a corner, which adjacent street is to be tapped; the full name of the owner, number of lot and the purpose for which
the water is to be used. The charge for breaking the concrete or oil mat shall be $25.00, and the charge for making the tap and
laying the pipe to the stop box, including all pipes and corporation cock complete, ready for the applicant to connect, shall be 110
percent of the cost of the material required to make the connection to the water main and to furnish the pipe to the stop box,
which cost shall be determined from the records in the office of the utilities superintendent. Such charges shall be and remain a
lien upon the real estate to be served thereby until the lien has been paid, and no water shall be supplied through the stop box
until such lien is satisfied.
(Code 1982, § 12-316)

Sec. 86-163. - Consumer contract.
The rules, regulations and water rates specified in this article shall be considered a part of the contract with every person who
is supplied with water through the waterworks system of the city. Every such person by taking water shall be considered held to
consent and to be bound thereby, and when any of the rules, regulations and water rates are violated or such others as the city or
water commissioner may hereafter adopt, the water shall be cut off from the building or place of such violation. The water shall
not be turned on again except by the order of the water commissioner or city council on payment of the expenses of shutting off
and turning the water on, and on such other terms as the city council or water commissioner shall determine, and a satisfactory
understanding with the party that no further cause for complaint shall arise.
(Code 1982, § 12-301)

Sec. 86-164. - Meters, service pipes, stopcocks.
All water services connected to the water system of the city shall have placed thereon a water meter of a type and
manufacture approved by the city council, and no other person but the water commissioner or his assistants under his supervision
shall be allowed to set meters or make connections to the city water system. All service pipes between the city mains and the
170/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

meter shall be approved by the city. Between the curbline and the property line shall be placed a Mueller H 15150 stopcock with
cast iron stop box complete with cover marked WATER or W in large letters, except as provided in this article. The city shall keep on
hand a supply of all materials used between the main and the meter and will install all service between the main and meter at the
customer's expense.
(Code 1982, § 12-303)

Sec. 86-165. - Meter vaults.
(a)

Meter vaults hereafter installed shall be placed between the curbline and the sidewalk and in accordance with
specifications adopted by the city and on file in the office of the water commissioner.

(b)

Subject to a special permit from the water commissioner in writing, consumers may be permitted to install their
water meter in the basement of the building to be served, providing copper pipe is used to meter.

(c)

At the point of entrance into all buildings and between the meter and the main a stop and waste cock shall be
installed in such a manner as to drain all plumbing attached thereto.

(d)

In meter vaults, a shutoff cock shall be installed between the stop box and the meter.

(Code 1982, §§ 12-304.01—12-304.04)

Sec. 86-166. - Access to meter.
The owner or tenant shall provide ready and convenient access to the meter, where meters are placed in a building, so that it
may be easily examined and read by the water commissioner at all times when in his discretion it is deemed necessary to enter
the premises or building for the purpose of testing the meter or to examine the pipes, meter or other fixtures.
(Code 1982, § 12-309)

Sec. 86-167. - Separate meters.
(a)

When one service pipe supplies two or more distinct premises or two or more separate tenants of any dwelling or
business property, there shall be provided, subject to the supervision of the water commissioner, a separate
stopcock and meter for each of the premises or tenants so that water supplies may be shut off from the one
without interfering with the supply of the others.

(b)

Any two or more such tenants may, by first obtaining the permission of the water commissioner, take water
through one meter.

(c)

When any two or more tenants of any such dwelling or business property shall take water through one meter as
provided in this section, each tenant shall be charged with and shall pay the minimum water rental as provided in
this article.

(d)

When two or more users take water through one meter as provided in this section, each user shall be allowed one
minimum water consumption amount as part of the water service provided by the city.

(Code 1982, §§ 12-317.01—12-317.04; Ord. No. 1055, § 1, 11-2-98)

Sec. 86-168. - Repair of meters.
(a)

Should any meter now installed in the basement of any dwelling house get out of order or repair, the meter shall be
taken charge of by the city and repaired at the city's expense. When the service pipe between the main and such
meter becomes leaky or out of repair, such meter shall be placed in a meter vault on the terrace as provided in this
article and thereafter shall be kept in repair by the city without cost to the consumer. Meters now installed in the
basement of business houses will also be kept in repair at the expense of the city. When any meter shall become
defective or out of repair and it becomes necessary for the city to take charge of the meter as set forth in this

171/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

section, the meter shall thereafter become the property of the city, who shall at all times thereafter while any such
premises are under contract for water supply furnish such premises with a suitable water meter. The city shall at all
times keep the meter in repair.
(b)

The cost of installing meter vaults when such vaults become necessary, as provided in this section, shall be paid by
the consumer.

(Code 1982, §§ 12-322.01, 12-322.02)

Sec. 86-169. - Service pipes; joints.
(a)

All service pipes hereafter laid shall be type K copper or clear core CTS pipes between the main and meter, up to
and including two inches. The pipe shall be laid not less than four feet below the established grade or as low as the
street mains and sufficiently waving to allow an extra length of not less than one foot and in such manner as to
prevent a rupture by settlement. All joints of lead pipes shall be plumber's joints. In no case will cup joints or bolted
joints be allowed.

(b)

No pipe shall be laid between the main and the meter larger than such sizes as are used respectively in connection
with corporation cocks. The service pipe used for interior plumbing shall be of the kind known as strong copper or
galvanized or plain iron pipe.

(Code 1982, §§ 12-311.01, 12-311.02; Ord. No. 1063, § 1, 12-6-99)

Sec. 86-170. - Stop boxes.
There shall be a stop box in every service attached to the mains, the stop box to be placed between the main and meter box
and within 18 inches of the meter box. Where stop cocks cannot be placed in the sidewalk on account of vaults or other
obstructions, they shall be placed in the street clear of the gutter at least four feet below the surface. This applies to the business
section only, and all stopcocks, without exception, shall have a strong and suitable T handle. They shall be enclosed in a substantial
extension iron case and covered with a tightfitting iron lid with the letter W or the word WATER cast upon it. There shall be one or
more stop and waste cocks attached to every supply pipe at a point in the building so as to admit of water being shut off in frosty
weather and the pipes emptied.
(Code 1982, § 12-312)

Sec. 86-171. - Charges for service pipes and trenching.
Applicants for water will be charged from the center of the street for all service pipes and trenching, and the water
commissioner shall have the power to make such arrangements with plumbers or others as he may deem expedient to carry this
section into effect. If, however, the water mains are not laid in the street abutting the premises of the applicant for water, and
there are two or more applicants, the applicants shall file a written petition with the water commissioner, specifying the
connection desired to be made, giving the number of feet of main required to be laid, together with a diagram of the premises,
street or alley on which the main is to be laid. The water commissioner shall, at the first meeting of the council after receiving such
request, present the request together with a written recommendation as to the advisability of the city granting the request, and
state as nearly as possible the number of connections that might be made to the main proposed to be laid, giving the size of pipe
to be used and an approximate estimate of the cost to lay the proposed main. The council may approve or reject the request. If
approved, the construction will be under the supervision of the commissioner.
(Code 1982, § 12-313)

Sec. 86-172. - Filling trenches.

172/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

In refilling the opening, after service pipes are laid, the earth must be laid in layers of not more than ten inches in depth, each
layer thoroughly tamped and settled with water. The streets, sidewalks and pavements must be restored to as good a condition as
before making the excavation, and all dirt, stones and rubbish must be removed immediately after completing the work. Should an
excavation in any street, alley or highway be left open or unfinished for the space of 24 hours or should the work be improperly
done or rubbish not removed, the water commissioner shall have a right to finish or correct the work. The expense incurred shall
be charged to the property owner, collected as provided for the delinquent water tariffs, and shall be paid by him before the water
is turned on.
(Code 1982, § 12-310)

Sec. 86-173. - Turning on.
Water will not be turned on into any house or service pipe except upon the order of the water commissioner, and plumbers
are prohibited from turning the water into any service pipe except upon the order of the water commissioner. This rule shall not
be construed to prevent plumbers admitting water to test pipes, but for that purpose only.
(Code 1982, § 12-305)

Sec. 86-174. - Suspending service.
The city reserves the right to suspend the use of water for fountain or for sprinkling yards, lawns, and gardens when, in the
opinion of the mayor and council, the public good requires such suspension.
(Code 1982, § 12-321)

Sec. 86-175. - Stopping service.
If any consumer shall vacate the premises for which his license is issued before the expiration of the license, or if for any cause
a further continuance of the city water service is not desired by such consumer, he shall notify the commissioner, who shall cause
the water to the premises to be shut off upon the payment of $1.00 for shutting off the water.
(Code 1982, § 12-323)

Sec. 86-176. - Written consent for reconnection required.
When the water has been turned off from a consumer, he shall not turn it on nor permit it to be turned on without the written
consent of the water commissioner.
(Code 1982, § 12-308)

Sec. 86-177. - Forbidden connections.
No person shall be permitted to make or have made any tap or connection with the service pipe between the meter and the
mains.
(Code 1982, § 12-306)

Sec. 86-178. - Water for public use.
A charge of $5.00 per annum for each fire hydrant shall be made to cover the cost of fire protection in the city. This clause
shall also be construed to cover public watering troughs and such other public water taps as may be hereafter ordered in by the
city council, and all such fire hydrants and other public water taps are declared to be public hydrants. The charge made in this

173/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

section shall be paid from a fund created by and levied as a public hydrant fund, provided that all water used for public street
sprinkling purposes shall be metered and a charge of $0.10 per each 100 cubic feet shall be made for the water, and the payment
of such charge shall be made from the general fund.
(Code 1982, § 12-324)

Sec. 86-179. - Users of public water.
Persons not paying water rentals to the city and habitually using water from the city fountains and watering places for
domestic purposes and watering livestock shall be assessed the water rate applicable to the premises inhabited by such
consumer.
(Code 1982, § 12-331)

Sec. 86-180. - Separate users.
No owner or occupant of any building or property in or upon which exists fixtures connected to the water system and into
which water from the water system has been admitted will be allowed to supply other persons, whether occupying the property or
other buildings, except upon payment of the charges for separate users as provided in this section, unless permission be granted
as provided in this division.
(Code 1982, § 12-330)

Sec. 86-181. - Manufacturers.
If any person shall desire to use water from the city in large quantities for the manufacture of ice, or in any other
manufacturing enterprise, the mayor and council may, upon the application of such person make a contract with such person to
furnish water at a special rate to such consumer, which rate shall not be less than the cost of pumping and supplying water to
consumers.
(Code 1982, § 12-327)

Sec. 86-182. - Special permission where no mains laid.
Persons residing on streets on which water mains have not been laid may obtain a license for the use of water upon procuring
the written permission of the owner of the hydrant from which it is proposed to take water. Such permit shall be filed in the office
of the water commissioner.
(Code 1982, § 12-314)

Sec. 86-183. - Use of water during res; penalty.
All persons using city water are prohibited from opening hydrant taps or other connections of any description during the
progress of any fire within the city, and it is hereby made the duty of all consumers upon the sounding of the fire alarm to
immediately close and keep closed all water taps during the continuance of the fire. Anyone violating the provisions of this section
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, may be fined in any sum not exceeding the sum of
$500.00 or be imprisoned in the common jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
(Code 1982, § 12-307)

Sec. 86-184. - Fire hydrants.

174/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

All hydrants erected in the city for the purpose of extinguishing fires are declared to be public hydrants, and no person other
than members of the fire department or the water commissioner shall open any of the hydrants or draw water from the hydrants
or in any manner interfere with the hydrants.
(Code 1982, § 12-320)

Sec. 86-185. - Excavation barricades, exposure of pipes to frost.
No person shall have any excavation made in the street, alley or highway open at any time without barricades, and during the
night red lights must be maintained at such excavations. No person shall make any excavation in any street or dig upon or uncover
so as to expose to frost any water pipes of the city, except under the directions of the council or water commissioner.
(Code 1982, § 12-315)

Sec. 86-186. - Buying or selling.
No person other than the city itself shall buy or sell or cause to be bought or sold any water for domestic or commercial use
from or to any other person within the city; provided, however, that this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the sale of
distilled water or bottled water or sparkling water in the original bottles or containers.
(Code 1982, § 12-337)

Sec. 86-187. - Drilling.
(a)

Water well construction. No person shall drill any water well within the corporate limits of the city within 300 feet of
an established water main which has been placed in service by the city, unless a permit therefor has been issued by
a three-fourths vote of the city council. Wells shall be drilled in accordance with the city's current standards for
water well construction.

(b)

Distance requirements. In order to protect the municipal potable water supply, the following distances from a well
shall be enforced:

Category

Distance
Feet

Meters

Nonpotable water well

1,000

300

Sewage lagoon

1,000

300

500

150

Cesspool

500

150

Dump

500

150

Feedlot or feedlot runo

500

150

Corral

500

150

Absorption or disposal eld for
waste

175/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Pit toilet

500

150

Sanitary land ll

500

150

Chemical or petroleum product

500

150

Septic tank

500

150

Sewage treatment plant

500

150

Sewage wet well

500

150

Sanitary sewer connection

100

30

Sanitary sewer manhole

100

30

Sanitary sewer line

50

15

Sanitary sewer line (permanently

10

3

water tight)

When surface runoff or underground movement from potential sources of contamination may adversely affect the
quality of water from such supplies, the distance separating these potential sources of contamination and the well or
spring should be greater than that listed in the above schedule.
(Ord. No. 993, § 1, 9-6-94)

Sec. 86-188. - Drilling permit.
No person shall drill or cause to be drilled any water well within the corporate limits of the city without making an application
for a permit and payment of an application fee in the sum of $100.00 or without the approval of an application for a permit to drill
the well by the city council.
(1)

The application for such permit shall be on such form as may be required by the water and light commissioner
and shall disclose the location of the proposed well, the depth to which the well is to be drilled, the contractor
who will be employed to drill the well and the precautions to be taken to make the well sanitary and prevent
the pollution of the water source at the time of drilling the well and after the well has been drilled. The
application shall also disclose when and how the well will be plugged upon abandonment.

(2)

The application form shall also contain such other information as the city physician may deem to be relevant
with reference to the maintenance of the public health.

(Code 1982, § 12-338)

Sec. 86-189. - Penalty for violation of sections.
Any person violating the provisions of sections 86-186 or 86-187 shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00.
(Code 1982, § 12-339)

176/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 86-190. - Water conservation, drought, emergency, and shortage contingency plan.
(a)

Purpose. The purpose of this section is to adopt a plan for the declaration of a water supply watch, warning or
emergency and the implementation of voluntary and mandatory water conservation measures throughout the city
in the event such a watch, warning or emergency is declared. Said plan shall be named the City of Minden Water
Conservation, Drought, Emergency and Shortage Contingency Plan.

(b)

Class of uses of water established. The following classes of water use are hereby established for users of water on
the city water system:
(1)

Class 1. Water used for outdoor watering; either public or private, for gardens, lawns, trees, shrubs, plants,
parks, golf courses, playing fields, swimming pools or other recreational areas; or the washing of motor
vehicles, boats, trailers, sidewalks, driveways, or the exterior of any building or structure.

(2)

Class 2. Water used for any commercial or industrial purpose, including agricultural; except water actually
necessary to maintain the health and personal hygiene of bona fide employees while such employees are
engaged in the performance of their duties at their place of employment.

(3)

Class 3. Domestic usage, other than that which would be included in either class 1 or 2. Water necessary only
to sustain human life and the lives of domestic pets and maintain standards of hygiene and sanitation.

(c)

Definitions.

Consumer shall mean the customer of record using water for any purpose from the city distribution system and for which
either a regular charge is made or, in the case of coin sales, a cash charge is made at the site of delivery.

Draw down means the distance between the static water level and the pumping water level.
Plan Refers to the City of Minden Water Conservation, Drought and Emergency Contingency Plan.
Pumping water level means the level of water in a well when the pump is pumping.
Shortage means the inability of the municipal water system to provide enough water to all customers for basic living needs,
and adequate firefighting reserves.

Static water level means the level of water in a well when the pump is not pumping.
Triggers mean significant events which indicate the implementation of the different stages of this plan.
Waste of water includes but is not limited to:
(1)

Permitting water to escape down a gutter, ditch, or other surface drain; or

(2)

Failure to repair a controllable leak of water due to defective plumbing; or

(3)

As determined by the water system operator.

Water shall mean water available to the city by virtue of its water introduced by the city into its water distribution system
including water offered for sale at any coin-operated site.

Water system capacity, for the purposes of this plan, is determined by aggregate production of all wells in gallons per minute
times 60 minutes in an hour times 24 hours per day.

Water system demand. Water meters on each well must be read daily. Daily consumption is calculated by subtracting the
previous day reading from the current day and added together for each well.
(d)

Water plan established. In order to assure the continued supply of safe drinking water to the citizens of the city, the
city council adopts the following plan addressing conservation, drought, emergency, and shortage contingencies.
The plan is based upon demand on the system and implements a series of stages depending upon the severity of
177/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

the demand.
(1)

Stage 1: Water watch.
a.

Triggers. This stage is triggered by any one of the following conditions:
1.

When the calculated water system demand equals 60% of the calculated water system capacity.

2.

When the draw down of the wells is more than normal for that time of year as determined by the
water operator.

3.
b.

When the system storage reservoir cannot be filled to 100% of capacity by 5:00 a.m. each morning.

Goals. The goals of this stage are to heighten awareness of the public regarding water conditions and to
maintain the integrity of the water supply system and may reduce overall weekly consumption by seven
percent.

c.

Education actions.
1.

The city may make occasional news releases to the local media, as well as posting at city hall,
describing present conditions and indicating the regulatory action.

2.

The triggers necessitating the stage 1: Water watch may also be made available to the news media
along with an explanation of terms.

d.

Management action.
1.

The city will ascertain that each well is operating at peak efficiency.

2.

Leaks detected will be repaired within 48 hours.

3.

The city shall curtail weekly use of class 1 uses by seven percent.

e.

Regulatory action. The public shall be asked to voluntarily reduce the use of water as defined in class 1.

f.

Declaration of a water watch. Whenever the city administrator or water superintendent finds that
conditions exist as described in the plan under stage 1: Water watch, triggers. The city administrator or
water superintendent shall declare a stage 1: Water watch, and implement the steps outlined under this
section. The implementation declaring the existence and end of a stage 1: water watch shall be effective
upon issuing of news releases and posting at city hall.

(2)

Stage 2: Water warning.
a.

Triggers. This stage is triggered by any one of the following conditions:
1.

When the calculated water system demand equals 70% of the calculated water system capacity.

2.

When the draw down of the wells increases significantly over and above the level determined in
stage 1.

3.

When the system storage reservoir cannot be filled to 90% of capacity by 5:00 a.m. each morning.

b.

Goals. The goal of this stage is to reduce overall weekly consumption by 15 percent.

c.

Education actions.
1.

The city may make news releases to the local media and by posting, describing present conditions
and projecting the outlook for the coming week.

2.

The triggers necessitating the stage 2: Water warning may also be made available to the public
through news releases and posting at city hall along with an explanation of terms.

3.
d.

Water conservation articles may be provided to the local newspaper and posted at city hall.

Management actions.
1.

The city will continue to monitor water supplies on a daily basis.

2.

Leaks shall be repaired within 48 hours or a violation notice shall be issued.

3.

The city shall curtail weekly use of class 1 by 15 percent.
178/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

4.
e.

The city may terminate its usage of water classified in class 1 and class 2.

Regulation action. Water classified as class 1 and class 2 will be terminated except as follows:
A.

A staggered lawn watering system will be imposed on city residents. The city administrator or
water superintendent shall determine the lawn watering schedule at the time of the
declaration.

B.

Outdoor water use, including lawn watering and car washing will be restricted to before 11:00
a.m. and after 7:00 p.m.

C.
f.

Waste of water is strictly prohibited.

Declaration of a water warning. Whenever the city administrator or water superintendent finds that
conditions exist as described in the plan under stage 2: Water warning, triggers. The city administrator or
water superintendent shall declare a stage 2: Water warning, and implement the steps outlined under
this section. The implementation declaring the existence and end of a stage 2: water warning shall be
effective upon a news release and posting at city hall.

(3)

Stage 3: Water Emergency.
a.

Triggers. This stage is triggered by any one of the following conditions:
1.

When the calculated water system demand equals 80 percent of the calculated water system
capacity.

2.

When the draw down of the wells increases significantly over and above the level determined in
stage 2.

3.

When the system storage reservoir cannot be filled to 80 percent of capacity by 5:00 a.m. each
morning.

b.

Goals. The goals of this stage are to reduce the overall weekly consumption by 25 percent and maintain
the integrity of the system.

c.

Education actions.
1.

The city may make news releases to the local media and by posting, describing present conditions
and projecting the outlook for the coming week.

2.

The triggers necessitating the stage 3: Water emergency may also be made available to the public
through news releases and posting at city hall along with an explanation of terms.

3.

Water conservation articles may be provided to the local newspaper and posted.

4.

The city may conduct public meetings to discuss the emergency; the status of the city water supply
and further actions, which may needed to be taken.

d.

e.

f.

Management actions.
1.

The city water supplies shall be monitored daily.

2.

Leaks shall be repaired within 24 hours.

3.

The city may seek additional emergency supplies from other sources.

Regulation actions.
1.

Uses of water in class 1 and 2 shall be prohibited.

2.

Waste of water shall be prohibited.

Declaration of a water emergency. Whenever the governing body of the city finds that conditions exist as
described in this plan under stage 3: Water emergency, triggers, it shall be empowered to declare, by
resolution, that a stage 3: Water emergency exists and implement the steps outlined under this plan. The
resolution declaring the existence of a stage 3: Water emergency shall be effective upon news release

179/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

and/or posting at city hall. In the event of a system failure, or natural disaster, the city administrator or
the water superintendent shall have the authority to declare a stage 3: Water emergency. the city
administrator or water superintendent shall declare the end of a stage 3: Water emergency.
(e)

Administrative enforcement provisions.
(1)

Warning. The city council hereby appoints, in addition to police officers, the city administrator, the water
superintendent or his agent(s) to issue written warnings and/or citations to any consumer violating stage 2:
Water warning and stage 3: Water emergency. Such warning shall advise the consumer that a second violation
at the same premise within a six-month period shall result in the issuance of an administrative notice of
violation for which a penalty charge of $100.00 shall be added to the premises monthly consumption. Such
penalty charge shall be imposed for six months following the notice of the violation. The city clerk shall weekly
post the names of the consumers issued a written warning during the previous week. The names of the
consumers given a warning shall be posted in the same locations as the declaration.

(2)

Administrative notice of violation. The city council hereby appoints, in addition to police officers, the city
administrator and the water superintendent or agent(s) to issue a written administrative notice of violation to
any consumer violating stage 2: Water warning and stage 3: Water emergency for a second time. Such notice
shall advise the consumer that they will be assessed a penalty charge of $100.00 for the next six months and
that a subsequent violation at the same premise within a six-month period shall result in the immediate
termination of all water service to the premise. The consumer shall further be notified that they have a right to
appeal the issuance of the administrative notice of violation by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk
within ten days of the issuance of the notice. The action shall be final if no appeal is filed within the ten-day
period. The city administrator and water superintendent shall hear such appeal within ten days.

(3)

Notice of termination of service. The city council hereby appoints, in addition to police officers, the city
administrator and water superintendent or his agent(s) to issue a written notice of termination of service to
any consumer violating stage 2: water warning and stage 3: water emergency for a third time. Such notice shall
advise the consumer that all water service to the premises in violation shall be discontinued, beginning not
less than 48 hours after the notice and not more than 72 hours after the notice, unless a further violation is
found to have occurred at which time termination shall be immediate for the protection of the municipal
water system. The consumer may appeal the decision by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within the
48-hour period after notice of termination of service is given. Such appeal shall stay the action of termination
for up to 48 hours or until a meeting with the city administrator and water superintendent shall be called
unless the city administrator or water superintendent determines that a further violation has occurred, at
which time termination shall be immediate for the protection of the municipal water system. If service is
terminated then service may be reconnected only upon the filing for water service reconnection with the city
and the payment of the $40.00 reconnection fee. Additionally, the applicant must file a written statement
advising that they are aware that a water warning or water emergency is in effect and that a subsequent
violation of its provisions will result in the termination of water service for a period of not less than 30 days
unless such termination would pose a health hazard to the occupants of the premises as determined by the
water superintendent. The water superintendent or his agent(s) shall cause the termination of water service of
the violating consumer as provided above or directed by the city council.

(f)

Emergency termination. Nothing in this section shall limit the ability of the city administrator or water
superintendent from terminating the supply of water to any or all customers upon the determination of said
officials that emergency termination of water service is required to protect the health and safety of the public.

(g)

Violation; penalty. Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall
be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined $100.00 for the first offense and $200.00
for the second offense. For a third of water restrictions, the penalty shall be $500.00. A new violation shall be

180/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of such failure to comply. In addition to police officers, the city
council hereby appoints the city administrator, water superintendent or his agent(s) to issue citations for violation
of the provisions of this section.
(h)

Exemptions by permit. Customers may apply for and be granted permits for:
(1)

New turf sod application for up to three weeks.

(2)

New grass seed application for up to four weeks. However the city strongly discourages new grass seed
between July 1st and August 31st.

(3)

Landscape in large common or public areas that, because of irrigation system limitations, cannot be sustained
by following mandatory drought restrictions in this section.

The above may be canceled by the city in the event a stage 3: Water emergency is declared.
(Ord. No. 1101, §§ 1—8, 7-7-03; Ord. No. 1102, 7-7-03)

Secs. 86-191—86-200. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - WATER COMMISSIONER

Sec. 86-201. - O ce created.
There shall be and is created the office of water commissioner. The mayor shall nominate and, by and with the advice and
consent of the majority of the council elected, shall appoint some competent person to be water commissioner of the city, whose
term of office shall be for one year or until his successor shall be appointed and qualified, and annually on the first day of each
municipal year thereafter. The water commissioner may for sufficient cause be removed by majority vote of all members elected
to the city council. If a vacancy occurs in the office of water commissioner, it shall be filled in the manner as provided in this
section for his appointment. The commissioner, before he enters upon his duties, shall execute a bond to the city to be approved
by the city clerk in the penal sum of $5,000.00 conditioned for the faithful discharge of his duties.
(Code 1982, § 12-332)

Sec. 86-202. - Duties.
It shall be the duty of the water commissioner, subject to the supervision of the mayor and council, to have the general
management and control of the system of waterworks in the city. He shall perform all the duties and have all the powers as water
commissioner that are imposed, granted and conferred by the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city. He shall collect all
moneys due the city on account of the system, paying such money to the city treasurer, taking his receipt therefor in duplicate, and
filing in writing with the city council at least every three months a report of the conditions of the water system, of all pipes,
hydrants, reservoirs; a statement of such improvements, repairs and extensions of such system as he may think proper; and also
showing the amount of the receipts and expenditures on account of such system for the preceding three months. He shall in
writing, from time to time, recommend to the city council the employment of such laborers as may be necessary for the efficient,
proper, and economical operation of such system. He shall also perform such other duties as may from time to time be required
of him by the mayor and council, relative to the waterworks.
(Code 1982, § 12-333)

Secs. 86-203—86-215. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - RATES

181/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 86-216. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Consumer or user means a family when applied to residential districts of the city and each separate business, firm or
corporation when applied to business houses and the business portion of the city.
(Code 1982, § 12-326)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 86-217. - Adjusted by mayor and council.
The mayor and council shall have power at any time by a majority vote of the members of the council, with the approval of the
mayor, to adjust or amend the rates to be charged for water consumers taking city water.
(Code 1982, § 12-325)

Sec. 86-218. - Bills; statements.
All moneys due the city for water furnished will become due and payable on January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 of each
year, provided the water commissioner may exact a monthly payment for water so used. Bills for water furnished shall be
rendered by the water commissioner at the time stated in this section, and shall designate the number of cubic feet registered at
the date of the bill, subtracted therefrom the number of cubic feet at the time of the last settlement and computed in dollars and
cents in accordance with the rates specified in this division.
(Code 1982, § 12-329)

Sec. 86-219. - Liens.
All water and meter rates shall be charged to and collected from the owner of the premises, and the rates shall be a lien upon
the premises and real estate where used, and may be collected by the city at any time after the rates become due by civil action in
court. It shall be the duty of the water commissioner in his annual report to show the amount due from each delinquent together
with a description of the property upon and to which the water has been supplied, and thereupon the city council shall, by
resolution, direct the clerk to file with the county clerk a certified copy of the report and resolution directing that the amount
assessed against the different premises, as shown by the report, be placed upon the county assessment roll and tax books for
collection as other taxes.
(Code 1982, § 12-328)

Secs. 86-220—86-230. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL

Sec. 86-231. - General policy.
The purpose of this division is to protect the public potable water supply of the city from the possibility of contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer's internal distribution system, or the customer's private water system, such
contaminants or pollutants that could backflow into the public water system; and to:
(1)

Promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections, actual or potential, between the customer's
182/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

in-plant potable water systems and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures, and industrial piping
systems; and
(2)

Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control that will systematically and
effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems.

(Ord. No. 957, § 1(12-340), 12-7-92)

Sec. 86-232. - Supervision by utilities superintendent.
The utilities superintendent shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from
contamination or pollution due to the backflow of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. If, in the
judgment of the utilities superintendent, an approved backflow-prevention assembly is required, at the customer's water service
connection or within the customer's private water system, for the safety of the water system, the utilities superintendent shall give
notice in writing to the customer to install such an approved backflow-prevention assembly at a specific location on his premises.
The customer shall immediately install such approved assembly and failure, refusal, or inability on the part of the customer to
install, have tested, and maintain the assembly shall constitute grounds for discontinuing the water service to the premises until
such requirements have been satisfactorily met. The assembly shall be furnished to the customer by the city at the city's cost to
the customer, at the customer's expense.
(Ord. No. 957, § 2(12-341), 12-7-92)

Sec. 86-233. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Air gap means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or
faucet conveying water or waste to a tank, plumbing fixture, receptor, or other assembly and the flood level rim of the receptacle.
These vertical, physical separations must be at least twice the diameter of the water supply outlet, never less than one inch (25
mm).

Approved means accepted by the authority responsible as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this division or
as suitable for the proposed use.

Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the purveyor's approved public
water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural
source, such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc.; used waters; or industrial fluids. These waters may be contaminated or
polluted, or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor does not have
sanitary control.

Backflow means the undesirable reversal of flow in a potable water distribution system as a result of a cross connection.
Backflow preventer means an assembly or means designed to prevent backflow.
Backpressure means a pressure, higher than the supply pressure, caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler, or any other
means that may cause backflow.

Backsiphonage means backflow caused by negative or reduced pressure in the supply piping.
Certified tester means a person who has completed a state approved backflow prevention course and has become certified as
a grade VI water operator.

183/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Contamination means an impairment of a potable water supply by the introduction or admission of any foreign substance
that degrades the quality and creates a health hazard.

Cross connection means a connection or potential connection between any part of a potable water system and any other
environment containing other substances in a manner that under any circumstances would allow such substances to enter the
potable water system. Other substances may be gases, liquids, or solids, such as chemicals, waste products, steam, water from
other sources (potable or nonpotable), or any matter that may change the color or add odor to the water.

Cross connection control by containment means the installation of an approved backflow-prevention assembly at the water
service connection to any customer's premises, where it is physically and economically unfeasible to find and permanently
eliminate or control all actual or potential cross connections within the customer's water system; or it shall mean the installation of
an approved backflow-prevention assembly on the service line leading to and supplying a portion of a customer's water system
where there are actual or potential cross connections that cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross
connection.

Cross connections, controlled means a connection between a potable water system and a nonpotable water system with an
approved backflow-prevention assembly properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection
commensurate with the degree of hazard.

Double check valve assembly means the approved double check valve assembly which consists of two internally loaded check
valves, either spring loaded or internally weighted, installed as a unit between two tightly closing resilient-seated shutoff valves
and fittings with properly located resilient-seated test cocks. This assembly shall only be used to protect against a nonhealth
hazard, that is, a pollutant.

Hazard, degree of means an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the
potable water system.

Hazard, health means a cross connection or potential cross connection involving any substance that could, if introduced in the
potable water supply, cause death or illness, spread disease, or have a high probability of causing such effects.

Hazard, nonhealth means a cross connection or potential cross connection involving any substance that generally would not
be a health hazard but would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable, if introduced into the potable water supply.

Hazard, plumbing means a plumbing-type cross connection in a consumer's potable water system that has not been properly
protected by an approved air gap or an approved backflow-prevention assembly.

Hazard, system means an actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the public potable water
system or the consumer's potable water system or of a pollution or contamination that would have a protracted effect on the
quality of the potable water in the system.

Hose bib vacuum breaker assembly means and consists of an atmospheric vacuum breaker that prevents backsiphonage.
Hose bib with built-in vacuum breaker assembly means that the approved assembly consists of an atmospheric vacuum
breaker built in to the hose bib.

Industrial fluids system means any system containing a fluid or solution that may be chemically, biologically, or otherwise
contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration, such as would constitute a health, system, pollution, or plumbing hazard if
introduced into an approved water supply. This may include, but not be limited to: polluted or contaminated waters; all types of
process waters and used waters originating from the public potable water system that may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalies; circulating cooling waters connected to an open cooling tower; and/or cooling

184/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters, such as wells,
springs, streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems, and so forth; oils, gases, glycerine, paraffins, caustic and
acid solutions, and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes for firefighting purposes.

Pollution means the presence of any foreign substance in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a
nonhealth hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.

Reduced-pressure backflow-prevention assembly means and consists of two independently acting approved check valves
together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check
valves and below the first check valve. These units are located between two tightly closing resilient-seated shutoff valves as an
assembly and equipped with properly located resilient-seated test cocks.

Residential survey means a survey of potential cross connections, conducted by the customer, of his own premises.
Service connection means the terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system, that is, where the
water purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer's water system, which
shall be the curb stop. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the
downstream end of the meter. There should be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflowprevention assembly located at the point of delivery to the customer's water system. Service connection shall also include water
service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable
water system.

Utilities superintendent means the person in charge of the water department of the city who is invested with the authority and
responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions
of this division.

Water, nonpotable means water that is not safe for human consumption or that is of questionable quality.
Water, potable means water that is safe for human consumption, as described by the public health authority having
jurisdiction.

Water, used means any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public potable water system to a consumer's water system
after it has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of the water purveyor.
(Ord. No. 957, § 3-22(12-342—12-361), 12-7-92)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 86-234. - Water system.
The water system shall be considered to be made up of two parts: the utility system and the customer system.
(1)

The utility system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system, and shall include all those
facilities of the water system under the complete control of the utility, up to the point where the customer's
system begins.

(2)

The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage, and
delivery of water to the distribution system.

(3)

The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to
the customer's system.

(4)

The customer's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the utility
distribution system that are utilized in conveying utility-delivered domestic water to points of use.

185/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(Ord. No. 957, § 23(12-362, 12-362.1—12-362.4), 12-7-92)

Sec. 86-235. - Policy.
No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the water purveyor unless the water supply is
protected as required by state laws and regulations and this division. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the
water purveyor if a backflow-prevention assembly required by this division is not installed and tested, or if such assembly is
removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until such
conditions or defects are corrected.
(Ord. No. 957, § 24(12-363), 12-7-92)

Sec. 86-236. - Inspection of customer's system.
The customer's system should be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the city to
determine whether cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. When
such a condition becomes known, the utilities superintendent shall require the customer to correct the condition within 14 days. If
the condition is not corrected within 14 days, then the utilities superintendent shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the
premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition in conformance with
state and city statutes relating to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant to such state and city
statutes.
(Ord. No. 957, § 24(12-363.1), 12-7-92)

Sec. 86-237. - Installation of back ow-prevention assembly.
An approved backflow-prevention assembly shall be installed on each service line to a customer's water system at or near the
property line or immediately inside the building being served, but in all cases before the first branch line leading off the service
line, wherever the following conditions exist:
(1)

In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply that is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or
chemical quality and that is not acceptable as an additional source by the utilities superintendent, the public
water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflowprevention assembly in the service line, appropriate to the degree of hazard.

(2)

In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substances are handled in
such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall be
protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow-prevention assembly in the
service line, appropriate to the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters
originating from the utility system that have been subject to deterioration in quality.

(3)

In the case of premises having:
a.

Internal cross connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled; or

b.

Intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily
accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not
dangerous cross connections exist;

the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved
backflow-prevention assembly in the service line.
(Ord. No. 957, § 24(12-363.2—12-363.5), 12-7-92)

Sec. 86-238. - Type of protective assembly required.
186/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

The type of protective assembly required under section 86-237 shall depend upon the degree of hazard that exists as follows:
(1)

In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply as stated in section 86-237 and it is not
subject to any of the following rules, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap
separation or an approved reduced-pressure principle backflow-prevention assembly.

(2)

In the case of any premises where there is water or substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous
to health, if introduced into the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an
approved double check valve assembly.

(3)

In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health that is handled in such a fashion
as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be
protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced-pressure principle backflow-prevention
assembly. Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage
pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants.

(4)

In the case of any premises where there are "uncontrolled" cross connections, either actual or potential, the
public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced-pressure
principle backflow-prevention assembly at the service connection.

(5)

In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is
impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross connection survey, the public water system shall
be protected against backflow from the premises by either an approved air gap separation or an approved
reduced-pressure principle backflow-prevention assembly on each service to the premises.

(6)

In the case of any premises where, in the opinion of the utilities superintendent, an undue health threat is
posed because of the presence of extremely toxic substances, the utilities superintendent may require an air
gap at the service connection to protect the public water system. This requirement will be at the discretion of
the utilities superintendent and is dependent on the degree of hazard.

(7)

Any backflow-prevention assembly required in this section shall be a model and size approved by the utilities
superintendent. The term "approved backflow-prevention assembly" shall mean an assembly that has been
manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Association
titled:
AWWA C510-89—Standard for Double Check Valve Backflow-Prevention Assembly; and
AWWA C511-89—Standard for Reduced-Pressure Principle Backflow-Prevention Assembly;
and has met completely the laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross
Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California established by
"Specification of Backflow-Prevention Assemblies," section 10 of the most current issue of the "Manual of
Cross Connection Control."
The AWWA and FCCHR standards and specifications have been adopted by the utilities superintendent. Final
approval shall be evidenced by a certificate of approval issued by an approved testing laboratory certifying full
compliance with the AWWA standards and FCCHR specifications. The following testing laboratory has been
qualified by the utilities superintendent to test and certify backflow preventers:
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research
University of Southern California
University Park
Los Angeles, CA 90089

187/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Testing laboratories, other than the laboratory listed in this subsection, will be added to an approved list as
they are qualified by the utilities superintendent.
Backflow preventers that may be subjected to backpressure or backsiphonage that have been fully tested and
have been granted a certificate of approval by the qualified laboratory and are listed on the laboratory's
current list of approved backflow-prevention assemblies may be used without further testing or qualification.
(8)

It shall be the duty of the customer-user at any premises where backflow-prevention assemblies are installed
to have or conduct inspections and operational tests at least once per year. In those instances where the
utilities superintendent deems the hazard to be great enough, certified inspections may be required at more
frequent intervals. These inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the water user and shall be
performed by the assembly manufacturer's representative, water department personnel, or by a certified
tester approved by the utilities superintendent. It shall be the duty of the utilities superintendent to see that
these tests are made in a timely manner. The customer-user shall be notified by the utilities superintendent in
advance when the tests are to be undertaken so that the customer-user may witness the tests if so desired.
These assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the customer-user whenever
such assemblies are found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs and overhaul shall be kept and made
available to the utilities superintendent.

(9)

All presently installed backflow-prevention assemblies that do not meet the requirements of this section but
were approved assemblies for the purpose described in this section at the time of installation and that have
been properly maintained, shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements under subsection
(8) of this section, be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the utilities superintendent is
assured that they will satisfactorily protect the utility system. Whenever the existing assembly is moved from
the present location, requires more than minimum maintenance, or when the utilities superintendent finds
that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved backflowprevention assembly meeting the requirements of this section.

(Ord. No. 957, § 24(12-363.6—12-363.15), 12-7-92)

Chapter 90 - VEGETATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
(41) Cross

reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70.

(41) State

Law reference— Authority to regulate trees, R.R.S. 1943, § 17-555; shade trees, R.R.S. 1943, § 18-801 et seq.; weeds, R.R.S.

1943, § 17-563.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Secs. 90-1—90-25. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - TREES
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 90-26. - Location.

188/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

All trees hereafter planted within the city shall be planted at such distance from the sidewalks or walks of the city so as not to
interfere in any way with free use of any such walk for public travel. All trees heretofore planted within the city, and all trees that
may hereafter be planted within the city, shall be kept trimmed in such a manner that no branch thereof which will extend above
any sidewalk shall be less than eight feet above such walk. The trees shall also be trimmed as not to interfere with public travel on
any street or alley or with any electric light wires.
(Code 1982, § 9-501)

Sec. 90-27. - Trimming.
It is the duty of the owner of any lot within the city to keep such trees trimmed as directed, provided he is a resident of the
city. In case the owner is not a resident of the city, then the duty of keeping the trees trimmed as directed shall devolve upon the
person who occupies the lot. In case the owner or occupant shall refuse or neglect to trim such trees in accordance with this
section within three days after being notified so to do by the city administrator, then and in that case the city administrator may
proceed to perform the work at such time and in such manner as he may deem advisable. The person whose duty it is to remove
such obstruction shall be liable to the penalty provided for section 1-8 of this Code.
(Code 1982, § 9-502)

Sec. 90-28. - Arborist's license and bond.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing any trees within
the municipality without first applying for and procuring a license. The license fee shall be $25.00 annually in advance; provided
however, that no license shall be required of any public service company or municipal employee doing such work in the pursuit of
their public service endeavors. Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of liability
insurance in the minimum amounts of $50,000.00 for bodily injury and $100,000.00 property damage, indemnifying the
municipality of any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as described in this section.
(Ord. No. 1104, § 1, 8-18-03)

Secs. 90-29—90-40. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - STREET TREES AND PARK TREES

Sec. 90-41. - Penalty for violation of division.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in any sum not exceeding $500.00 and, in default of payment thereof, shall be adjudged to stand
committed to the city jail until such fine and costs be paid, secured or otherwise discharged according to law.
(Code 1982, § 8-719)

Sec. 90-42. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Large trees means trees which by their nature attain heights greater than 45 feet at maturity.
Medium trees means trees which by their nature normally attain heights of from 25 to 45 feet at maturity.

189/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Park trees means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation in public parks and all areas owned by the city, or to
which the public has free access.

Small trees means trees which by their nature do not normally attain heights greater than 25 feet at maturity.
Street trees means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side
of all streets, avenues, or ways within the city.
(Code 1982, § 8-702)

Definitions generally, § 1-2
Sec. 90-43. - Species to be planted.
(a)

The following species of trees, listed by common name, constitutes the official street tree species for the city. No
species other than those included in this list may be planted as street trees without written permission of the
municipal tree board.

Small trees

Medium trees

Large trees

Hawthorne

Ginkgo

Ash, Green (seedless)

Golden

Linden, Littleleaf

Co eetree, Kentucky

Linden, Redmond

Hackberry

Mountainash, European

Maple, Norway

Ohio buckeye

Oak, Bur

Horse chestnut

Oak, Northern Red

raintree
Corktree,
Amur
Maple,
Amur
Pear,
Bradford
Plum,
Purple Leaf
Redbud,

Honeylocust (seedless/thornless)

Eastern
Crabapples,

Sycamore, American

Flowering

Linden, American

(scab

Cottonwood (seedless)

resistant)
Saucer
Magnolia

190/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(b)

The municipal tree board shall review and approve all tree planting plans for park trees.

(Code 1982, § 8-703)

Sec. 90-44. - Spacing.
The spacing of street trees and park trees will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in this division, and no
trees may be planted closer together than the following: small trees, 30 feet; medium trees and large trees, 40 feet; except in
special plantings approved by the municipal tree board.
(Code 1982, § 8-704)

Sec. 90-45. - Distance planted from curbs and sidewalks.
The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the tree species size
classes listed in this division, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than four feet; provided, however, that
any tree classified in this division by common names as a small tree may be planted less than four feet, but no less than three feet,
from all curbs, curblines and sidewalks. In areas with no curbs or sidewalks or less than four feet between the curb and sidewalk,
no street trees shall be planted without permission from the municipal tree board.
(Code 1982, § 8-705)

Sec. 90-46. - Distance planted from street intersections, driveways and alleys.
No street tree, shrub, hedge, or park tree shall be planted within 25 feet of any street intersection, measured from the point
nearest intersecting curbs or curblines or within 25 feet of any driveway or alley.
(Code 1982, § 8-706; Ord. No. 1138, § 1, 11-5-07)

Sec. 90-47. - Distance from utility lines.
No street trees or park trees, other than those species listed as small trees in this division or species specifically approved by
the municipal tree board, may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five lateral
feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility line, or wire of main. No street tree shall be
planted within ten feet of any fireplug.
(Code 1982, § 8-707)

Sec. 90-48. - Care and removal.
(a)

The municipality shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove street trees or park trees within the lines
of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to
preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.

(b)

The municipal tree board may remove or cause or order to be removed any street tree or park tree or part thereof
which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines,
water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest.

(c)

No person or property owner shall remove any live street tree or park tree for any reason without permission of the
municipal tree board. Utility companies may remove trees or parts thereof which are injurious to their utility lines at
their expense upon obtaining permission for such removal or trimming from the municipal tree board.

(d)

This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by abutting property owners providing that the selection
and location of the trees is in accordance with this division.

(Code 1982, § 8-708)

191/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 90-49. - Tree topping.
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person or municipal department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree
on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the
tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or
other causes or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be
exempted from this section at the determination of the municipal tree board.
(Code 1982, § 8-709)

Sec. 90-50. - Obstruction; pruning; removal.
(a)

All trees and shrubs within the municipality shall be pruned or removed when such trees or shrubs obstruct the
light from any street lamp, obstruct the visibility of any traffic control device or sign, obstruct the passage of
pedestrians on sidewalks, interfere with municipal utilities, or obstruct the view of any street or alley intersection.
The minimum clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be 12 feet over all streets and eight feet over
sidewalks.

(b)

All shrubs and hedges defined as street trees in this division shall be kept trimmed by the abutting property owner
at least two feet back from all curbs.

(Code 1982, § 8-710)

Sec. 90-51. - Dead or diseased trees; pruning, removal.
(a)

All trees and shrubs within the municipality shall be pruned or removed when such trees or shrubs constitute a
hazard to life and property or harbor insects or disease which constitutes a threat to other trees or shrubs within
the city.

(b)

The municipal tree board shall have the power and authority to prune or remove, or order to prune or remove, any
such trees or shrubs on private property. The municipal tree board shall notify in writing the owners of such trees
or shrubs. Pruning or removal shall be done by the owners at their own expense within 60 days after the date of
notification. In the event of the failure of owners to comply with the notice, the municipality shall have the authority
to prune or remove such trees or shrubs and charge the cost of the pruning or removal on the owner's property tax
notice.

(c)

Service of such notice shall be by personal service where the owner of the premises is a resident of the city. When
the owner is a nonresident of the city, such notice shall be served by certified mail, addressed to the owner at his
last known address as shown on the records in the office of the county assessor and by publication at least one
time in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.

(Code 1982, § 8-711)

Sec. 90-52. - Work ordered or done by the city.
Written permission shall not be required for any tree, shrub or hedge planting, pruning, spraying, or removing ordered or
done by the city; however, all such work shall be done in conformance with the requirements of this chapter.
(Code 1982, § 8-712)

Sec. 90-53. - Abuse or mutilation.
Unless specifically authorized by the municipal tree board, no person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant, or
remove any street tree or park tree; attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance to such trees; allow any
gaseous, liquid, or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come in contact with them; or set fire or permit any fire to
192/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of such trees. The preceding restrictions do not apply to proper
planting, staking and guying practices.
(Code 1982, § 8-713)

Sec. 90-54. - Protection.
(a)

All street trees or park trees near any excavation or construction of any building structure or street work shall be
protected to avoid unnecessary injury to the trees.

(b)

No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches, or lay any drive within five feet of the drip line of any street
or park tree without first obtaining written permission from the municipal tree board.

(c)

No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain, upon any public property of the municipality, any stone, brick,
sand, soil, concrete or other material which may impede the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of
any street tree or park tree, except by written permission of the municipal tree board.

(Code 1982, § 8-714)

Sec. 90-55. - Removal of stumps.
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not
project above the surface of the ground.
(Code 1982, § 8-715)

Sec. 90-56. - Arborist's license and bond.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street or park
trees within the municipality without first applying for and procuring a license. The license fee shall be $25.00 annually in advance;
provided, however, that no license shall be required of any public service company or municipal employee doing such work in the
pursuit of their public service endeavors. Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of
liability insurance in the minimum amounts of $50,000.00 for bodily injury and $100,000.00 property damage, indemnifying the
municipality or any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as described in this section.
(Code 1982, § 8-717)

Sec. 90-57. - City tree board—Interference with.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the municipal tree board, or any of its agents, while
engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees, park trees, or trees on
private ground, as authorized in this division.
(Code 1982, § 8-716)

Sec. 90-58. - Same—Review of by city council.
The city council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the municipal tree board. Any person may
appeal any ruling or order of the municipal tree board to the city council, who may hear the matter and make a final decision.
(Code 1982, § 8-718)

Sec. 90-59. - Same—Created; composition.
There is hereby created and established a tree board which shall consist of five members who are residents of the city, to be
appointed by the mayor with the consent of a majority of the members of the council.
193/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(Ord. No. 1036, § 1, 10-20-97)

Sec. 90-60. - Same—Appointments; terms; vacancies; compensation.
At the first regular meeting of the mayor and council in December 1997, the mayor, with the consent of a majority of the
members of the council, shall appoint three members of the board for a term of two years and two members of the board for a
term of three years commencing January 1 of the following year. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for three years. All members
of the board shall continue to serve until their successors shall be appointed and shall accept such appointment. Neither the
mayor nor any member of the city council may be appointed to the board, and if any member of the board shall become mayor or
a member of the council during his term of office, his membership on the board shall thereby terminate. Vacancies occurring in
the membership of the board by reason of election to the office of mayor or councilmember or by reason of the death or
resignation of a member or his removal from the city, or in any other manner, shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired
term in the same manner as provided in this section for the original appointment of members. No member of the board shall
receive any salary or other compensation for his services. No member of the board shall be financially interested in any contract
made by the board.
(Ord. No. 1036, § 2, 10-20-97)

Sec. 90-61. - Same—Board o cers.
(a)

Chairperson; vice-chairperson. At its regular meeting in June each year, the tree board shall elect a chairperson and
a vice-chairperson for a term of one year. The chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the board, and shall
countersign all minutes of the proceedings of the board. In the absence of the chairperson, his/her duties shall be
performed by the vice-chairperson. In the case of a vacancy in the office of chairperson or vice-chairperson, the
board at its next meeting shall fill the vacancy by election. The chairperson shall have no vote except when the
other members present shall be evenly divided, in which case he/she may cast the deciding vote.

(b)

Secretary. At its regular meeting in June of each year the tree board, by a majority vote of all its members, shall
appoint some person to be secretary of the tree board. This office may be either a member of the board or some
other suitable person. It shall be their duty to keep accurate records of all proceedings of the board and of all its
receipts and expenditures.

(Ord. No. 1036, § 3, 10-20-97)

Sec. 90-62. - Same—Meetings of board; quorum.
The tree board shall hold a regular meeting at least quarterly at a time and place to be fixed by the board. Special meetings
may be called by the chairperson of the board at any time. Four members of the board shall constitute quorum.
(Ord. No. 1036, § 4, 10-20-97)

Sec. 90-63. - Same—Management of trees.
Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the tree board may adopt all necessary rules for the control and management of
trees within the city. It shall make proper provision for the preservation of trees and shrubbery, regulate the planting thereof and
can remove any tree or shrubbery planted contrary to its rules of which in its judgment may be a detriment to the city. All proper
and lawful expenses as provided in this chapter shall be paid by warrants drawn upon the city treasurer and signed by the mayor
and city clerk/treasurer. No such warrant shall be issued or signed by such officers until the warrant shall have been duly allowed
and authorized by the city council. All monies received from whatever source shall be paid to the city treasurer, and all payments
made for whatever purpose shall be by warrants as provided in this chapter. The board shall keep a complete and accurate

194/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

account of all its acts and proceedings, and once each year, at the first regular meeting in April, the board shall present to the
mayor and council a complete written report of all its acts and doings, receipts and expenses, together with any suggestions or
recommendations which the board desires to make to the mayor and council with respect to trees within the city.
(Ord. No. 1036, § 5, 10-20-97)

Secs. 90-64—90-70. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - DUTCH ELM DISEASE

Sec. 90-71. - Enforcement of division; city forester.
The city forester is charged with enforcement of this division, and to that end may enter upon private property at all
reasonable hours for purposes of inspecting trees thereupon, and may remove such specimens as are required for purposes of
analysis to determine whether or not the trees are infected. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent the city forester from
entering on private property for purposes of carrying out his duties under this division, or to interfere with such city forester in the
lawful performance of his duties under the provisions of this division.
(Code 1982, § 9-503.03)

Sec. 90-72. - Penalty for violation of division.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in any sum not exceeding $500.00 and, in default of payment thereof, shall be adjudged to stand
committed to the city jail until such fine and costs be paid, secured or otherwise discharged according to law. Imposition of any
penalty for a violation of this division shall be construed as a waiver of the right of the city to collect the costs of removal of such
tree in accordance with the provisions of this division where it is necessary for the city to remove such tree in accordance with the
provisions of this division.
(Code 1982, § 9-503.08)

Sec. 90-73. - Trees with disease classi ed a nuisance.
(a)

Trees of all species and varieties of elm, zelkova and planera infected with the fungus Ceratostomella ulmi, as
determined by laboratory analysis, are declared to be a public nuisance and shall be removed and burned.

(b)

Trees, or parts thereof, of elm, zelkova or planera in a dead or dying condition that may serve as breeding places for
the European elm bark beetle Scolytus multistriatus are declared to be a public nuisance and shall be removed and
burned.

(Code 1982, § 9-503.02)

Sec. 90-74. - Notice for removal and burning on private property.
If trees on private property are found to be infected or in a dying condition, the city forester shall give to the owner of the
premises where the trees are situated written notice of the existence of such disease or of the dead or dying condition of such
trees or parts thereof and require the removal and burning of the trees under the direction and supervision of the city forester.
Such notice shall also notify the owners of the premises that if such a tree is not removed and burned after ten days' notice by
publication or personal service, the city will proceed with the removal and burning of the tree and assess the cost thereof against
the property in accordance with the provisions of this division.
(Code 1982, § 9-503.04)

195/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 90-75. - Service of notice for removal and burning.
Service of such notice shall be by personal service where the owner of the premises is a resident of the city. When the owner is
a nonresident of the city, the notice shall be served by certified mail, addressed to the owner at his last known address as shown
on the records in the office of the county assessor, and by publication at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city.
(Code 1982, § 9-503.05)

Sec. 90-76. - Owner's duty to abate; consequences of failure.
After due notice has been served upon the owner of the premises, it shall thereupon become his duty to cause such tree to be
removed and burned, under the supervision and direction of the city forester. If the owner fails, neglects, or refuses to remove or
burn such tree, the city forester may, ten days after notice is given, enter upon such private property and proceed with the
removal and burning of the tree, and the cost thereof shall be assessed against the real estate in the manner provided in this
section. The city forester shall, not later than September 15 of each year, report such costs to the city council, whereupon the city
council shall, at a regular council meeting by resolution, assess such cost, together with any assessment expenses against such
real estate, provided that notice of the time of such meeting of the city council shall be given in the manner provided by law. When
such assessment has been made, it shall be certified by the city clerk and delivered to the county treasurer and shall be collected
in the manner provided by law for the collection of general real estate taxes. Such assessment shall be a lien upon such real estate
from the date of such assessment and shall become delinquent in the same manner as general real estate taxes under the state
statutes relating thereto and shall draw interest after delinquency at the rate of seven percent per annum from the date until paid.
It shall be the duty of the county treasurer to collect the tax in the same manner and at the same time as general taxes, and the
items of the tax shall be receipted for on the same receipt blanks as general real estate taxes.
(Code 1982, § 9-503.06)

Sec. 90-77. - Diseased trees on public lands.
Infected trees, or trees or parts thereof in a dead or dying condition on public lands shall be removed and burned by the city
forester within ten days of his discovery that such condition exists, and the cost thereof shall be borne by the city without being
assessed to the abutting property owner.
(Code 1982, § 9-503.07)

Secs. 90-78—90-100. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - WEEDS

Sec. 90-101. - Penalty for violation of article.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction hereof, be fined in any sum not more than
$500.00 and pay costs of prosecution and shall be committed to jail until such fine and costs are paid.
(Code 1982, § 4-504)

Sec. 90-102. - Enforcement of article.
The chief of the fire department is charged with the enforcement of this article and shall report any violation thereof to the
mayor and city council.
(Code 1982, § 4-502)

196/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 90-103. - Cutting.
Every person owning or occupying any real estate within the corporate limits of the city or having control thereof as agent is
required to keep the real estate and the abutting portions of streets and alleys at all times free and clear from any growth of
weeds and especially from any growth of weed called Bromus tectorum or wild oats; and every such owner, occupant, or agent of
such owner of such property is required to destroy and remove all such weeds before the weeds shall be allowed to ripen or
become combustible so as to constitute a fire hazard to property within the city.
(Code 1982, § 4-501)

Sec. 90-104. - Special tax.
In case of the failure, neglect, or refusal of any owner, occupant or such agent of any real estate within the corporate limits of
the city to comply with the provisions of this article, the mayor and council may cause the property to be cleared of such weeds at
the expense of the city and shall assess the costs thereof as a special tax against the property to be collected, and the city clerk is
hereby directed to certify all such special taxes to the county clerk to be spread upon the tax books of the county at the same time
of certifying levies for other such taxes.
(Code 1982, § 4-503)

Chapter 94 - ZONING
FOOTNOTE(S):
(42) Cross

reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34;

manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 46; planning, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; subdivisions, ch. 74;
utilities, ch. 86.
(42) State

Law reference— Zoning regulations, R.R.S. 1943, § 19-901 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 94-1. - Enforcement of chapter.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the city zoning inspector. Appeal from the decision of the city zoning
inspector may be made to the board of adjustment as provided in this chapter.
(Code 1982, § 15-211.02)

Sec. 94-2. - Interpretation and application of chapter.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, such provisions shall be held to be minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity, and general welfare. It is not the intent of this
chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any ordinance, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued, and not
in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter, or which shall be adopted or issued, pursuant to law relating to the use of
buildings or premises and likewise not in conflict with this chapter; nor is it intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate
or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a
greater restriction upon the use of buildings or requires larger open spaces or larger lot areas than are imposed or required by
such other resolutions or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
(Code 1982, § 15-213.01)

197/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 94-3. - O ce of city zoning inspector established.
There is hereby established the office of city zoning inspector. For the purpose of this chapter, the executive secretary of the
planning commission is hereby designated as such zoning inspector or the planning commission may, in its discretion, designate
an inspector other than the executive secretary.
(Code 1982, § 15-211.01)

Sec. 94-4. - Amendments; change of zone; procedure.
(a)

City council shall submit proposals to planning commission. The city council may, from time to time, amend the
number, shape, boundary or area of any district or any regulations of or within such district or any other provisions
of this zoning chapter, but no such amendments shall be made or become effective until the amendments shall
have been proposed by or first be submitted for approval, disapproval, or suggestions to the planning commission.

(b)

Thirty-day limit on planning commission's response. Any proposal, approval, disapproval or suggestion of the
planning commission shall have an advisory effect only and not be binding upon the city council, unless the
planning commission shall have transmitted its report upon the proposed amendment within 30 days after the
submission thereof to it. The city council shall be free to act on the amendment in accordance with the procedure
described in this section and as set forth in R.R.S. 1943, § 19-901 et seq., without further awaiting the receipt of the
report of the planning commission.

(c)

Protests by owners. In case of a protest against such change, signed by the owners of 20 percent or more either of
the area of the lots included in such proposed change or of those immediately adjacent on the sides and in the rear
thereof extending 300 feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment shall not become
effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the city council.

(d)

Change of district or consideration of amendment; procedure. In order to have a proposed change of district or
amendment introduced and considered by the planning commission, persons requesting the change or
amendment shall comply with the following:
(1)

At the time an application for the change of a zoning district or amendments to the zoning text is filed with the
planning commission there shall be deposited the sum of $50.00 as a fee to cover investigation, legal notices,
and other expenses incidental to the determination of such matter.

(2)

An application for a change of district to a commercial district shall contain a minimum area equivalent to one
city block area and, should more than one parcel of land be involved, shall be contiguous exclusive of any
streets or easements.

(3)

An application for a change of district to an industrial district shall contain a minimum area equivalent to one
city block. The area, should more than one parcel of land be involved, shall be contiguous exclusive of any
streets or easements.

(4)

The requirements in subsections (d)(2) and (d)(3) of this section will not apply in the case of an extension of a
commercial or industrial district.

(5)

A person presenting an application for a change of district shall not be entitled to have such change
considered and acted upon by the city council unless and until the planning commission has certified that such
change is not inconsistent with the principles of the future land use plan of the city.

(6)

The foregoing requirements shall not limit the introduction of amendments on their own initiative by the city
council.

(Code 1982, §§ 15-214.01, 15-214.02, 15-214.04, 15-214.05; Ord. No. 969, § 2, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 996, § 1, 10-17-94)

Sec. 94-5. - Zoning jurisdiction of city.

198/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(a)

Jurisdiction. The zoning jurisdiction of the city includes the area within the corporate limits of the city and an area not t
one mile from the corporate limits, as authorized by R.R.S. 1943, § 17-114. This chapter includes a map designated as t
map of Minden, Nebraska. This zoning map and all notations, references and other information shown on it are part o
chapter and have the same effect as if fully set forth in this chapter; provided, however, the zoning jurisdiction of the c
expanded from the limits shown on the map so as to include all of the area described as lying within the boundaries d
follows:
Commencing at the northwest corner of the southwest quarter (SW¼) of section 31, township 7 north, range 14, and
including all of the southwest quarter (SW¼) and the south half of the southeast quarter (S½ SE¼) of section 31, all of
the west half of the northwest quarter (W½ NW¼) and southwest quarter (SW¼) of section 5 in township 6 north,
range 14, west of the 6th p.m., and the west half (W½) of section 8, the north half of the northwest quarter (N½ NW¼)
and the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter (SW¼ NW¼) and the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter
(NW¼ SW¼) of section 17, the southeast quarter (SE¼) of section 18, the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter
(NW¼ NE¼) and the northwest quarter (NW¼) of section 19, all in township 6 north, range 14, and the northeast
quarter (NE¼) and the northwest quarter (NW¼) and the north half of the southeast quarter (N½ SE¼) of section 24,
the east half of the southeast quarter (E½ SE¼) and the northeast quarter (NE¼) of section 14, the southeast quarter
and the east half of the northeast quarter (E½ NE¼) of section 11, the southwest quarter (SW¼) and the east half of
the northwest quarter (E½ NW¼) of section 1, all in township 6 north, range 15, west of the 6th p.m. and the south
half of the southeast quarter (S½ SE¼) of section 36, in township 7 north, range 15, west of the 6th p.m.
Commencing at the SW corner of said section 18; thence S 89° 49'46" E on the south line of said SW ¼ 75.00 feet to a
point on the east line of Highway #10 right-of-way, said point also being the southwest corner of a tract of land
quitclaimed to Kearney County in deed book 129, Page 275, Kearney County Register of Deeds; thence N 00° 34'26" W
on the west line of said Kearney County tract on said east right-of-way line 577.50 feet to the northwest corner of said
Kearney County tract and the point of beginning; thence leaving said west line and continuing on said east right-ofway line and on the aforesaid bearing, 823.75 feet to the southwest corner of a 364' x 50' tract of land described in
deed book 104, Page 192, Kearney County Register of Deeds, thence leaving said right-of-way line N 89° 59'31" E on
the south line of said 364' x 50' tract 362.11 feet to the southeast corner of the aforesaid tract; thence S 00° 30'11" E
824.86 feet to a point on the north line of said Kearney County tract; thence N 89° 49'46" W on said north line 361.10
feet to the point of beginning, be and is hereby rezoned from Agricultural District (A) to Industrial District, (D).
A tract of land being part of the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter (SW¼ SW¼) of Section Eighteen (18),
Township Six (6) North, Range Fourteen (14) West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, Kearney County, Nebraska, more
particularly described as follows: Referring to the Southwest Corner of Section 18; thence Easterly on the South line of
the Southwest Quarter of Section 18 a distance of 75.00 feet to a point on the East right-of-way line of Nebraska State
Highway No. 10, said point also being the Southwest Corner of a tract of land as described on QuitClaim Deed filed in
Book 129 of Microfilm on Page 275, recorded May 11, 1993 in the Kearney County Register of Deeds Office; thence
continuing Easterly on the South line of the Southwest Quarter of said Section 18 and the South line of said tract of
land described on QuitClaim Deed filed in Book 129 of Microfilm on Page 275, recorded May 11, 1993 in the Kearney
County Register of Deeds Office a distance of 544.50 feet to THE ACTUAL PLACE OF BEGINNING, said point also being
the Southeast Corner of said tract of land described on QuitClaim Deed filed in Book 129 of Microfilm on Page 275,
recorded May 11, 1993 in the Kearney County Register of Deeds Office; thence continuing Easterly on the South line of
the Southwest Quarter of said Section 18 a distance of 248.91 feet; thence Northerly parallel with the East line of said
tract of land as described on QuitClaim Deed filed in Book 129 of Microfilm on Page 275, recorded May 11, 1993 in the
Kearney County Register of Deeds Office a distance of 350.00 feet; thence Westerly parallel with the South line of said
Southwest Quarter a distance of 248.91 feet to a point on the East line of said tract of land as described on QuitClaim
Deed filed in Book 129 of Microfilm on Page 275, recorded May 11, 1993 in the Kearney County Register of Deeds
Office; thence Southerly on the East line of said tract of land as described on QuitClaim Deed filed in Book 129 of
199/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Microfilm on Page 275, recorded May 11, 1993 in the Kearney County Register of Deeds Office a distance of 350.00
feet to the place of beginning. Containing 2.00 acres, more or less, of which 0.19 acres, more or less, are presently
being used for road purposes on the South side, be and is hereby rezoned from Agricultural District (A) to Industrial
District (D).
Lots 1, 2, 3, and 4, Block 1, Minden West Estates Addition to the City of Minden, Kearney County, Nebraska; be and is
hereby rezoned from Outlying Commercial District (C2) to Industrial District (D).
All of the territory lying between the zoning limits shown on the original map and the boundaries described in this
section is hereby classified as being within the agricultural zone of the city, and the map is hereby amended to show
the expanded zoning jurisdiction of the city and the fact that the expanded area is zoned as part of the agricultural
zone of the city.
A tract of land located in the SW 1/4 of Section Six (6), Township Six (6) North, Range Fourteen (14) West of the 6th
P.M., Kearney County, Nebraska, described as follows:
Commencing at the W ¼ Corner of Section Six (6), Township Six (6) North, Range Fourteen (14) West of the 6th P.M.,
Kearney County, Nebraska: thence S00º41'49"E on the West Line of the SW ¼ of said Section 6,556.82'; thence
N89º18'11"E 33.00' to the Point of Beginning, said point being on the East Line of Highway No. 10; thence N89º32'21" E
222.14'; thence SO0º41'49" E 293.51'; thence S88º27'09" W 17.00'; thence S01º24'32" W 225.00'; thence N87º53'24" W
197.11' to appoint on said East line, said point being 33.00' East of the West Line of said SW 1/4; thence NO0º41'49"W,
on said East Line of Highway No. 10,509.86' to the Point of Beginning, containing 2.52 acres more or less.
Be and is hereby rezoned from Agricultural District to Outlying Commercial District.
(b)

On file. This chapter, together with the zoning map which is part of it, is on file in the office of the chief clerk of the
county, and a certified copy is on file in the office of the city clerk.

(Code 1982, §§ 15-201.01, 15-201.02; Ord. No. 1064, § 1, 3-6-00; Ord. No. 1116, § 1, 9-7-04; Ord. No. 1135, § 1, 9-4-07; Ord. No. 1140, § 1, 11-19-07; Ord.
No. 1147, § 1, 2-2-09)

Sec. 94-6. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Accessory building, structure or use means a structure, use, or activity on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily
incidental and subordinate to, the principal use of the structure.

Block means a tract or parcel of land legally dimensioned and described, duly recorded in the office of the register of deeds,
bounded by public streets, streams, railroads, unplatted lands or a combination thereof.

Building means anything designed or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels
or property and forming a construction that is safe and stable. The word "building" includes the word "structure."

Building, height of means the vertical distance from the grade, elevation of the curb, sidewalk or average elevation of the
ground around the structure, to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean
height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, or gambrel roofs.

Cellar means a portion of a building located partly or wholly underground and having one-half or more of its floor-to-ceiling
height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.

Commission means the planning commission of the city.
Dwelling means any building or portion thereof designed and used exclusively for residential purposes.
200/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Dwelling, multiple means a dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.
Dwelling unit means a room or group of rooms within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities for living,
sleeping and cooking.

Family means one or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a
group occupying a boardinghouse or lodginghouse or hotel.

Feedlot means any fenced-in pen or enclosure in which more than five head of cattle, hogs or 50 head of turkeys or other
domestic fowls are kept for more than ten hours, in which such animals or fowls are fed and watered.

Floor area means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the
exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating buildings, but not including cellar or basement space.

Frontage means all the property abutting upon one side of street between the intersecting streets measured along the rightof-way line.

Garage, private means a building used only for the housing of motor vehicles without their equipage for operation, repair, hire
or sale.

Garage, public means a garage other than a private garage.
Home occupation or profession means any use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling clearly incidental and
secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and which does not change the character thereof and in connection
with which there is no display nor outside storage of equipment.

Lot means a parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in this chapter, including one main building
together with its accessory building, open spaces, and parking spaces required by this chapter, and having its principal frontage
upon a street.

Lot of record means a lot or parcel of land, the deed to which has been recorded in the office of the county recorder prior to
the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived.

Manufactured home shall mean
(1)

A factory-built structure which is to be used as a place for human habitation, which is not constructed or
equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than to a permanent site,
which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles, and which bears a label
certifying that it was built in compliance with National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety
Standards, 24 C.F.R. 3280 et seq., promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development; or

(2)

A modular housing unit as defined in R.R.S. 1943 § 71-1557 bearing the seal of the department of health.

Nonconforming use means any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the time of passage of this chapter which does
not conform with the use regulations of the district within which it is located.

Parking space means a surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one automobile not less than nine
feet wide and 20 feet long connected to a public street or alley by a surfaced driveway and permanently reserved for the parking
or storage of one motor vehicle.

Place of assembly means any room or space for the congregation or seating of 100 or more persons.

201/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Recreational vehicle means any vehicle used or so constructed as to permit its use as a conveyance upon the public streets or
highways, which shall include self-propelled and nonself-propelled vehicles, and so designed and constructed in such a manner as
will permit the seasonal occupancy thereof as a dwelling unit and having no permanent foundation.

Recreational vehicle camp means any lot or parcel used for one or more coaches, house or camp cars or other portable or
mobile shelters use for living purposes.

Right-of-way line means the dedicated boundary line of a street.
Special use exception means a use not in specific conformity with the provisions of this chapter, which may be allowed by the
board of adjustment after public hearing. Such request shall be made on an application provided by the city. The cost of the
application shall be $25.00.

Story means that portion of a building other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of
the floor next above it or, if there is no floor above it, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.

Street means any public or private way set aside as a permanent right-of-way for street purposes.
Structural alteration means any change in structural members of a building, such as a wall, columns, beams or girders.
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground.
Use, secondary means a use subordinate to a primary or principal use and which may not occupy more than 45 percent of the
street floor (ground) level of a structure on the lot area devoted to the primary use.

Variance means a legal modification or variation of the provisions of this chapter as applied to a specific piece of property.
Yard means an open space on the same lot with a building unobstructed from the ground upward and measured as the
minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and main building.

Yard, front means a yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines and measured between the right-of-way
line and the main buildings or any projection thereof other than the projection of the usual steps, terraces, unenclosed porches or
entrance ways.

Yard, rear means a yard extending across the rear of the lot between the side lot lines and measured between the rear lot line
and the rear of the main building or any projections other than steps, unenclosed porches or entranceways.

Yard, side means a yard between the main building and the side line of the lot line.
(Code 1982, §§ 15-202, 15-202.01—15-202.37; Ord. No. 1000, § 2, 2-20-95)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 94-7. - Violations of zoning ordinances; penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of chapter 94 of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be
punished for said violation by a fine not to exceed $100.00 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, or by imprisonment in the
county jail for a term not to exceed 30 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day such violation continues after notice
of violation is given to the offender will be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 1123, § 1, 2-7-06)

Secs. 94-8—94-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
202/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 94-31. - Creation.
In compliance with provisions of R.R.S. 1943, ch. 19, art. 9, the board of adjustment is hereby created. The number of
members of the board, their terms of office, succession, removal, and filling of vacancies shall be as provided in R.R.S. 1943, ch. 19,
art. 9, and the powers and duties of the board shall likewise be as provided in the article. Until such time as a board of adjustment
is appointed, the city planning and zoning commission shall act as such; provided, however, any party aggrieved by the action of
the city planning and zoning commission shall have the right to appeal from its decision to the city council, which shall then be the
official board of adjustment, as provided for by law.
(Code 1982, § 15-212.01)

Sec. 94-32. - Appeals.
Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of
the city affected by any action of the zoning inspector. Such appeal shall be taken within 20 days after the action by filing with the
zoning inspector and with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The zoning inspector shall
forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was
taken.
(Code 1982, § 15-212.02)

Sec. 94-33. - Nature of notice.
The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, shall give at least ten days' notice to the
public and to the parties in interest, and decide the appeal within a reasonable time after it is submitted. Upon the hearing, any
party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. Any party adversely affected by a decision of the board of adjustment may
appeal to the district county court in the manner set forth in R.R.S. 1943, ch. 19, art. 9, on the grounds that such decision was
illegal. The court may affirm, reverse, vacate or modify the decision complained of in the appeal.
(Code 1982, § 15-212.03)

Secs. 94-34—94-55. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICTS

Sec. 94-56. - General provisions.
The zoning area over which the city exercises jurisdiction is hereby divided into seven use districts which shall be known as,
and designated on, the city zoning map with the appropriate symbol as follows:

District

Symbol

Agricultural district

A

Residential district one

R1

Residential district two

R2

203/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Residential district three

R3

Central commercial district

C1

Outlying commercial district

C2

Industrial district

D

(Code 1982, § 15-203.01)

Sec. 94-57. - Doubtful uses; procedure for presenting proposals to planning commission.
When land, a building or structure, or construction not specifically provided for is proposed for use in these regulations, the
municipal building official shall arrange for the permit applicant to present his plans to the planning commission which shall, after
hearing the applicant, pass a resolution by favorable vote of a majority of the entire membership on the commission. Such
resolution shall indicate whether the intended use of land, building or structure does or does not comply with the planning goals
of the municipality; and, if it does, shall advise the building official to permit construction or use in a specified district with any
special restriction; and if it does not, shall advise the building official to disallow any permit.
(Code 1982, § 15-203.02)

Sec. 94-58. - Boundaries.
The boundaries of the districts are shown upon the zoning map.
(1)

Where the districts designated on the zoning map are bounded approximately by streets, alleys, lot lines, or
property lines, such boundaries shall be construed to be the boundary lines of the district, unless such
boundaries are otherwise indicated on the map.

(2)

In case of unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines shall be determined by the use of the scale of the
zoning map or by dimensions shown on it.

(3)

Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad line, the boundaries shall be construed to be located
midway between the two rails of the railroad line, unless the boundary line location is otherwise expressly
indicated on the zoning map.

(Code 1982, § 15-203.03)

Sec. 94-59. - Compliance with article.
(a)

No building or structure shall be constructed, located, converted or altered nor shall any building or land be used
except for the purposes permitted in the district in which the building or land is located, except as provided in this
article. No building shall be erected, enlarged or altered except in conformity with the area regulations and
minimum yard requirements of this article for the district in which such building is located.

(b)

Except as specified elsewhere in this article, no buildings or structure shall be erected, reconstructed, or enlarged,
and no use shall be established unless located on or comprising a lot.

(c)

No part of a yard or other open space required in connection with any building or structure for the purpose of
complying with the provisions of this article shall be included as a part of a yard or other open space similarly
required for another building or structure.

(Code 1982, § 15-203.04)

204/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 94-60. - Nonconforming structures, uses and variances.
(a)

Any building or other structure or land lawfully existing at the time of enactment of Ordinance No. 631, September
6, 1966, may, except as provided in this section, be continued although such building or other structure or use of
any building structure or land does not conform with the provisions of Ordinance No. 631.

(b)

Should the building or structure or use of any building structure or land that is nonconforming be discontinued for
a period of 12 months, such right to the nonconforming use shall be forfeited, and any future use of the building
and premises shall conform to the ordinance.

(c)

The total structural repairs and alterations that may be made in a structure that is nonconforming in use only shall
not exceed 50 percent of its assessed value for tax purposes at the time of application for the first structural change
unless changed to a conforming use.

(d)

Any nonconforming building or structure or one or more of a group of nonconforming buildings or structures which
has been or may be damaged by fire, flood, explosion, earthquake, war, riot, act of God, or act of any governmental
authority may be reconstructed and used as before, if it is done within 12 months of such calamity, provided that
the restored building covers no greater area or has no greater cubic content.

(e)

A nonconforming use of land not involving a building or involving building structures or improvements which have
an assessed value of less than $500.00 shall be discontinued within three years from the adoption of Ordinance No.
631 and any such change which becomes nonconforming by reason of a subsequent change in Ordinance No. 631
or in the zone boundaries shall be discontinued within three years from the date of such change.

(Code 1982, § 15-203.05)

Sec. 94-61. - Authority of board to grant variance; application.
The board of adjustment is authorized to grant variances from the terms of this article upon application for the granting of a
variance.
(Code 1982, § 15-203.06)

Sec. 94-62. - Procedure for variance.
The board, in granting a variance, shall first find that strict application of the zoning regulation would result in peculiar and
exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardships upon, the owner by reason of the exceptional narrowness,
shallowness, or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of enactment of the applicable zoning regulation or by reason of
exceptional situation or topographic conditions of the tract. The board shall find that the relief to be granted is not a substantial
detriment to the public good and does not substantially impair the intent and purpose of any ordinance or resolution.
(Code 1982, § 15-203.07)

Sec. 94-63. - Orders for variance.
The order granting the variance shall show that:
(1)

The strict application of the article would produce undue hardship;

(2)

Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity;

(3)

The authorization of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and the character
of the district will not be changed by the granting of the variance;

(4)

The granting of such variance is based upon reason of demonstrable and exceptional hardship as
distinguished from variations for purposes of convenience, profit or caprice; and

(5)

The condition or situation of the property concerned or the intended use of the property is not of so general
205/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted
as an amendment to this article.
(Code 1982, § 15-203.08)

Sec. 94-64. - Hearings, notice and fees for variance.
The board of adjustment shall hold a public hearing on all applications for variances.
(1)

The board shall publish a notice of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the town at least
ten days prior to the hearing date. For applications for variances the board shall also send a written notice of
the hearing to all owners of property within 200 feet from any boundary of the property in question.

(2)

All applications shall be accompanied by a fee of $25.00 to cover the cost of advertising and processing,
together with a survey of the lot or tract for which the variance is sought, prepared by a licensed surveyor. The
survey shall show lot boundary lines, curblines, location of setback lines, locations of present structures and
locations of the desired variance.

(3)

The board shall adopt such procedures as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.

(Code 1982, § 15-203.09; Ord. No. 969, § 3, 6-22-93)

Sec. 94-65. - A agricultural district use regulations.
In the A agricultural district, building, structures and land shall be used only for the following purposes:
(1)

Agricultural uses, farming, dairying, stock raising or similar purposes, including poultry raising, orchards,
nurseries, greenhouses, truck gardens; raising birds, bees, rabbits, and other animals, fish and other
creatures; and other agricultural activities including dwellings, barns and incidental buildings commonly
required for the operation of a farm.

(2)

Single-family residences.

(3)

Churches, Sunday schools and other places of worship.

(4)

Public buildings and publicly owned parks, playgrounds and community centers.

(5)

Private clubs, private, social and recreational buildings and grounds for games, sports, and camping, but only if
not opened to the general public.

(6)

Hospitals or sanitariums, and charitable institutions.

(7)

Dog kennel and veterinary establishments, but not nearer than 750 feet to any zoned residential district,
incorporated area or dwelling other than the dwelling of the lessee or owner of the site.

(8)

Removal of dirt or topsoil.

(9)

Public and private forest and wildlife reservation.

(10)

Airport and airplane landing field.

(11)

Riding stable.

(12)

Accessory or secondary buildings, structures or uses, subordinate and customarily incidental to and located in
the same lot with any of the foregoing principal uses, provided that no person who is not a resident of the
premises shall be employed in such accessory or secondary use thereof.

(Code 1982, § 15-204)

Sec. 94-66. - R1 residential district use regulations.
(a)

Permitted uses. In the R1 residential district the following buildings and uses are permitted:
206/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(1)

Residences, including single-family residences and two-family residences, but not including multiple dwellings, ho
accommodations, trailer parks or boardinghouses and lodginghouses. A boardinghouse or lodginghouse is a hou
or more persons pay for their room and meals and such persons are not members of the immediate family of the
tenant of the house.

(2)

Churches, Sunday schools, and other places of worship.

(3)

Public and parochial schools.

(4)

Public buildings, libraries, and publicly owned parks, playgrounds and community centers.

(5)

Child day care centers licensed by the state department of social services, private clubs, private lodges, private
social and recreational buildings and grounds for games, sports, and camping, including publicly or privately
operated playgrounds, open to the public without charge.

(6)

Hospitals or sanitariums and charitable institutions.

(7)

Telephone exchanges, static transformer stations and public utility, water or gas installations, but such uses
shall be permitted only if there is no yard for service or storage and no garage.

(8)

Customarily agricultural uses, timbering, truck gardening and nurseries not including commercial buildings,
except such buildings, structures and facilities as are incident to such uses, but excluding the raising or
keeping of hogs, livestock, cattle, goats, poultry or other livestock generally raised or kept on a farm for profit.

(9)

Accessory or secondary buildings, structures or uses, subordinate and customarily incidental to and located in
the same lot with any of the foregoing principal uses, provided that no person who is not a resident of the
premises shall be employed in such accessory or secondary use thereof.

(b)

Height and area requirements. The required height and area regulations in the R1 residential district are as follows:
Maximum Building Height

Stories

3

Feet

45

Minimum Lot Requirements

 

Single-family

Two-family Area (square feet) 

7,920

9,600

Lot frontage (feet)

66

80

Front yard depth

25

25

Rear yard depth

30

30

Total side yard width

12

12

One side yard width

6

6

See sections 94-96 and 94-97.
(Code 1982, §§ 15-205.01, 15-205.02; Ord. No. 898, § 1, 4-6-87)

207/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 94-67. - R2 residential district use regulations.
(a)

Permitted uses. In the R2 residential district the following buildings and uses are permitted:
(1)

Residences, including single-family residences, two-family residences and multiple dwellings, but not including
hotels or tourist accommodations. Multiple dwellings shall include apartment houses, row houses, and other
residential structures providing permanent living accommodations for three or more families.

(2)

Boardinghouses and lodginghouses not primarily for transient guests and not intended as tourist
accommodations.

(3)

Churches, Sunday schools and other places of worship.

(4)

Public and parochial schools.

(5)

Public buildings, libraries, publicly owned parks, playgrounds, community centers and child day care centers
licensed by the state department of social services.

(6)

Private clubs, private lodges, private social and recreational buildings and grounds for games, sports and
camping, including publicly or privately operated playgrounds open to the public without charge.

(7)

Hospitals or sanitariums and charitable institutions.

(8)

Telephone exchanges, static transformer stations and public utility, water or gas installations, but such uses
shall be permitted only if there is no yard for service or storage and no garage.

(9)

Customarily agricultural uses, timbering, truck gardening and nurseries not including commercial buildings,
except such buildings, structures and facilities as are incident to such uses, but excluding the raising or
keeping of hogs, livestock, cattle, goats, poultry or other livestock generally raised or kept on a farm for profit.

(10)

Accessory or secondary buildings, structures or uses, subordinate and customarily incidental to and located in
the same lot with any of the foregoing principal uses, provided that no person who is not a resident of the
premises shall be employed in such accessory or secondary use thereof.

(11)

Video rental stores by special use permit only, which special use permit shall expire at the end of the two years
from its issuance, at which time the owner may apply for another two-year special use permit.

(b)

Height and area requirements. The required height and area regulations in the R2 residential district are as follows:
Maximum Building Height

Stories

3

Feet

45

Minimum Lot Requirements 

Single-family

 Two-family 

Multifamily 

Area (square feet)

7,920

9,600

12,000

Lot frontage (feet)

66

80

100

Front yard depth

25

25

25

Rear yard depth

30

30

30
208/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Total side yard width

12

12

12

One side yard width

6

6

6

(Code 1982, §§ 15-205.03, 15-205.04; Ord. No. 987, § 1, 4-18-94; Ord. No. 990, § 1, 5-2-94; Ord. No. 1000, § 3, 2-20-95)

Sec. 94-68. - R3 residential district use regulations.
(a)

Permitted uses. In the R3 residential district the following buildings and uses are permitted:
(1)

Single-family residences.

(2)

Churches, Sunday schools, and other places of worship.

(3)

Public and parochial schools.

(4)

Public buildings, libraries and publicly owned parks, playgrounds and community centers.

(5)

Private clubs, private lodges, private social and recreational buildings and grounds for games, sports and
camping, including publicly or privately operated playgrounds open to the public without charge.

(6)

Hospitals or sanitariums and charitable institutions.

(7)

Telephone exchanges, static transformer stations and public utility, water or gas installations, but such uses
shall be permitted only if there is no yard for service or storage and no garage.

(8)

Customarily agricultural uses, timbering, truck gardening and nurseries not including commercial buildings,
except such buildings, structures and facilities as are incident to such uses, but excluding the raising or
keeping of hogs, livestock, cattle, goats, poultry or other livestock generally raised or kept on a farm for profit.

(9)

Accessory buildings, structures or uses, subordinate and customarily incidental to and located in the same lot
with any of the foregoing principal uses, provided that no person who is not a resident of the premises shall
be employed in such accessory or secondary use thereof.

(b)

Height and area regulations. The required height and area regulations in the R3 residential district are as follows:
Maximum Building Height

Stories

2

Feet

30

Minimum Lot Requirements

 

Single-family 

Mobile home Area (square feet)

7,920

5,280

Lot frontage (feet)

66

44

Front yard depth

25

25

Rear yard depth

30

25

209/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Total side yard width

12

8

One side yard width

6

4

(Code 1982, §§ 15-205.05, 15-205.06; Ord. No. 1000, § 4, 2-20-95)

Sec. 94-69. - C1 central commercial district use regulations.
(a)

Permitted uses. In the C1 central commercial district, the following buildings and uses are permitted:
(1)

Any use permitted in the R1 residential district.

(2)

Automotive sales and service, such as filling or service stations, commercial garages, enclosed salesrooms, and
enclosed buildings for vehicle repair.

(3)

Business service, such as banks, office buildings, and postal stations.

(4)

Clothing services, such as laundry agencies, self-service laundries, dressmaking, millinery, shoe repair and dry
cleaning and pressing establishments and using only cleaning materials safe from fire hazards.

(5)

Equipment service, such as radio shops, electric appliance shops, record shops.

(6)

Personal service, such as barber shops, beauty salons, reducing salons, and photographic studios.

(7)

Retail sales, such as food markets, drugstores, haberdashers, stationers, newsdealers, apparel shops,
showrooms, and flower shops.

(8)

Food service, such as eating and drinking establishments.

(9)

Service establishments and wholesale trade conducted completely within an enclosed building.

(10)

Transportation terminals.

(11)

Warehouse buildings and commercial storage.

(12)

Hotels and motels.

(13)

Accessory or secondary buildings, structures or uses, subordinate and customarily incidental to and located in
the same lot with any of the foregoing principal uses, provided that no person who is not a resident of the
premises shall be employed in such accessory or secondary use thereof.

(b)

Height and area requirements. The required height and area regulations in the C1 central commercial district are as
follows:

Maximum Building Height

Stories

3

Feet

45

Minimum Lot Requirements for new family dwelling structures Single-family

Two-family 

Area (square feet) 

7,920 

9,240

 
Lot frontage (feet)

 66

66

210/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Front yard depth

25

25

Rear yard depth

30

30

Total side yard width

12

12

One side yard width

6

6

(Code 1982, §§ 15-206.01, 15-206.02; Ord. No. 1131, § 1, 1-15-07)

Sec. 94-70. - C2 outlying commercial district use regulations.
(a)

Permitted uses. In the C2 outlying commercial district the following buildings and uses are permitted:
(1)

Any use permitted in the R2 residential district.

(2)

Automotive sales and service, such as filling or service stations, commercial garages, enclosed salesrooms, and
enclosed buildings for vehicular repair.

(3)

Business service, such as banks, office buildings, and postal stations.

(4)

Clothing service, such as laundry agencies, self-service laundries, dressmaking, millinery, shoe repair, and dry
cleaning and pressing establishments using only cleaning materials safe from fire hazards.

(5)

Equipment service, such as radio shops, electric appliance shops, record shops.

(6)

Personal service, such as barber shops, beauty salons, reducing salons and photographic studios.

(7)

Retail sales, such as food markets, drugstores, haberdashers, stationers, newsdealers, apparel shops,
showrooms, and flower shops.

(8)

Food service, such as eating and drinking establishments.

(9)

Service establishments and wholesale trade conducted completely within an enclosed building.

(10)

Transportation terminals.

(11)

Warehouse buildings and commercial storage.

(12)

Hotels and motels.

(13)

Accessory buildings, structures or uses, subordinate and customarily incident to, and located on the same lot
with any of the foregoing principal uses.

(b)

Height and area requirements. The required height and area regulations in the C2 outlying commercial district are
as follows:

Maximum Building Height

Stories

3

Feet

45

Minimum Lot Requirements

Area (square feet)

Single-family

Two-family

Multifamily

7,920

9,240

12,000
211/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Lot frontage (feet)

66

66

100

Front yard depth

25

25

25

Rear yard depth

30

30

30

Total side yard depth

12

12

12

One side yard depth

6

6

6

(c)

Special exceptions. In the outlying commercial district, buildings, structures and land may also be used for the
special exception designated for an outlying commercial district in section 94-99(b), but only if approved in
accordance with standards specified in that section.

(Code 1982, §§ 15-206.03—15-206.05)

Sec. 94-71. - D industrial district use regulations.
(a)

Permitted uses. In the D industrial district the following buildings and uses are permitted:
(1)

Any use permitted in the C2 outlying commercial district except section 94-70(a)(1).

(2)

The manufacturing, assembling, compounding, packaging, processing or treatment of products or raw
materials.

(b)

(3)

The storage of raw materials to be used in production, goods in process, or manufacturing items.

(4)

Warehouse buildings and commercial or industrial storage.

(5)

Customary general agricultural uses, truck gardening and nurseries.

Height and area requirements. The required height and area regulations in the D industrial district are as follows:
Maximum Building Height

Stories
Feet

7
110

Minimum Lot Requirements

Area (square feet)
Frontage (feet)

14,400
100

Front yard depth

None

Rear yard depth

None

Total side yard depth

None

One side yard depth

None
212/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(c)

Building abutting residential district. Whenever a building in a D industrial district adjoins or abuts a residential
district within 100 feet therefrom, such buildings shall not exceed three stories or 45 feet in height unless it is set
back one foot from the required side and rear yard lines for each additional foot of height above 45 feet.

(d)

Special exceptions. Special exceptions may be granted in the D industrial district for such construction and uses as
may be advantageous for the convenience of the public, the promotion of health, safety, morals or general welfare,
providing such construction and use meet the standards set forth in section 94-99

(Code 1982, §§ 15-207.01—15-207.04)

Secs. 94-72—94-95. - Reserved.

ARTICLE IV. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS

Sec. 94-96. - Height and area.
The following height and area regulations are supplementary regulations pertaining to the commercial and industrial districts,
as follows:
(1)

A building in the C1 central commercial district may be erected to a height of six stories and 75 feet if set back
from all required yard lines a distance of one foot for each additional foot of height above 45 feet.

(2)

No rear yard is required except on the rear of a lot adjoining a residential district, in which case a rear yard of
not less than 25 feet shall be provided.

(3)

For a three-story building, a side yard of eight feet on each side shall be required.

(4)

No side yard is required except on the side of a lot adjoining a residential district in which case a side yard of
not less than five feet shall be provided in any commercial district and of not less than ten feet in any
industrial district.

(Code 1982, § 15-208.01)

Sec. 94-97. - Height and area exceptions and modi cations.
The following height and area exceptions and modifications are supplementary regulations pertaining to all use districts as
follows:
(1)

Lot area and width. Any lot of record in any agricultural, residential, or commercial district at the time of
passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived having less area or width than in this chapter
required may be used for a single-family dwelling, nonetheless.

(2)

Front yard. Where 30 percent or more of a block is improved with buildings, then no part of any new building
shall project beyond a line joining the two adjacent corners of the building on only one side, beyond a line
projected from the corresponding adjacent corners of the two nearest buildings, except that no building shall
be required to provide a front yard greater than 25 feet in any event.

(3)

Corner lots. The owner of a corner lot shall, at the time of his application for building permit, designate a front
street and a side street. The front yard depth shall then comply with the appropriate district regulation. The
side yard adjacent to the side street shall be determined as follows: Where 30 percent or more of a block
fronting on the side street is improved with buildings, then no part of any new building on the corner lot shall
project beyond a line projected along the side of the existing dwelling which is closest to the street right-ofway, which line shall be parallel to the right-of-way, except that no building shall be required to provide a side

213/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

yard adjacent to a side street greater than 25 feet, in any event, as measured from the right-of-way line. If less
than 30 percent of a block fronting on the side street is improved with buildings, then the side yard width
adjacent to a side street shall be not less than 15 feet, in any event, as measured from the right-of-way line.
(4)

Side yard. For the purpose of side yard regulations a two-family group house or multiple dwelling shall be
considered as one building occupying one lot.

(5)

Rear yard. The required rear yard may be reduced to 20 percent of the depth of the lot on any lot not
exceeding 125 feet. An accessory building may be built within a required rear yard when located at least six
feet from the rear lot line and when occupying not more than 30 percent of the area of such required rear
yard.

(6)

All yards. The ordinary projection of sills, beltcourses, cornices and ornamental features may be permitted not
to exceed 18 inches in any required yard.

(7)

Height.
a.

Chimneys, cooling or water towers, elevators, bulkheads, fire towers, monuments, stacks, stage towers,
tanks, spires, church steeples, radio towers or necessary mechanical apparatus may be erected to any
safe height not in conflict with any other ordinance of the city.

b.

Public, semipublic or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions, churches and schools, when
permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not exceeding 70 feet, provided all required yards are
increased by one foot for each foot of the building height above the height limit otherwise provided.

(Code 1982, § 15-208.02)

Sec. 94-98. - O -street parking regulations.
No building shall be erected or changed in use unless there is provided on the lot or tract of land used, or within 300 feet of
the lot or tract, space for the parking of automobiles or trucks in accordance with the following minimum requirements:
(1)

Dwellings. One parking space for each dwelling unit.

(2)

Public, semipublic, business and commercial uses. One parking space for each 200 square feet of floor area,
provided that this requirement shall not apply to the following described real estate:
All of block 20; lots 1 through 6, inclusive, block 13; lots 1, 2, 3, 10, and lots 1 through 5, inclusive, of the
subdivision of lots 11 and 12, block 19; lots 7 through 12 inclusive, block 29, lots 4, 5, 6 and lots 1 through 5,
inclusive of the subdivision of lots 7, 8 and 9, and the east 24 feet of lots 7, 8 and 9, block 21; all in the original
town, now city.

(3)

Industries. One parking space for each two employees on the maximum work shift.

(Code 1982, §§ 15-209, 15-209.01—15-209.03)

Sec. 94-99. - Tourist accommodations and trailer parks.
(a)

Campgrounds and manufactured home parks within the zoning authority, located in an agricultural district.
Campground and manufactured home parks may be located in an agricultural district shall meet all of the following
standards:
(1)

Any tract to be used shall have a total area of not less than 6,800 square feet.

(2)

Manufactured home parks shall be divided into lots or stalls of sufficient size that manufactured home units
shall not occupy in aggregate more than 35 percent of the total area so used. Each manufactured home lot or
stall shall be of an area of at least 3,600 square feet and shall be of sufficient size so as to provide open space
of not less than six feet on each side and at the rear of the manufactured home unit located thereon. Each
214/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

manufactured home unit shall be set back from the street front of such lots or stall not less than 15 feet. All
roadways or streets within the manufactured home park shall be at least 20 feet wide and shall be provided
with a paved or all-weather surface and be free of dust.
(3)

Campsites shall be divided into lots or stalls of sufficient size so as to provide open space of not less than six
feet between campers, manufactured homes or other vehicles or structures located on the campgrounds. All
roadways shall be at least 12 feet wide and be free of dust.

(4)

Operators of manufactured home parks and campsites and the occupants thereof shall also comply with all
requirements of chapter 46 of this Code.

(b)

Campgrounds and manufactured home parks in outlying commercial districts. Campgrounds and manufactured
home parks located in an outlying commercial district, shall meet all of the following standards:
(1)

Any tract to be so used shall have a total area of not less than one city block as originally platted.

(2)

Manufactured home parks shall be divided into lots or stalls of sufficient size that manufactured home units
shall not occupy in aggregate more than 35 percent of the total area so used. Each manufactured home lot or
stall shall be of an area of at least 3,600 square feet and shall be of sufficient size so as to provide open space
of not less than six feet on each side and at the rear of the manufactured home unit located thereon. Each
manufactured home unit shall be set back from the street front of such lot or stall not less than 15 feet. All
roadways or streets within the manufactured home park shall be at least 20 feet wide and shall be provided
with a paved or all-weather surface and be free of dust.

(3)

Campsites shall be divided into lots or stalls of sufficient size so as to provide open space of not less than six
feet between campers, manufactured homes or other vehicles or structures located on the campgrounds. All
roadways shall be at least 12 feet wide and be free of dust.

(4)

Operators of manufactured home parks and campsites and the occupants thereof shall also comply with all
requirements of chapter 46 of this Code.

(Code 1982, §§ 15-210.01, 15-210.02; Ord. No. 1000, § 5, 2-20-95)

APPENDIX A - FRANCHISES
ARTICLE I. - CABLE TV FRANCHISE
Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to:
(1)

Establish a local policy concerning cable television;

(2)

Establish franchise procedures and standards which encourage the growth and development of cable systems
which assure that cable systems are responsive to the needs and interests of the city;

(3)

Establish guidelines for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of cable systems;

(4)

Establish an orderly process for franchise renewal which protects cable operators against unfair denials of
renewal where an operator's past performance and proposal for future performance meet the standards set
by the FCC and this ordinance;

(5)

Promote competition in cable communications and minimize unnecessary regulations that would impose
undue burdens on cable systems;

(6)

Create a set of regulations, standards and procedures for cable operators;

(7)

Create a comprehensive customer service and consumer protection policy for cable operators;

(8)

Provide for access and inspection of a cable operator's books and records in order to monitor compliance with
local, state and federal laws, and any franchise agreement;
215/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(9)
(10)

Provide a thorough construction and installation policy for a cable operator's system;
Provide for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city in light of the cable operator's construction,
operation and maintenance;

(11)

Create a thorough procedure for collecting and monitoring franchise fees;

(12)

Create a thorough default and revocation procedure for franchised operators; and

(13)

Create a performance review procedure in order to assist the city in its periodic evaluation of a franchised
operators performance.

FOOTNOTE(S):
(43) Editor's

note— Printed herein are the substantive provisions of the cable television franchise, Ord. No. 1068, adopted Sep. 18,

2000, which repeals the former cable television franchise, Ord. No. 908, as adopted by the city on May 16, 1988. For stylistic
purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has
been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.
Sec. 1. - De nitions.
As used in this ordinance or in any franchise issued pursuant to this ordinance, the following terms shall have the following
definitions:
(1)

City means the City of Minden, Nebraska. Council means the City Council of the City of Minden. Mayor shall
mean the Mayor of the City of Minden. City administrator shall mean the City Administrator of the City of
Minden.

(2)

Affiliate means another person or entity who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common
ownership or control with, the person or entity.

(3)

Applicant means a person or entity submitting an application or proposal to the City for a franchise to operate
a cable system under the terms and conditions of this ordinance and any state or federal regulations.

(4)

Auxiliary equipment means equipment supplied by a cable operator which enhances or assists in the
reception or provision of cable service.

(5)

Basic cable service or basic service means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television
broadcast signals and/or any PEG channels required to be carried pursuant to applicable law or a Franchise.

(6)

Cable Communications Act or Cable Act means 47 U.S.C. 541 et seq. or corresponding legislation in any future
federal communications legislation.

(7)

Cable operator or operator means any person or entity which:
a.

Provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a
significant interest in that cable system; or

b.

Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of a
cable system.

(8)

Cable service means:
a.

The one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video programming, or (ii) other programming service; and

b.

Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other
programming service.
This shall include all forms of cable service whether provided by a cable operator or through a DBS, MDS,
MMDS, or a SLMATV system, if the service otherwise qualifies as a cable system. Provided, this definition
shall not be construed to prohibit any other lawful service that may be provided by a cable operator.
216/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(9)

Cable system or cable television system means a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and asso
generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video, voice
programming, and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the City. Provided, this shall not include:
a.

A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of 1 or more television broadcast stations;

b.

A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership,
control, or management, unless the facility uses any public way or public right-of-way;

c.

A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of the Cable
Communications Act, except that the facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent the facility
is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or

d.
(10)

Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems.

Channel or cable channel means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable
system and which is capable of delivering a television channel (as defined by the FCC).

(11)

Charge means a one-time or non-regularly occurring cost paid by the subscriber, and which is associated with
the installation, maintenance, service or repair of the cable service.

(12)

Converter means any device, separate and apart from the subscriber's receiver, that will permit a subscriber
to view or otherwise use signals delivered at designated dial locations or other reception and use allocations
as may be applicable and required for the practical use of the signal.

(13)

Customer means a subscriber or user of the services and/or facilities of the cable system provided by a cable
operator.

(14)

IDBS system or direct broadcast satellite system means the delivery and/or provision of cable services from a
satellite to a subscriber through the use of a small earth or satellite station.

(15)

Drop means a small branch of cable or other transmitting medium which connects the terminals on the back
of the subscriber's receiver to the feeder cable or future technical equivalent on the street, easement, rightsof-way, or public way.

(16)

Easement means and shall include any public easement or other compatible use created by dedication or by
other means, to the City for public utility or other purposes including cable television. Easement shall include a
private easement used for the provision of cable service.

(17)

Entity shall mean partnership, joint venture, corporation or limited liability company.

(18)

FCC means the Federal Communications Commission.

(19)

Franchise means the initial authorization, amendment or renewal granted by the City which authorizes the
construction and operation of a cable system.

(20)

Franchised operator means a person or entity that is awarded a franchise by the City to construct and operate
a cable system, within all or a part of the City. The term franchised operator specifically includes the term

cable operator.
(21)

Franchise expiration means the date of expiration, or the end of the term of a franchise, as provided under a
franchise agreement.

(22)

Franchise fee means a fee or charge that the City requires as payment for the privilege of using the streets,
rights-of -way, public ways, and easements of the City in order to construct, maintain and operate a franchised
cable system.

(23)

Franchising authority means the City.

(24)

Gross Annual Subscriber Revenues shall mean any and all compensation and other consideration received
directly by Company from subscribers in payment for all furnished CATV service which includes additional
service tiers and pay television. Gross annual subscriber revenue shall not include any taxes on services

217/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

furnished by Company imposed directly on any subscriber or user by any city, state or other governmental
unit and collected by Company for such governmental unit, nor shall it include revenue from auxiliary, services
which include, but are not limited to, advertising or leased channels.
(25)

Late charge means a charge which is added to a subscriber's account or bill for non-payment of a previously
due and delinquent account.

(26)

IIMDS system or Multi-point distribution system means a system which transmits (via Super High Frequency)
specialized programming or data or facsimile transmission to subscribers as authorized by the FCC.

(27)

Other programming service means information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers
generally.

(28)

Pay-per-view or Premium channel means the delivery over the cable system of audio and/or video signals in
an unintelligible form to subscribers for a fee or charge, over and above the charge for standard or basic
service, on a per program or per channel basis where the unintelligible or unusable form for viewing is made
intelligible only to those subscribers paying a separate fee or charge for the viewing or use of the signals.

(29)

PEG channel means a public, educational or governmental channel which is carried on a cable system, but
which is not part of any institutional network. For purposes of this paragraph, institutional network shall mean
a communication network which is constructed or operated by a cable operator and which is generally
available only to subscribers who are not residential subscribers.

(30)

Public way means any public street, public place or right-of-way now or later dedicated to the public use within
the area served by a cable operator.

(31)

Rate means the monthly, bimonthly, quarterly, semiannual, annual or other periodic price paid by a subscriber
in order to receive cable service.

(32)

Reporting month shall mean a calendar month of the year, as reported to the City.

(33)

Revocation, Termination or Non-renewal means an official act by the City which lawfully removes, repeals or
rescinds a previously approved authorization for a franchised operator to provide cable service.

(34)

Service tier means a category of cable service or other services provided by a cable operator, and for which a
separate rate is charged by the cable operator.

(35)

SMATV system or Satellite Master Antenna Television system means a private cable system not crossing any
public rights-of-way and which is located on private property and serving private dwellings.

(36)

State means the State of Nebraska.

(37)

Subscriber means a person lawfully receiving cable service delivered by the cable operator.

(38)

User means a person or organization utilizing a cable system and/or its equipment for purposes of production
and/or transmission.

(39)

Video programming means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming
provided by, a television broadcast station.

(40)

Normal Operating Conditions means those service conditions which are within the control of the cable
operator. Those conditions which are not within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited
to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages and severe, unusual
weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but
are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular, peak or seasonal demand
periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the system.

Sec. 2. - Administration; delegation of powers and authority.

218/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Unless prohibited by Federal or State law, the Council may delegate its powers and authorities with respect to a cable operator
to one or more duly authorized representatives of the City, including the Mayor, the City Administrator, a Cable Advisory
Committee or an outside consultant. Provided, the Council may never delegate its franchising or revocation power to another
person.
Sec. 3. - Same; request for relief.
Any cable operator may file a written petition, at any time, with the City requesting relief from one or more provisions of this
ordinance . The relief requested may specifically include the delay in implementation (as to the petitioning cable operator only) of
one or more provisions of this ordinance. In order to receive any relief from one or more of the provisions of this Ordinance, a
cable operator must satisfactorily demonstrate to the Council that at least one of the following facts exist:
(1)

The provision and/or requirement is expressly prohibited by Federal law, the FCC or State law; or

(2)

That the provision in question materially affects, and is in conflict with an expressed right that is specifically
noted in an existing franchise agreement (but only for the term of the existing franchise); or

(3)

That the imposition of the provisions and/or requirements will create an undue economic hardship on a cable
operator so as to imperil or eliminate a cable operator's ability to provide cable service to a majority of current
subscribers.

(4)

As an alternative to requesting relief, a cable operator may petition for clarification as to the precise intent and
effect that one or more provisions or sections of this Ordinance has on the petitioning cable operator.

If the Council grants relief to a franchised operator, then the franchise agreement shall be amended to reflect the
exact extent of the relief.
Sec. 4. - Noncompliance not excused for failure to enforce.
A cable operator shall not be excused from complying with any of the requirements of this ordinance by any failure of the City
on any one or more occasions to seek, or insist upon compliance with this ordinance.
Sec. 5. - Compliance with law.
Any cable operator, its assignee, or transferee shall be subject to, and expected to comply with:
(1)

All ordinances in effect within the city including this Ordinance, to the extent that the cable operator has not
received exemption or relief.

(2)

All Federal and State Laws, and all rules and regulations issued by all applicable regulatory agencies.

(3)

All lawful exercise of the City's police power.

Nothing contained in this section shall prevent a cable operator from exercising any, and all, of its administrative
and legal rights as to the constitutionality, applicability, and enforceability of this ordinance or any later
amendments.
Sec. 6. - Inconsistencies with Federal or State Law.
If any provision or section of this ordinance is inconsistent with any provision or section of a Federal or State rule, regulation,
or law, then the Federal or State rule, regulation, or law shall control.
Sec. 7. - Retained Rights and Authorities.

219/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Subject to pre-emption by the FCC or any other Federal or State governmental entity or agency, the City retains the authority
for:
(1)

The regulation and control of any cable system within the geographical limits of the City, and within the limits
prescribed by applicable law;

(2)

The award and grant of a cable franchise subsequent to review of an application or proposal by the Council;

(3)

Subject to the provisions of this Ordinance entitled "Compliance with law" and any relief or exemption granted
with respect to those provisions, the amendment or repeal of all or part of this ordinance; and

(4)

The amendment of a franchise by mutual agreement of the Council and the holder of the franchise.

(5)

The regulations of any and all rates and charges associated with the provision of any services offered over the
system. If the City chooses to regulate rates the City shall abide by all applicable state and federal laws and
regulations including the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission found at 47 C.F.R.
paragraphs 76.900-76.987 et. seq. as may, from time to time be amended.

(6)

The enforcement of all laws and regulations relating to cable customer service practices and consumer
protection.

(7)

The enforcement of all laws and regulations relating to the technical and operational standards associated
with providing cable television services.

Sec. 8. - Notices.
The City and each cable operator shall provide the other party with the name and address of the contact person designated to
receive notices, filings, reports, records, documents and other correspondence. All notices shall be delivered to each party's
contact person by certified mail, return receipt requested, personal service with signed receipt of delivery, or overnight with
receipt verification. All other filings, reports, records, documents, and other correspondence may be delivered by any permissible
means including, but not limited to: facsimile transmission ("faxing"); personal service, overnight mail or package delivery. The
delivery of all notices, reports, records, and other correspondence shall be deemed to have occurred at the time of receipt (unless
otherwise designated by State law) . The designation of the contact person for notice purposes may be contained within any
franchise agreement.
Sec. 9. - Indemnity.
Each cable operator shall indemnify, defend and hold the City, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees
(collectively the "Indemnified Parties") harmless from and against any and all lawsuits, claims, causes of action, actions, liability,
demands, damages, judgments, settlements, losses, expenses (including reasonable attorneys fees) and costs of any nature that
any of the Indemnified Parties may at any time, directly or indirectly, suffer, sustain or incur arising out of, based upon or in any
way connected with the grant of a franchise to a cable operator, the operation of the cable operator's cable system and/or the act
and/or omissions of the cable operator or its agents or employees, whether or not pursuant to this ordinance or any franchise
granted hereunder. This indemnity shall apply, without limitation, to any action or cause of action for invasion of privacy,
defamation, anti-trust, errors and omissions, theft, fire, violation or infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade names, service
mark, patent or any other right of any person whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or
prohibited buy [by] this ordinance or any franchise agreement, but shall exclude any claim or action arising out of the acts of
omissions of Indemnified Parties or related to any City programming or other access programming for which the cable operator is
not legally responsible.
Sec. 10. - Liability Insurance.

220/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Within sixty (60) days following the grant of a franchise, a cable operator shall obtain, pay all premiums for and make available
to the City at its request copies of the following insurance policies:
(1)

A general comprehensive liability insurance policy insuring, indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the
Indemnified Parties from any and all claims by any person whatsoever on account of injury to or death of a
person or persons occasioned by the operations of the cable operator under any franchise granted hereunder
or alleged to have been so caused or occurred with a minimum coverage of one million dollars ($1,000,000) for
personal injury or death of one person, and two million dollars ($2,000.000) for personal injury or death of any
two or more persons in any one occurrence.

(2)

Property damage insurance for property damage occasioned by the operation of the cable operator under any
franchise grated pursuant to this ordinance, or alleged to have been so caused or occurred with minimum
coverage of one million dollars ($1,000,000) for property damage to the property of any one person and two
million dollars ($2,000,000) for property damage to the property of two or more persons in any one
occurrence.

(3)

Workers comp insurance as provided by applicable local, state and federal laws.

(4)

All insurance policies called for herein shall be in a form satisfactory to the City with a company licensed to do
business in the State of Nebraska with a rating by A.M. Best & Co. of not less than "A" and shall require thirty
(30) days written notice of any cancellations to both the City and the cable operator. The cable operator shall,
in the event of any such cancellation notice obtain, pay all premiums for and file with the City, written evidence
of the issuance of replacement policies within thirty (30) days following receipt by the City or the cable
operator of any notice of cancellation.

(5)

It shall be the obligation of the cable operator to properly notify the City of any pending litigation that would
be likely to effect the indemnified parties.

Sec. 11. - Furnishing of Reports.
Upon written request of the City a cable operator shall furnish, at no cost to the city, copies of any or all filings with the FCC
and the United States Copyright Office within 30 days of the request.
Sec. 12. - Books and Records.
A cable operator shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts and records concerning the business and operations of
the cable system. In addition:
(1)

The City shall have the right, on seven days written notice, to review at the cable operator's local office all
records pertaining to a cable operator's cable operations with respect to the City which are necessary to the
enforcement of this ordinance or an applicable franchise. Any review, unless mutually agreed upon or
judicially ordered, should occur within the cable operator's regular office hours. Payroll information of
employees and corporate officers within the company may only be requested in the aggregate on a summary
prepared by the cable operator. The City acknowledges the sensitivity of these records, and will request this
information only on as needed basis, and will treat this information as confidential and proprietary to the
fullest extent allowed by law.

(2)

The City shall have the right to hire, at its own expense, an independent certified public accountant, or other
business or financial expert, to review the books and records of a cable operator pertaining to revenue
information.

(3)

A false entry in the books and/or records of a cable operator of a material and substantial fact shall constitute
a material violation of this ordinance. Erroneous entries shall not constitute a material violation if made in
221/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

good faith.
(4)

If after a review or audit of a cable operator's records, it is discovered that the cable operator has underpaid
the City by an amount that exceeds 3 % of the total amount paid for any reporting month, then the City may
require the cable operator to reimburse the City for the actual cost of the audit, in addition to the amount of
underpayment.

Sec. 13. - Customer response and service standards.
A cable operator shall maintain a local, toll-free or collect call telephone access line which will be available to its subscribers 24
hours a day, seven days a week. In addition:
(1)

Trained company representatives will be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal
business hours.

(2)

After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by a service or an automated response system,
including an answering machine. Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a
trained company representative on the next business day.

(3)

A cable operator shall comply with any applicable FCC standards concerning customer response, installations,
outages and service calls.

(4)

In order to assist the City in assessing the resolution of customer service requests, inquiries and complaints, a
cable operator shall be required to keep and maintain service logs as required by the FCC, subject to any
limitations imposed by State or Federal law (including any subscriber privacy limitations).

Sec. 14. - Noti cations to subscribers.
A cable operator shall provide written notification containing information as required by the FCC at the time of installation of
service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request.
Sec. 15. - Billing practices.
Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to basic,
tiered and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period,
including optional charges, rebates and credits.
(1)

In case of a billing dispute, the cable operator must respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within
30 days.

(2)

Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than either the customer's next billing cycle following
resolution of the request or 30 days, whichever is earlier.

(3)

Credits for service will be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination
that a credit is warranted.

Sec. 16. - Installations, outages, and service calls.
Under Normal Operating Conditions, each of the following four standards will be met no less than 95 percent of the time
measured on a quarterly basis.
(1)

Standard installations will be performed within 7 business days after an order has been placed. Standard
installations are those that are located up to 125 feet from the existing distribution system.

(2)

Excluding conditions beyond its control, a cable operator will begin working on "service interruptions"
222/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known. A cable operator must
begin actions to correct other service problems the next business day after notification of the service problem.
Except in emergency situations, all service problems shall be handled or corrected within 48 hours from the
time the cable operator first received notification (except for intermittent problems not present at the time of
the service call).
(3)

The "appointment window" alternatives for installations, service calls, and other installation activities will be
either a specific time or, at maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business hours. A cable operator
may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal business hours for the express
convenience of a customer.

(4)

A cable operator may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business
day prior to the scheduled appointment.

(5)

If a cable operator representative is running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to
keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled, as
necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer.

Sec. 17. - Noti cations to subscribers.
A cable operator shall provide written information on each of the following areas at the time of installation of service, at least
annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request:
(1)

Products and services offered, itemizing the basic, premium, and informational services offered, as well as the
service tiers offered;

(2)

Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other
services;

(3)

Installation and service maintenance charges and policies;

(4)

Instructions on how to use the cable service;

(5)

Channel positions of programming carried on the system;

(6)

Billing and complaint procedures, including:
a.

The address and telephone number of the cable operator's local office;

b.

Payment due and delinquent dates;

c.

Amount or percentage of late charges, if any;

d.

Resolution procedures for billing disputes, complaints, and inquiries;

(7)

The customer service hours and telephone number(s);

(8)

The method of securing a voluntary disconnection;

(9)

The extent of the credit/refund policy;

(10)

The equipment use and return policy together with any required security deposits;

(11)

The additional rights of blind, hearing-impaired or ambulatory impaired customers; and

(12)

Notification of a subscriber's ability to purchase or lease from the cable operator a lock box, parental control
mechanism, or other devise which will prohibit the viewing of a particular cable service during a period
determined by the subscriber.

Subscribers will be notified of any changes in rates, programming services, channel positions, or service tiers as
soon as possible through announcements on the cable system and in writing. Notice must be given to subscribers a
minimum of 30 days in advance of these changes if the change is within the control of the cable operator. In

223/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

addition, the cable operator shall notify subscribers 30 days in advance of any significant changes in the other
information required by this section.
Sec. 18. - Billing Credit or Refunds for Service Outages, Interruptions, or Unsolicited Service.
A cable operator shall provide a subscriber with credit or a rebate for a service outage or interruption exceeding eight hours in
duration beyond the time that the customer notified the cable operator of the outage. The credit for purposes of determining the
amount of the credit or rebate, shall be deemed to be equivalent to or the same as a twenty-four hour service outage. No credit or
rebate shall be required where the outage was due to matters beyond the immediate control of the cable operator. In addition:
(1)

For notifications by the customer after hours, these credit refund requirements shall only apply if three
customers have provided notice in a given area.

(2)

In the case of a regional or area outage, all affected subscribers shall be due a credit or refund if the cable
operator is able to reasonably determine the subscribers affected. If the cable operator is not able to
reasonably determine the subscribers affected by a regional or area outage, a credit or refund shall be given
to all customers affected by the outage who make a claim for credit or refund within 30 days of the outage.

(3)

In the case of a charge for unsolicited service, a cable operator shall provide a subscriber with an adjustment
or billing credit on the next available billing statement, and the subscriber shall not be considered delinquent
for failure to pay a charge for unsolicited service.

Sec. 19. - Special Service Requirements.
A cable operator shall comply with all Federal and State laws and regulations concerning special service requirements for
disabled, sight or hearing impaired or ambulatory impaired customers.
Sec. 20. - Preferential or Discriminatory Practices Prohibited.
A cable operator shall not, as to rules, regulations, rates, changes, provision of service, or use of a provider's facilities and
equipment, make or allow, or grant undue preference or advantage to any person, nor subject any person to prejudice or
disadvantage on the basis of age, race, creed, color, sex, national origin, handicap, religious affiliation or location of residence.
Cable operators shall not deny cable service, or the extension of cable service, to any group of potential residential cable
subscribers because of the income of the residents of the local area in which such group resides. The provisions of this section
shall not, however, prohibit a cable operator from:
(1)

Offering a promotional or incentive discount rate or charge as long as the rate or charge does not exceed one
hundred twenty days in length.

(2)

Denying service based on location of residence, if that residence is outside the parameters for line extension
as detailed in a franchise agreement, if applicable.

(3)

Implementing a carefully designated no-frills service tier for "lower income" and/or fixed income individuals.

(4)

Making agreements or entering into cable service agreements with multiple dwelling unit owners, including
hotel, motel, and mobile park owners, to provide cable service under a bulk billing or other type of
arrangement.

Sec. 21. - Use and return of equipment.
A customer shall maintain any equipment rented or leased from a cable operator in good working order, and operate the
equipment only in the manner specified by the cable operator or the manufacturer of the equipment.

224/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

(1)

If needed for proper operation, or requested by a customer, a cable operator shall deliver to a customer written i
detailing the proper use of rented, loaned or purchased equipment. A cable operator may comply with this sectio
the manufacturer's instructions to a customer.

(2)

A customer shall totally and fully reimburse a cable operator for any damage to a cable operator's equipment
that is due to the customer's failure to properly maintain and operate the equipment.

(3)

A customer shall be relieved from any responsibility for reimbursing a cable operator for equipment which
malfunctions or does not operate due to a hidden or latent defect in the equipment or for which fails to
operate or improperly operates due to natural occurrences conditioned by the normal wear and tear of the
equipment, of [or] for equipment damaged or destroyed by an act of nature.

Sec. 22. - Security deposits.
A cable operator is not required to seek a security deposit from a customer for use or rental of the cable operator's
equipment. However, if a security deposit is charged:
(1)

A cable operator shall comply with any, and all, applicable State statutes, rules or regulations concerning
security deposits. If the State has no statutes, rules or regulations concerning the security deposit for a
particular piece of equipment, then the cable operator shall be prohibited from charging any security deposit
for equipment which exceeds the replacement cost to the cable operator.

(2)

A cable operator shall be prohibited from charging any security deposit for cable service which exceeds twice
the basic monthly rate. This shall be in addition to any other security deposit allowable under this paragraph.

(3)

A cable operator shall return a security deposit if the equipment is returned in as good condition as when
provided to the customer, normal wear and tear excepted.

Sec. 23. - Service inquiry logs.
In order to assist the City in assessing the resolution of customer service requests, inquiries and complaints, a cable operator
shall be required to keep and maintain service logs, subject to any limitations imposed by State or Federal law (including any
subscriber privacy limitations). At a minimum, the service inquiry logs should contain the following:
(1)

the date and time of the initial receipt of a service request, inquiry or complaint, together with the date and
time of the initial response;

(2)

the nature of the matter;

(3)

the precise action taken by a cable operator in order to resolve the matter; and

(4)

whether the matter was resolved by allowing a credit or refund of some sort.

In addition to any other right of inspection that the City may possess, it shall have the right to review and inspect a
compilation of the logs. The City shall not have the right of review or inspection for any logs or any information
contained within the logs that are otherwise protected by State or Federal law.
Sec. 24. - Restoration of a subscriber's property.
At any time a cable operator disturbs the yard, residence, or other real or personal property of a subscriber, the cable
operator shall ensure that the subscriber's property is returned, replaced and/or restored to a substantially similar condition as
that in existence prior to the disturbance by the cable operator. The costs associated with both the disturbance and the return,
replacement and/or restoration shall be borne by the cable operator. The requirements imposed upon the cable operator extend
to any subcontractor or independent contractor employed by the cable operator.

225/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Sec. 25. - Disconnection for nonpayment.
A subscriber shall be subject to disconnection for non-payment if the customer fails to comply with reasonable payment
policies disclosed in advance to the subscriber.
Sec. 26. - Voluntary disconnections and downgrades.
A subscriber may at any time request that a particular service tier, pay channel, premium channel, informational service or the
entire cable service be disconnected. In addition, where different levels of service are offered by a cable operator, a subscriber
may request a downgrade from a particular level of service to a less comprehensive or less expensive level of service.
Disconnections or downgrades shall be effective according to reasonable policies disclosed in advance to the subscriber.
Sec. 27. - Protection of subscriber privacy.
A cable operator shall abide by any, and all, subscriber privacy rules or regulations of the Federal, State or Local governments.
Sec. 28. - Resolution of complaints/inquiries.
A cable operator is required to develop a comprehensive complaint/inquiry resolution policy that is consistent with the rules
and regulations outlined in this Ordinance. The City may establish a neutral third-party appeal process to handle
complaints/inquiries that are not satisfactorily resolved at the cable operator level.
Sec. 29. - Use of streets and public ways.
All wires, conduits, cable (coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent), and other property and facilities of a cable operator shall be
located, installed and maintained so as not to endanger or unnecessarily interfere with usual and customary use, traffic and travel
upon the City streets, rights-of-way, easements and public ways.
(1)

If a cable operator's system creates a hazardous or unsafe condition or an unreasonable interference with
property, then the cable operator shall at its own expense voluntarily, or upon request of the City, remove or
move, as appropriate, that part of the system that creates the hazardous condition.

(2)

A cable operator shall not place equipment where it will interfere with the rights of property owners or with
other public utility services or any other service facility that benefits the City or its residents, health, safety or
welfare.

(3)

A cable operator shall, at its expense, protect rights of way, easements and support or temporarily disconnect
or relocate in the same street or other public way, any property of the cable operator when necessitated by
reason of: traffic conditions, public safety, a street closing, street construction or resurfacing, change or
establishment of a street grade, installations of other city utility services, or any improvement, construction or
repair related to health, safety or welfare within five (5) working days upon receipt of written notification by
the City.

(4)

A cable operator shall, at the request of any person holding a building moving permit, temporarily remove,
raise or lower the cable wires to allow the moving of the building. The expense of temporary removal shall be
paid by the person requesting it. The cable operator may require payment in advance. The affected cable
operator shall be given not less than 15 days notice of a contemplated move to arrange for temporary wire
changes.

(5)

A cable operator shall have the authority to trim trees overhanging any streets in the franchise area so as to
prevent branches from coming in contact with the providers wires and cables. The cable operator shall allow
City officials to supervise such tree trimming, if desired, to prevent disputes between home owners and the
226/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

cable operator.
(6)

In those areas of the City where transmission or distribution of both telephone and power companies are
underground or are later placed underground, a cable operator's feeder and drop cables shall also be placed
underground. Any undergrounding of cable performed by the cable operator shall be at its sole expense
within thirty (30) working days upon written notification from the City.

Sec. 30. - Construction standards.
Methods of construction, installation or maintenance and repair of any cable system shall comply with the most current
editions of the National Electrical Safety Code, and the National Electric Code, as affects the construction, installation and
maintenance of electrical supply and communications line and attachments and supports. To the extent that these are
inconsistent with other provisions of a franchise, or State, or local law, then the more stringent shall govern in order to protect the
public health, safety and welfare.
Sec. 31. - System expansion.
A cable operator shall extend cable service to any area within the City that has a density of 35 homes or building passings per
mile, or fractional equivalent, as measured from the extremity of the system nearest the unserved area. A newly installed
subscriber shall not be assessed or apportioned the cost for installation, except for the usual and normal connection fees paid by
subscribers, so long as the system expansion is technically feasible. A cable operator shall not be required to extend its system to
a point which is more that one-half mile from the existing cable system.
Sec. 32. - Permits and licenses.
A cable operator shall obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses required by law, rule, regulation or ordinance, and
maintain the same in full force and effect for as long as required.
Sec. 33. - Construction, re and safety codes.
A cable operator shall construct, operate, maintain, repair, remove, replace or restore the cable system in strict compliance
with all current technical codes adopted by the City, the State, or the United States which are customary to the cable television
industry. The codes referred to specifically include, but are not limited to, construction, fire, safety and zoning codes.
Sec. 34. - Franchise required.
No person or cable operator, other than the City, shall be permitted to construct, operate or maintain a cable system which
requires the laying or positioning of cable (coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent) across the rights-of-way of the City without first
having entered into a franchise agreement with the City.
(1)

The Council may award one or more non-exclusive cable service franchises within its geographical limits;
provided, however, that the council shall not authorize or permit a cable television system to operate within
the City on terms or conditions more favorable or less burdensome to such operator than any other operator.

(2)

A franchised operator shall be selected as part of a public proceeding and hearing which affords due process
to both the City and the applicant. If the applicant is selected as a franchised operator, then the applicant will
enter into a franchise agreement with the City, pursuant to the provisions of Federal, State and local laws and
regulations.

Sec. 35. - Franchise agreement; minimal requirements.
227/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

If the Council awards an applicant a franchise to construct, operate or maintain a cable system in all or part of the City, or
approves a proposal for renewal of a franchise, then a franchise agreement shall be entered into. A newly franchised operator may
not lay any cable until the franchise agreement is executed by the newly franchised operator and the City. At a minimum, a
franchise agreement shall contain provisions for the following:
(1)

The term or duration of the franchise;

(2)

An agreement to comply with the Cable Ordinance;

(3)

Any applicable construction, upgrade or rebuild schedule;

Sec. 36. - Extent of grant of franchise.
Upon an award of a franchise, and the subsequent execution of a franchise agreement, a cable operator may construct, install,
maintain, operate, repair, replace, remove, or restore a cable system within the geographical limits set forth in the franchise
agreement.
(1)

The franchised cable system may utilize the streets, rights-of-way, easements and public ways of the City
subject to terms and conditions of this Ordinance and the Franchise Agreement.

(2)

The franchised operator shall be responsible for obtaining its own easements for private property, including
privately owned utility or street light poles.

(3)

A franchised operator, through a separate pole or utility easement agreement with an affected utility, may
locate the cable system on, or within, the property of the utility company.

Sec. 37. - Franchise term.
The term of this franchise will be for a term, not to exceed 10 (ten) years from the date that franchise agreement, or a
franchise renewal agreement, is approved by the Council.
Council has the right to evaluate the franchise during the fifth year of the term. If the Council finds reason to revoke the
agreement during the evaluation period, the Council must give sixty (60) days written notification to Cable prior to the end of the
initial (5) five year term. This written notification should explain in detail the reasons for not extending the franchise for the
remaining 5 years. The reasons for not extending the franchise the remaining five years include and are not limited to the
following:
(1)

Multiple or repeated violations of the prior franchise agreement;

(2)

Multiple or repeated violations of this ordinance, or any mandated provisions of the Cable Act;

(3)

A continuing and documented pattern of substandard or non-responsive service;

(4)

Reckless disregard for the safety and welfare of the citizens of the City;

(5)

Failure to comply with any construction, rebuild, or upgrade schedule; and

(6)

Failure to timely pay in their entirety any franchise fees or taxes or other charges due to the City.

Sec. 38. - Franchise application.
The City may develop rules and regulations with respect to the submission and processing of applications for a franchise. The
rules and regulations shall primarily be aimed at determining the legal, financial, technical and character qualifications of the
applicant.
Sec. 39. - Franchise fees.
228/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Each franchised operator shall pay to the City franchise fees equal to three percent (3%) of the all revenue items charged by
cable. Said items include but are not limited to the following: hookup fees; basic subscriber service revenue; premium channel
subscriber fees; pay- per-view fees and any and all other revenue generating items. The franchise fees for the privilege of using the
streets, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways and other facilities of the City in the operation of the cable system, and for the
City's supervision during the term of the franchise. If the FCC, Congress or other governmental entity with authority over cable
service allows a franchising authority to increase the franchise fee beyond the above percentage, then the City shall have the
authority to increase the franchise fee to the maximum rate allowable. It is intended that the franchise fees will promote the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City.
Accordingly, the franchise fee shall be deposited into the general revenues of the City, unless otherwise specified.
(1)

Franchise fee payments will be payable in monthly installments on the basis of one twelfth of the prior year's
Gross Revenues, to be adjusted and corrected annually. Monthly payments shall be paid within 30 days of the
end of each month. In the event that any payment due to the city is not paid within 30 days from the date said
payment is due said delinquent payment shall draw interest at one percent (1%) over the prime-lending rate
from the date payment becomes delinquent.

(2)

In the event payment is not timely as set out herein, then and in addition to the provisions of [sec.]39 (1), the
cable operator may be declared in default of the franchise and the City may take action against the cable
operator as authorized in this ordinance.

(3)

The acceptance of any payment shall not be construed as a release of, or an accord or satisfaction of, any
claim that the City might have for further or additional sums payable under the terms of this Ordinance, or for
any other performance or obligation of a franchised operator.

(4)

Payments of compensation made by a franchised operator to the City pursuant to this Ordinance shall be
considered in addition to, and exclusive of, any and all authorized taxes, business license fees, or other levies
or assessments presently in effect or later adopted.

(5)

A franchise fee does not include any items excluded by Federal law.

Cable shall also pay $3.50 pole rent per year for each pole used in the operation of the cable system. Said pole rent
is payable annually at the end of each year.
Sec. 40. - Assignment of franchise.
A cable operator's franchise may not be assigned in whole or in part without the City's prior written approval. For purposes of
this paragraph, "assignment" shall mean the transfer, sale, or any other form of assignment of a cable operator's franchise, to
include any transaction or action which effectively or actually changes ownership from one person or entity to another to include
the transfer of 50% or more of the ownership interest of an entity. Any attempted assignment without prior written approval shall
constitute a default in the franchise. A proposed assignment shall be subject to the following:
(1)

At least 120 days before a proposed assignment is scheduled to become effective, the franchised operator
shall make a written request to the Council for the City's approval of the proposed assignment.

(2)

The City will not unreasonably withhold its consent to an assignment. However, in making its determination,
the Council may consider the following criteria:
a.

Qualifications of the proposed assignee;

b.

Financial ability and stability of the proposed assignee;

c.

The experience of the proposed assignee which may include conducting an investigation of the proposed
assignee's service record in other communities;

d.

Legal integrity of the proposed assignee or transferee;

e.

If requested by the Council, submittals from the proposed assignee concerning any changes it intends to
229/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

make in the operation and maintenance of the present cable system;
f.

The corporate connection, if any, between the franchised operator and the proposed assignee;

g.

The economic viability or non-viability of the cable system in the future, based upon certain factors
including the impact of the purchase price on the City and/or the proposed assignee; and

h.

Any other aspect of the proposed assignee's background which could affect the health, safety and
welfare of the citizenry of the City as it relates to the operation of the cable system.

(3)

Nothing in this section shall restrict the City from considering other criteria, and in particular, any criteria
established under State or Federal law, rule or regulation.

(4)

Before an assignment or transfer is approved by the City, the proposed assignee shall execute an agreement
that it has read, understood, and intends to abide by any existing franchise agreement.

(5)

In the event of any approved assignment, the assignee shall assume all obligations and liabilities of the former
franchised operator, except as noted in the following subsection.

(6)

The City's consent to an assignment shall not relieve the former franchised operator of its liabilities under the
franchise agreement until the assignment actually takes place unless specifically relieved by Federal or State
law or by the Council at the time an assignment is approved. In the event of an assignment, the former
franchised operator shall remain liable for any then incurred franchise fees for the period governed by the
applicable State statute of limitations.

Consent shall not be required for an assignment to a wholly-owned subsidiary entity of the current parent entity of
a cable operator, whether the ownership is direct or indirect, such as through other wholly-owned intermediate
subsidiaries. In addition, consent shall not be required for the granting of a security interest in the cable operator's
system including its franchise. However, if the holder of the security interest repossesses, forecloses or takes other
action concerning its collateral, it shall dispose of the system within a reasonable period of time and the disposition
by the holder of the security interest shall be considered an assignment subject to the provisions of this section.
Sec. 41. - Public service.
A cable operator shall furnish, upon request, one outlet and one converter for each public school building, municipal office
building, public library, fire station, police station which is passed by the operator's cable system. Basic cable service and the next
additional service tier shall be provided at no charge. An initial connection will be made at no charge with additional connections
to be made for the cost of time and materials only. All premium channels shall be provided to the municipal office building at no
charge. All of the buildings set out in this section shall also be provided with internet hookup at no charge. Emergency warning and
notification systems shall also be provided to the city.
Sec. 42. - Technical standards.
A cable operator shall comply with any rules and regulations of the FCC concerning technical operation, signal quality and
consumer electronics equipment compatibility.
Sec. 43. - Default.
When the franchised operator violates an integral provision of this ordinance, or acts so as to compromise the corporate
character, or legal, financial or technical integrity and/or stability of the cable system or the franchised operator to a degree that
the interests of the subscribers and users are negatively affected, then the franchised operator shall be considered in default of
this ordinance.
(1)

Examples of a default shall include, but are not limited to: bankruptcy, insolvency, failure to pay taxes or
franchise fees, failure to receive written City approval for an assignment, or failure to substantially abide by
230/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

the integral terms and conditions of the franchise agreement or this ordinance. Events in the nature of force
majeure or conditions which cannot be corrected because they are matters beyond the immediate control of
the affected cable operator shall not be considered a default.
(2)

In the event that a default occurs, the City shall notify the affected cable operator in writing of the specific
violation (s).

(3)

The cable operator shall have 30 days from the receipt of the written notice to bring itself into compliance so
that it is no longer in default of its franchise or this ordinance, as the case may be.

(4)

If the cable operator fails to cure its default within the time period provided for above, the matter shall be set
for public hearing before the Council to be held within 75 days after the notice of default was mailed to the
cable operator. Written notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be sent by certified mail to the
cable operator and the surety at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.

(5)

At the time of the hearing, the cable operator may present information on the current status of the alleged
default in the franchise agreement. If the cable operator fails to attend the hearing where a continuance of the
hearing has not been granted by the Council, then the franchised operator may be declared in default of the
franchise agreement.

(6)

If the default has not been resolved at the time of or as a result of the hearing, the Council may, after the
public hearing, direct the cable operator to take corrective action within a specified period of time, or may
declare the cable operator in default of the franchise agreement, and revoke or terminate the franchise. The
Council's action shall be mailed to the cable operator and the surety within 15 days of the Councils action.

(7)

If the Council directs corrective action to be taken and the cable operator or surety does not rectify the default
within the time specified, then the Council may without further notice declare the cable operator to be in
default and revoke or terminate the franchise.

Sec. 44. - Penalties.
Subject to the provisions of the preceding paragraph concerning notice and hearing, any violation or failure to abide by, and
comply with, any provision or requirement of this Ordinance shall be a violation of this ordinance, and shall be subject to civil
remedies as provided by State or Federal law, including monetary fines where permissible.
Sec. 45. - Federal legislation, rules and regulations; franchise subject to amendment.
In addition to any requirements contained within this Ordinance, all cable operators shall be expected to comply with all
applicable provisions of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition
Act of 1992, all later legislation directed at controlling or regulating cable operators, and any rules and regulations issued pursuant
to this legislation. In addition, any franchise issued pursuant to this ordinance shall be subject to amendment to incorporate any
federal legislation, rules or regulations which become effective after the date of the franchise.
Sec. 46. - Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance will be deemed severable, and if any provision of this ordinance is held illegal, void, or invalid
under applicable law, that provision may be changed to the extent reasonably necessary to make the provision legal, valid and
binding. If any provision of this ordinance is held illegal, void or invalid in its entirety, the remaining provisions of this ordinance
will not be affected.
Sec. 47. - Repeal of Con icting Ordinances.

231/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Ordinance Nos. 908, 912 and 915 codified at §12-601.01 through §12-612 and all other ordinances and parts of ordinances in
conflict with this ordinance are repealed to the extent of the conflict. Provided, this ordinance shall not be construed to affect any
rights, liabilities, duties or causes of action existing, or actions pending at the time when this ordinance becomes effective.
Sec. 48. - E ective Date.
This Ordinance shall be known as Ordinance No. 1068 and shall become effective upon its passage, approval and publication
as provided by law.
ARTICLE II. - NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE

FOOTNOTE(S):
(44)

Editor's note— Ord. No. 1111, §§ 1—13, adopted January 19, 2004, amended Appendix A, Article II, §§ 12-401—12-412.03, in its

entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, Article II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1982, §§ 12401—12-412, 12-412.01, 12-413.03; Ord. No. 976, §§ 1, 3, adopted November 1, 1993; Ord. No. 1038, §§ 1—7, adopted February 16,
1998; Ord. No. 1039, §§ 1, 3, adopted February 16, 1998; and Ord. No. 1040, § 1, adopted February 16, 1998.
Sec. 1. - Granting; rights of grantee.
That in consideration of the benefits to be derived by the City of Minden, Nebraska, hereinafter referred to as "Municipality",
and its inhabitants from the construction and operation of a gas transmission and distribution system in said Municipality there be
and hereby are granted to Kinder Morgan, Inc., a corporation, its successors and assigns, hereinafter collectively referred to as
"Grantee", the right, permission and authority to construct, maintain and operate a gas transmission and distribution system
within the limits of said Municipality, as the same now exists or may hereafter be extended for a period of twenty-five (25) years
from and after February 1, 2004 and for said purpose there are hereby further granted to Grantee the right, permission and
authority during said period to lay, install, construct, maintain and operate in, under, upon, over, across and along all of the
streets, alleys, bridges and public places within the present and future corporate limits of said Municipality all mains, pipes,
services, conduits and structures necessary or convenient for the furnishing, transmission, distribution and sale of gas whether
artificial, natural, mixed or otherwise for lighting, heating, domestic, industrial and other uses, and for transmitting such gas into,
through or beyond the limits of said Municipality to other cities, villages and customers.
The Municipality reserves the right at the end of each ten (10) year period from and after February 1, 2004, to renegotiate the
provisions of this ordinance with the Grantee, its successors or assigns, and in the event that such negotiations shall not have
resulted in a mutually agreeable amendment to said ordinance within a period of ninety (90) days from the end of such ten (10)
year period, then and in such event, the Municipality, reserves the right to cancel this franchise by repeal of this ordinance within
sixty (60) days following the said ninety (90) day period. If no renegotiation is instituted by the Municipality within said ninety (90)
day period or if the franchise is not canceled within said sixty (60) day period, this franchise shall continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. No. 1111, § 1, 1-19-04)

Sec. 2. - Installation of mains, pipes and services.
That all mains, services, and pipes laid or installed under this grant shall be so located and laid as not to obstruct or interfere
with any water pipes, drains, sewers or other structures already installed, and all such mains, services and pipes shall be installed
subject to approval of the Committee on streets and alleys or other authorized representatives of said Municipality.
Grantee, in doing any work in connection with said mains, pipes and services shall avoid, so far as practicable, interfering with
the use of any street, alley or
232/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

public place, and where the paving or surface of any street, alley or public place is disturbed, Grantee at its own expense and
in a manner satisfactory to the authorized representatives of said Municipality shall replace such paving or surface in as good
condition as before such work was commenced.
In the event that at any time hereafter said Municipality shall lawfully elect to change or alter the grade of any street, alley or
public place, or to construct new or additional water or sewer lines, Grantee, upon being directed by resolution of the Mayor and
City Council of said Municipality so to do, shall where the same becomes necessary by reason of said change of grade or
construction of water or sewer lines, move or relay its mains or service pipes; provided, that Municipality shall confer with Grantee
and seek Grantee's input during the initial planning and engineering phase of any change of grade or replacement or construction
of Grantee's pipelines, and Municipality and Grantee shall take reasonable steps to avoid or minimize the need for Grantee to
move or relay its mains or service pipes. Grantee shall be compensated by Municipality for costs incurred by Grantee in moving or
relaying its lines or facilities or raising or lowering the same where required by the construction of new or additional or the
replacement of existing water or sewer lines.
(Ord. No. 1111, § 2, 1-19-04)

Sec. 3. - Rules of business conduct.
Grantee shall have the right to make all such reasonable rules and regulations in the conduct of its business as it may deem
necessary or expedient, including without limitation meter deposits in such amounts as may be required to assure payment of
bills. Grantee shall make such reasonable extensions of its mains from time to time as may be required to furnish service within
said Municipality to parties making application therefor; but Grantee shall not be required to make any extension for the purpose
of serving any consumer or consumers if Grantee is, for any reason, unable to obtain an adequate supply of gas to warrant the
construction of said extension nor where the estimated revenue to be derived from serving such new consumer or consumers is
not sufficient to show an adequate return upon the total additional investment required to serve such consumer or consumers.
Whenever the delivery or supply capability of Grantee's system, due to any cause whatsoever not limited to force majeure, is
such that Grantee is unable to deliver to consumers served by Grantee the quantity of gas which the consumers require, Grantee
shall have the right to prescribe reasonable rules and regulations for allocating the available quantities of gas among such
consumers.
(Ord. No. 1111, § 3, 1-19-04)

Sec. 4. - Utilization of approved construction materials.
Grantee in the construction of said gas system within the limits of said Municipality shall use tested and approved pipes,
material and equipment.
(Ord. No. 1111, § 4, 1-19-04)

Sec. 5. - Map of mains.
Grantee at all times will keep a map in the office of Grantee or of the Clerk of said Municipality, showing the size and location
of its mains laid in said distribution system in said Municipality. This map will be replaced each May with a revised map showing
new construction for the previous calendar year.
(Ord. No. 1111, § 5, 1-19-04)

Sec. 6. - Restoration of public places upon removal of pipes and equipment.

233/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

In case the available supply of gas shall at any time fail or become insufficient to supply the needs of the public of said
Municipality, or should Grantee for any reason be unable to furnish the service herein contemplated, or upon the termination of
this franchise for any reason whatsoever, Grantee shall have the right to remove any and all of its pipe and other equipment or
property from said Municipality, but in such event Grantee shall restore the streets, alleys and other public places to as good
condition as before such removal, and will hold said Municipality harmless from damage and expense incident to such removal.
(Ord. No. 1111, § 6, 1-19-04)

Sec. 7. - Liability of grantee.
Grantee shall be required, and by the acceptance hereof agrees, to save harmless said Municipality from and against all lawful
claims and demands, and from all loss and expense necessarily incurred as a result thereof, arising out of the negligence of
Grantee in the construction, removal, replacement, inspection or repair of any mains, pipes, services or appliances of Grantee, or
in the use and operation thereof during the term of this Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1111, § 7, 1-19-04)

Sec. 8. - Annual payment by grantee to city.
In consideration of the rights and privileges herein granted, the Grantee shall assess, effective the first billing cycle after this
franchise becomes effective, to residential (commonly known as domestic) and commercial customers within the City of Minden,
Nebraska, a franchise tax or fee equivalent to $0.015 per therm for gas delivered to residential and commercial customers within
the Municipality on Grantee's distribution system. Grantee shall pay to the City Treasurer an annual payment for each year of the
duration of this franchise, in an amount equal to the franchise fee or tax funds collected by Grantee hereunder. Payment shall be
made on or before March 1st of each year for the preceding year and each such payment shall be accompanied by a statement
supporting the payment.
Such payment shall be in lieu of any and all other fees, charges, licenses, taxes or assessments which the Municipality may
impose for the rights and privileges herein granted or for the privilege of doing business within the Municipality and, in the event
any such fee, charge, license, tax or assessment shall be imposed by the Municipality, the payment to be made in accordance with
the provisions of this section shall be refunded in an amount equal to the annual burden of such fee, charge, license, tax or
assessment imposed upon the Grantee. Ad Valorem property taxes imposed generally upon all real and personal property within
the Municipality shall not be deemed to affect the obligation of the Grantee under this section.
(Ord. No. 1111, § 8, 1-19-04)

Sec. 9. - Franchise subject to governmental legislation.
This Ordinance and the respective rights and obligations of the parties hereunder are subject to all present and future valid
governmental legislation or regulation, whether federal or state, of duly constituted authorities which have jurisdiction over this
Ordinance, one or both of the parties, or any transaction hereunder.
(Ord. No. 1111, § 9, 1-19-04)

Sec. 10. - Termination of franchise.
This Ordinance and the rights, authority and franchise herein and hereby granted shall terminate and be of no further force
and effect:
(a)

Unless within six (6) months after final passage of this Ordinance Grantee shall file with the Clerk of said
Municipality a written acceptance hereof; also

(b)

If and when, after such acceptance Grantee shall file with the Clerk of said Municipality a surrender hereof in
234/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

writing.
(Ord. No. 1111, § 10, 1-19-04)

Sec. 11. - Ordinances repealed.
Ordinance No. 819, passed under date of October 2, 1978 and Ordinance No. 1040, passed under date of February 16, 1998
are hereby repealed and of no further force or effect.
(Ord. No. 1111, § 11, 1-19-04)

Sec. 12. - De nition.
Wherever the term "Grantee" is used herein it shall be held to mean and include Kinder Morgan, Inc., its successors and
assigns.
(Ord. No. 1111, § 12, 1-19-04)

Sec. 13. - E ective date.
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its final passage and publication as required by law and upon
acceptance by Grantee shall be held to constitute a binding contract between said Municipality and Grantee, subject to its terms
and conditions
(Ord. No. 1111, § 13, 1-19-04)

ARTICLE III. - TELEPHONE FRANCHISE

FOOTNOTE(S):
(45) Editor's

note— Printed herein is the telephone franchise, as adopted by the City of Minden. The absence of a history note

indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been
corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state
statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are
indicated by brackets.
12-501. - Grant.
That the Nebraska Telephone Company, its successors and assigns, be and hereby are granted right-of-way for the erection
and maintenance of poles and wires, and all appurtenances thereto, for the purpose of transacting a general telephone and
telegraph business through, upon and over the streets, alleys and public grounds of the City of Minden, provided that said
company shall at all times when requested by the proper authorities permit their poles and fixtures to be used for the purpose of
placing and maintaining thereon free of charge any wires which may be necessary for the use of the police or fire departments of
the City of Minden. And further provided that such poles and wires shall be erected so as not to interfere with ordinary travel
through such streets and alleys.
(Code 1982, § 12-501)

12-502. - Removing poles, etc.
Whenever it shall be necessary for any person to move along or across any of said streets or alleys, any vehicle or structure of
such height or size as to interfere with poles and wires, [grantee] shall, upon receiving 24 hours' notice, served in writing upon
their agent or manager at Minden, and upon receiving payment of the actual cost thereof, temporarily remove such poles and
235/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

wires from such place as must necessarily be crossed by such vehicle or structure, and provided that this section shall not be
construed to apply to circus or other parades upon the public streets and alleys.
(Code 1982, § 12-502)

12-503. - Violations, penalty.
Any person who shall interfere with, cut, injure, remove, break or destroy any of the poles, wires, fixtures, instruments or
other property of the said telephone company, or its successors, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction
thereof, shall be fined in any sum not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00; and any person who shall paste, tack or fasten on
the poles or fixtures of said company any sign, poster, advertisement or banner, shall be fined in any sum not less than $5.00, not
[nor] more than $50.00.
(Code 1982, § 12-503)

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1982 CODE
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1982 Code which are included herein. Sections of the 1982
Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent
nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table.

1982 Code

Section

Section

this Code

1-100, 1-101

2-51, 2-52

1-102.01

2-101

1-102.02

2-67

1-102.03

2-102

1-103

2-67

1-103.01

2-116

1-104

2-53

1-104.01

2-54

1-105

2-66

1-105.01

2-67

1-201, 1-202

2-26, 2-27

1-301—1-306

26-1—26-6

236/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

2-101

38-26

2-201—2-204

66-28—66-31

2-205

66-27

2-207

66-26

2-301—2-303

30-27—30-29

2-304, 2-305

30-31, 30-32

2-401

10-2

2-401.01, 2-401.02

10-2

2-402

10-3

2-403—2-408

30-33—30-38

2-409, 2-410

10-4

2-411

10-1

3-101—3-104

10-52—10-55

3-105

10-58

3-106

10-51

3-108.01, 3-108.02

10-59

3-109

10-33

3-109.01

10-34

3-109.02

10-36

3-110

10-38

3-112

10-32

3-113

10-35

3-114

10-37

237/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

3-201, 3-202

10-5

4-101

34-36

4-102—4-104

34-37

4-105, 4-106

34-38, 34-39

4-201—4-205

14-26—14-30

4-301, 4-302

34-87

4-303—4-306

34-88—34-91

4-307

34-86

4-501

90-103

4-502

90-102

4-503

90-104

4-504

90-101

4-801

14-211

4-901

34-112

4-902

34-111

4-1001, 4-1002

34-26

4-1101, 4-1102

34-61, 34-62

4-1103

34-64

4-1105, 4-1106

34-65, 34-66

4-1107.01, 4-1107.02

34-63

5-101, 5-102

82-51, 82-52

5-103.01

82-97

5-103.02

82-53

238/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

5-104.01, 5-104.02

82-31

5-105.01, 5-105.02

82-76

5-106, 5-107

82-3, 82-4

5-108—5-110

82-7—82-9

5-111

82-2

5-113

82-1
82-96

5-201

82-151

5-301

46-1

5-302.01

46-71

5-302.02

46-2

5-302.03, 5-302.04

46-71

5-302.05—

46-72—46-74

5-302.07
5-303.01, 5-303.02

46-46

5-303.03

46-48

5-304

46-47

5-305.01—

46-27

5-305.03
5-306—5-310

46-28—46-32

5-311.01, 5-311.02

46-33, 46-34

5-312

46-49

5-313.01, 5-313.02

46-50

5-313.03

46-26
239/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

5.103.03

82-99

6-201

50-27

6-201.01

50-26

6-401

50-3

6-501, 6-502

50-1, 50-2

7-101, 7-102

6-1, 6-2

7-102.01

6-3

7-105.01

6-5

7-106

6-6

7-107

6-8

7-108.02

6-31

7-201, 7-202

18-96, 18-97

7-301

18-57

7-302, 7-303

18-71, 18-72

7-304

18-58

7-305

18-73

7-306—7-308

18-59—18-61

7-309

18-56

8-102

14-52
14-234

8-103

14-238

8-106

14-231

240/268

7/12/2019

8-201.01—

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

14-176

8-201.22
8-202

14-177

8-203.01—

14-178

8-203.04
8-203.05

14-179

8-204.01—

14-180

8-204.08
8-205.01—

14-181

8-205.08
8-206

14-182

8-206.01—

14-182

8-206.08
8-207

14-183

8-207.01—

14-183

8-207.06
8-208.01—

14-184

8-208.07
8-209

14-185

8-209.1—

14-185

8-209.10
8-210

14-186

8-210.01—

14-186

8-210.05
8-211.01, 8-211.02

14-187

8-212

14-188

8-213.01

14-189
241/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

8-301

14-51

8-302

14-53

8-303—8-305

14-55—14-57

8-306.01, 8-306.02

14-54

8-702—8-715

90-42—90-55

8-716

90-57

8-717

90-56

8-718

90-58

8-719

90-41

9-101—9-104

70-27—70-30

9-105

70-26

9-201, 9-202

70-31

9-402, 9-403

82-54

9-501, 9-502

90-26, 90-27

9-503.02

90-73

9-503.03

90-71

9-503.04—

90-74—90-77

9-503.07
9-503.08

90-72

9-504, 9-505

70-53, 70-54

9-506

70-51

9-602—9-606

70-77—70-81

9-607.01, 9-607.02

70-82

242/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

9-608

70-76

9-801, 9-802

82-5, 82-6

10-101

14-108

10-201

14-121

10-202—10-204

14-122

10-205, 10-206

14-123, 14-124

10-301—10-306

14-146—14-151

10-307.01,

14-152

10-307.02
10-308.01,

14-153

10-308.02
10-309

14-154

10-401—10-409

14-125—14-133

10-501—10-504

14-106—14-109

10-505.01,

14-107

10-505.02
10-507

14-110

10-701

14-1

10-801—10-803

86-41—86-43

10-901—10-903

86-28—86-30

10-904

86-26

10-1001

86-56

10-1003

86-27

11-101

18-28

243/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

11-103.01

58-41

11-103.02

58-27

11-103.03—

58-42—58-45

11-103.06
11-103.08

58-26

11-106

18-1

11-107

18-98

11-110—11-115

18-28

11-117—11-120

18-29—18-32

11-122

18-26

12-101

86-101

12-102.01

86-102

12-102.02

86-85

12-103—12-106

86-103—86-106

12-107

86-116

12-108

86-86

12-109

86-78

12-110.01—

86-76

12-110.04
12-111

86-80

12-112

86-79

12-113, 12-114

86-82, 86-83

12-115

86-117

12-116

14-232
244/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

12-117

86-77

12-118

86-81

12-120

86-118

12-122

86-87

12-123

86-84

12-124—12-127

86-131—86-134

12-201

14-81

12-202

14-83

12-203

14-82

12-204

14-85

12-205.01,

14-84

12-205.02
12-301

86-163

12-302

86-161

12-303

86-164

12-304.01—

86-165

12-304.04
12-305

86-173

12-306

86-177

12-307

86-183

12-308

86-176

12-309

86-166

12-310

86-172

245/268

7/12/2019

12-311.01,

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

86-169

12-311.02
12-312, 12-313

86-170, 86-171

12-314

86-182

12-315

86-185

12-316

86-162

12-317.01—

86-167

12-317.04
12-318, 12-319

86-159, 86-160

12-320

86-184

12-321

86-174

12-322.01,

86-168

12-322.02
12-323

86-175

12-324

86-178

12-325

86-217

12-326

86-216

12-327

86-181

12-328

86-219

12-329

86-218

12-330

86-180

12-331

86-179

12-332, 12-333

86-201, 86-202

12-334

86-158

246/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

12-335

86-156

12-336

86-187

12-337

86-186

12-338, 12-339

86-188, 86-189

12-401—12-412

12-401—12-412

12-412.01

12-412.01

12-413.03

12-413.03

12-501—12-503

12-501—12-503

13-101—13-103

54-26—54-28

13-201

42-1

13-202

42-26

13-202.01,

42-28, 42-29

13-202.02
13-203

42-30

13-204

42-2

13-205

42-27

13-301

22-2

13-302.01,

22-31, 22-32

13-302.02
13-303.01

22-33

13-303.02

22-3

13-304, 13-305

22-33, 22-34

13-307.01,

22-7

13-307.02

247/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

13-308

22-35

13-309, 13-310

22-5, 22-6

13-311.01,

22-8

13-311.02
13-312

22-9

13-313

22-4

13-314

22-1

15-101

62-1

15-102—15-105

62-26—62-29

15-106—15-108

62-31—62-33

15-109

62-30

15-201.01,

94-5

15-201.02
15-202

94-6

15-202.01—

94-6

15-202.37
15-203.01—

94-56—94-64

15-203.09
15-204

94-65

15-205.01,

94-66

15-205.02
15-205.03,

94-67

15-205.04
15-205.05,

94-68

15-205.06

248/268

7/12/2019

15-206.01,

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

94-69

15-206.02
15-206.03—

94-70

15-206.05
15-207.01—

94-71

15-207.04
15-208.01,

94-96, 94-97

15-208.02
15-209

94-98

15-209.01—

94-98

15-209.03
15-210.01,

94-99

15-210.02
15-211.01

94-3

15-211.02

94-1

15-212.01—

94-31—94-33

15-212.03
15-213.01

94-2

15-214.01,

94-4

15-214.02
15-214.04,

94-4

15-214.05
15.401.01—15.401.05

14-2

16-101

66-46

16-101.01

66-47

16-102

66-48

100-102

86-157
249/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1982 Code. Ordinances adopted since the
1982 Code, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature.

Ordinance

Date

Section

Number
869

Section
this Code

10-17-83

870

12-19-83

874

6- 4-84

1(4-901)

34-112

2(4-902)

34-113

3(4-903)

34-111

1

82-97

1(5-104.04)

82-98

2(5-103.05)

82-98

3

82-96

883

9-16-85

5(8-101.05)

14-236

887

6- 2-86

1(7-108.03)

6-32

888

6- 2-86

1(8-101.06)—

14-262—14-264

1(8-101.08)

893

11- 3-86

1(8-101.09)

14-261

1—4

10-52—10-55

5(3-104.01)

10-56

6, 7

10-57, 10-58

8

10-51

9

10-59

10

10-33

11

10-34

250/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

13

10-32

894

2-16-87

1

82-76

895

3-16-87

1

22-32

4

22-8

6(13-311.02), 6(13-311.03)

22-8

896

3-16-87

1

82-76

898

4- 6-87

1

94-66

900

8- 3-87

1(8-101.01)

14-233

901

8- 3-87

1(3-115.01—

10-39

3-115.03)
905

11-16-87

908

5-16-88

1(7-105)

6-4
App. A, Art. I

1(12-606)

App. A,
§ 12.606.06

1(12-606.03—

App. A,

12-606.06)

§ 12-606.06

1(12-607.01—

App. A,

12-607.05)

§ 12.607.05

1(12-608.01), 1(12-608.02)

App. A,
§ 12.608.02

1(12-609.01—

App. A,

12-609.03)

§ 12-609.03

1(12-610.01—

App. A,

12-610.11)

§ 12-610.11

1(12-611.01), 1(12-611.02)

App. A,
§ 12-611.02

251/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

1(12-612.01—

App. A,

12-612.05)

§ 12-612.05

909

5-16-88

1

14-110

912

8- 1-88

1

App. A,
§ 12.606.06

914

9-19-88

1

82-99

915

10-17-88

1

App. A,
§ 12.601.01

2

App. A,
§ 12.603.12

916

12-19-88

920

7-17-89

924

12- 4-89

1(8-101.03)

14-237

2(8-101.04)

14-235

3

14-234

4

14-238

5

14-231

1

2-26

1(100-101.01), 1(100-

54-51, 54-52

101.02)
1(100-101.03)

54-53
54-66

1(100-101.04)

54-67

927

5- 7-90

1

2-53

936

3- 4-91

1, 2

22-7, 22-8

940

3- 2-92

1

34-38

941

3-17-92

1

22-33

2

22-3
252/268

7/12/2019

942

943

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

5- 4-92

6- 1-92

3(13-303.03)

22-7

1

22-35

2

22-5

4, 5

22-33, 22-34

1(11-102)

58-66

2(11-102.01)

58-67

3(11-102.02)

58-68

4(11-102.03)

58-69

5(11-102.04)

58-70

6(11-102.05)

58-71

7(11-102.06)

58-72

8(11-102.07)

58-86

9(11-102.08)

58-87

10(11-102.09)

58-88

12(11-102.11)

58-90

14(11-102.13)

58-91

15(11-102.14)

58-92

16(11-102.15)

58-93

17(11-102.16)

58-94

18(11-102.17)

58-95

19(11-102.18)

58-96

20(11-102.19)

58-97

21(11-102.20)

58-98

253/268

7/12/2019

944

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

6- 1-92

22(11-102.21)

58-99

23(11-102.22)

58-100

24(11-102.23)

58-1

25(11-102.24)

58-121

26(11-102.25)

58-131

27(11-102.26)

58-132

28(11-102.27)

58-133

1—3

30-27—30-29

4(2-303.01)

30-30

5(2-303.02)

30-26

6, 7

30-31, 30-32

945

6-15-92

1—11

30-51—30-61

946

6-15-92

1

34-136

3, 4

34-136

1

42-2

2

42-27

948

7-20-92

950

9- 8-92

1

86-56

952

9-21-92

1

34-137

953

10-19-92

1

14-81

954

10-19-92

1

14-51

955

10-19-92

1

14-106

956

11-23-92

1, 2

78-26, 78-27

957

12- 7-92

1(12-340)

86-231

254/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

2(12-341)

86-232

3-22(12-342—12-361)

86-233

23(12-362)

86-234

23(12-362.1—

86-234

12-362.4)
24(12-363)

86-235

24(12-363.1)

86-236

24(12-363.2—

86-237

12-363.5)
24(12-363.6—

86-238

12-363.15)
958

12-21-92

11(1-102.10)

58-89

959

3- 1-93

1

82-99

960

2- 1-93

1

70-52

963

5- 3-93

1

66-32

969

6-22-93

1

14-52

2

94-4

3

94-64

974

10-18-93

2, 3

10-40

976

11- 1-93

1

App. A,
§ 12-413.01

3

App. A,
§ 12-413.01

977

11- 1-93

1—7

App. A,
§ 12-413.02(7)

978

12- 6-93

1(11-301)—1(11-303)

18-121—18-123
255/268

7/12/2019

979

980

982

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

12- 6-93

12-20-93

1- 3-94

2(5-114)

82-121

3(5-115)

82-122

4(5-116)

82-123

5(5-117)

82-124

6(5-118)

82-125

7(5-119)

82-126

8(5-120)

82-127

9(5-121.04)

82-128

10(5-122.02)

82-129

1(5-123)

82-100

2(5-124)

82-100

2(5-124.01—124.06)

82-100

1(8-801)

14-286

2(8-802)

14-287

3(8-803)

14-288

4(8-804)

14-289

5(8-805)

14-290

983

1- 3-94

1(100-101.03)

54-66

985

2- 7-94

1

2-116

987

4-18-94

1

94-67

988

5- 2-94

1

18-27

989

5- 2-94

1

86-119

990

5- 2-94

1

94-67

256/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

992

9- 6-94

1—7

Adopting ord., p.ix

993

9- 6-94

1

86-187

994

9-20-94

1

995

9-20-94

1

70-31

996

10-17-94

1

94-4(d)(4)

998

11- 7-94

1

1000

2-20-95

1

46-1—46-74

2

94-6

3

94-67

4

94-68

5

94-99

1

82-102

2

82-102.1

3

82-98

1005

6-19-95

4

Added

Dltd

Added

82-103

5-15-95

1012

10-16-95

1

1013

12- 4-95

1

1014

12-18-95

1

1015

1-15-96

1

14-52

1016

7- 1-96

1

30-30

2

30-38

1, 2

14-262, 14-263

8-22-96

Added

82-98(b)

1006

1018

1—3

14-265

Added

82-101—82-102.1
82-99(g)
6-4(a)

Added

18-124—18-126

257/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

3

14-265

1019

9- 3-96

1—3

Added

82-55—82-57

1022

10-21-96

1

1023

11- 4-96

1

Added

82-99(h)

2

Added

82-10

Rpld

18-96—18-98

82-98

1024

11- 4-96

1

1025

11-18-96

1—12

1027

2- 3-97

1

Added

Dltd
Added

66-1—66-12
74-1
74-1—74-6
74-26—74-28
74-36—74-44
74-51—74-59
74-66, 74-67
74-76—74-86
74-91—74-96
74-106
74-116—74-122
74-131—74-134
74-141—74-146

1029

2-17-97

1, 2

Added

10-41, 10-42

1030

4-21-97

1

62-29

1031

8-18-97

1, 2

10-31, 10-32

3

10-37

258/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

4

Dltd

1—3

Added

10-38

1032

7-21-97

1035

10-20-97

1

1036

10-20-97

1—5

Added

90-59—90-63

1037

2- 3-98

1—4

Added

50-41—50-44

1038

2-16-98

1—7

App. A, § 12-413.02

1039

2-16-98

1, 3

App. A, § 12-413.01

1040

2-16-98

1

App. A, § 12-410

1047

6- 1-98

1

82-76(a)(5)

1048

6- 1-98

1

Added

82-77

1049

7- 6-98

1

Rpld

58-71, 58-72

66-31

2

58-86

3

58-87

4

Rpld

5
6

8

Rpld

58-90—58-96
58-97

Rpld

9

10- 5-98

58-88
58-89

7

1054

2-121—2-123

58-98—58-100
58-131

10

Rpld

58-132, 58-133

11

Added

58-134

12

Added

58-135

1

Rpld

2-121—2-123

259/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

1055

11- 2-99

1

86-167(d)

1062

12- 6-99

1

1063

12- 6-99

1

86-169(a)

1064

3- 6-00

1

94-5

1065

6- 5-00

1—3

1066

7- 5-00

1—3

82-55—82-57

1067

8- 7-00

1

82-78

1068

9-18-00

1069

10-16-00

1

1070

11-20-00

1—7

Added

2-141—2-147

1074

5-23-01

1—4

Added

62-51—62-54

1080

11-19-01

1082

5- 8-02

1—8

1083

5- 8-02

1

66-46

1087

6- 3-02

1

54-66(c), (d)

1088

8-22-02

1—3

1090

11- 7-02

Added

Added

Added

66-33

34-67—34-69

App. A, 1—48

1

Added

Added
Added

Added

1

82-79

82-99(i)
34-70—34-77

10-43—10-45
Ch. 62, Art. III (title)
62-51—62-54

1098

3-17-03

1

Added

Ch. 14, Art. VI, Div. 6, §§
14-201—14-208

1099

5-20-03

1

Added

1100

6- 2-03

1

1101

7- 7-03

1—8

1-22
6-4

Added

86-190

260/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

1104

8-18-03

1

Added

90-28

1106

9- 2-03

1, 2

1107

10-20-03

1

Added

82-99(j)

1110

1- 5-04

1

Added

Ch. 14, Art. XI, §§ 14-301—

Ch. 14, Art. VI, Div. 6 (note)

14-321
1111

1-19-04

1—13

Rpld

App. A, Art. II, §§ 12-401—
12-413.03

Added

App. A, Art. II, §§ 1—13

1112

2- 2-04

1

1115

7- 6-04

1

1116

9- 7-04

1

94-5(a)

1120

10-17-05

1

38-26

1122

2- 7-06

1

82-98

1123

2- 7-06

1

1124

3- 6-06

1

1126

6- 5-06

1

Rpld

34-67—34-69

2

Added

Ch. 35, §§ 35-1—35-15

Rpld

2-27

1130

1-15-07

1

1131

1-15-07

1

1132

4- 2-07

6-4
Added

Added

82-80

94-7
82-98(e)

94-69(a)(4)
82-2
82-4
82-9
82-52
82-96
261/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Rpld

82-98(e)
82-100

Rpld

82-102, 82-102.1
82-126
82-128
82-129(c)

1133

3- 5-07

1

Added

10-46

1135

9- 4-07

1

1137

10-15-07

1

1138

11- 5-07

1

90-46

1140

11-19-07

1

94-5

1141

3-17-08

1

1142

8- 4-08

1

10-39

1145

2- 2-09

1

2-26

1146

1-19-09

1

2-54

1147

2- 2-09

1

94-5

1151

7-21-09

1

1154

11-16-09

1

94-5
Added

Added

Added

10-47

82-58

82-(b)—(d)
70-53

2

Added

70-55

Amd.

14-51

1156

5-17-10

1

1159

6- 7-2010

1

6-7

1162

10- 4-10

1

Added

82-99(k)

1164

12- 6-10

1

Added

86-88—86-92

262/268

7/12/2019

1165

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

2- 7-11

1

58-1
Rpld

58-26, 58-27

Rpld

58-41—58-45

Added

58-2, 58-3
58-67
58-69, 58-70
58-86, 58-87
58-89
58-97
58-121
58-131
58-134, 58-135

1166

5- 2-11

1

82-99(a)

STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Reissue Revised
Statutes, 1943.

R.R.S. 1943

Section
this Code

9-201 et seq.

Ch. 18, Art. III

11-104 et seq.

2-52

12-401 et seq.

22-31

12-402

Ch. 22

12-1001

Ch. 22

263/268

7/12/2019

13-304

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

Ch. 54
Ch. 54, Art. III

13-2001 et seq.

66-2

16-201

1-6

16-246

1-6
1-8

16-247

1-1

16-403—16-405

1-1

16-901

1-2

ch. 17

2-51

17-105

2-26

17-108

2-54

17-114

94-5

17-119

2-67
Ch. 70

17-120

Ch. 18, Art. IV

17-121

Ch. 30, Art. II
38-26

17-123

Ch. 30, Art. II

17-124

2-102

17-130 et seq.

Ch. 34

17-142

Ch. 14, Art. VIII

17-145

Ch. 86, Art. II

264/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

17-508 et seq.

Ch. 70

17-512

82-5

17-521

82-6

17-523 et seq.

70-27

17-525

Ch. 18, Art. II

17-526

10-52

17-549, 17-550

Ch. 34

17-555

Ch. 90

17-563

Ch. 90

17-610

2-116

17-913 et seq.

Ch. 86, Art. II

17-948 et seq.

Ch. 54

17-951

54-26

17-967 et seq.

Ch. 42

17-970 et seq.

Ch. 86, Art. IV

17-1001

38-26

18-132

1-4

18-503

Ch. 86, Art. II

18-801 et seq.

Ch. 90

18-1302

62-1

18-1306

62-1

18-1716

Ch. 62

18-1720

Ch. 30, Art. II

265/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

18-1722

14-211

18-2101 et seq.

Ch. 62

ch. 19, art. 9

94-31
94-33

19-901 et seq.

Ch. 62
Ch. 94
94-4

19-903

62-1

19-916 et seq.

Ch. 74

19-922

Ch. 14

19-924 et seq.

Ch. 62, Art. II

19-926

62-26

19-929

62-32
74-121

19-2101 et seq.

Ch. 66

19-4301

58-1

24-517(6)

1-8

24-532

1-9

25-2221

1-2

28-101 et seq.

Ch. 50

28-106

1-8

28-601 et seq.

1-7

28-1321

Ch. 30, Art. II

266/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

28-1440 et seq.

Ch. 58, Art. II

ch. 32

26-1

39-601 et seq.

Ch. 82

39-697 et seq.

82-3

39-704

70-52

39-6,112

1-8

49-801 et seq.

1-2

49-802(8)

1-3

49-802(10)

1-20

51-201 et seq.

Ch. 42

53-1,116

6-33

53-101 et seq.

Ch. 6

53-101.01

6-33

53-124(5) or (9)

6-33

53-132

6-31

53-134

Ch. 6
6-32

53-134.04

6-33

53-168.06

6-33

54-601 et seq.

Ch. 10

54-605

10-58

ch. 60, art. 3

30-53

ch. 60, art. 1901 et seq.

30-61

267/268

7/12/2019

Minden, NE Code of Ordinances

64-206

74-79

70-2001—

86-88

70-2005
86-91
71-1557

46-1
94-6

71-3305

86-157

71-4401 et seq.

Ch. 10

71-4403

10-54

71-4406

10-59

71-4412

10-53

71-4601 et seq.

Ch. 46

75-323 et seq.

Ch. 58
58-121

77-2701—

78-26

77-27,135
77-27,185,

78-26

77-27,186
81-216.01 et seq.

18-1

81-520

Ch. 34

81-829.36 et seq.

34-26

81-1501 et seq.

66-2

81-1506

Ch. 30, Art. II

81-2101 et seq.

Ch. 86, Art. III

268/268

