



CHAPTER I ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE I - ELECTED OFFICIALS
SECTION 1-101: ENUMERATED
The electors of the City shall elect a mayor at large and one City Council member
from each ward in each city election year; provided that when and if voting by
wards is suspended, four Council members shall be elected at large in each election
year. A total of eight Council members shall serve the City at all times.
Councilmembers shall be electors of the City and residents of the ward from
which they were elected. Terms of all elected officials shall commence on the
first regularly scheduled City Council meeting in December of the year following
their election. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-302.01)
SECTION 1-102 CITY MAYOR; SELECTION AND DUTIES
The mayor of the City shall have the general and immediate control over all
property and officials of the City, whether elected or appointed. He/she shall preside
at all meetings of the City Council, and may vote when such vote shall be
decisive and the Council is equally divided on any pending matter, legislation or
transaction; and the mayor shall, for the purpose of such vote, be deemed to be
a member of the Council. His/her signature must appear on the city clerk's minutes
of all meetings, and he/she must sign all resolutions which have been
passed and warrants for the payment of money when ordered by the City Council;
provided, any ordinance vetoed by the mayor may be passed over his/her veto
by a two-thirds (2/3) vote by the members of the City Council. However, if the
mayor neglects or refuses to sign any ordinance and returns it to the Council with
his/her objections in writing at the next regular Council meeting, the same shall
become a law without his/her signature.
The mayor shall from time to time communicate to the Council such information
and recommendations as, in his/her opinion, may improve the City. He/she may
require any city official at reasonable intervals to exhibit his/her accounts and
make reports to the Council on any subject pertaining to his/her office. He/she
shall have the power to remit fines or pardon any offense arising under the ordinances
of the City. He/she may remove at any time an appointed police officer of
the City, subject to the provisions of Section 1-1304 herein.
The mayor's territorial authority for the enforcement of health and quarantine ordinances
shall extended two miles beyond the City’s corporate limits. He/she
shall also have such other duties as the City Council may by resolution confer
upon him/her, or in any other matters which the laws of the State of Nebraska
repose in him/her. He/she shall be elected at the city election, and shall serve a
four-year term of office. Any candidate for mayor must have resided within the
City for 40 days prior to filing for the said office and must in addition be a qualified
taxpayer.
The mayor shall require all city officials and employees to give him/her a receipt
for any and all articles belonging to the City now in their charge and all that may
hereafter come under their charge. All outgoing city officers and employees shall
deliver over to the mayor or account to him/her for all articles used by them in the
duties of their office whenever their term of office or employment with the City
ceases. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-312 through 16-316)
SECTION 1-103: CITY COUNCIL; ACTING PRESIDENT
The City Council shall elect one of its own body each year who shall be styled
the president of the Council, and who shall preside at all meetings of the City
Council in the absence of the mayor. In the absence of the mayor and the president
of the Council, the council members shall elect one of their own body to occupy
the mayor's place temporarily, who shall be styled acting president of the
Council. Both the president of the Council and the acting president of the Council,
when occupying the position of the mayor, shall have the same privileges as
the other members of the City Council; and all acts of the president of the Council
or acting president of the Council, while so acting, shall be as binding upon the
City Council and upon the City as if done by the elected mayor. (Ref. Neb. Rev.
Stat. §16-402)
SECTION 1-104: CITY COUNCIL; SELECTION AND DUTIES
The members of the City Council shall be elected and serve for a four year term.
One council member from each ward shall be elected at each election so that
terms are staggered. The City Council shall be the legislative division of the city
government, and shall perform such duties and have such powers as may be authorized
by law. The City Council shall maintain the peace, regulate business,
protect the public health and safety, and assess such taxes and fees as are necessary
and appropriate in the exercise of these functions. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat.
§16-302.01)
SECTION 1-105: CITY COUNCIL; ORGANIZATION
City Council members of this City shall take office and commence their duties on
the first regular meeting in December following their election. The newly elected
council members who have qualified as prescribed by law, together with the
members of the City Council holding over, shall assemble in a regular meeting at
the hour and place hereinafter prescribed and perfect the reorganization of the
City Council as herein provided, and all appointive offices in which the terms of
incumbents are expired shall be filled by appointment. After the said meeting
has been called to order, the city clerk shall report to the City Council the names
of all City Council members-elect who have qualified for their respective offices,
and this report shall be spread upon the minutes of the meeting preceding the roll
call. Each ward of the City shall be represented by two council members. No
person shall be eligible who is not at the time of his/her election an actual resident
of the ward for which he/she is qualified; and should any council member
move from the ward from which he/she was elected, his/her office shall thereby
become vacant. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-302.01)
SECTION 1-106: RESIGNATIONS
All resignations of the mayor and council members shall be in writing and submitted
to the City Council for acceptance. Resignations shall not be effective until
accepted by formal action of the City Council. No resignations shall be accepted
unless a quorum for conducting business will remain after such acceptance of
such resignation. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §32-562)
SECTION 1-107: ELECTED OFFICIALS; VACANCY
Vacancies in city elected offices shall be filled by the mayor and Council for the
balance of the unexpired term except as provided in this section. Notice of a vacancy,
except a vacancy resulting from the death of the incumbent, shall be in
writing and presented to the Council at a regular or special meeting and shall appear
as a part of the minutes of such meeting.
The City Council shall at once give public notice of the vacancy by causing to be
published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City or by posting in
three public places in the City the office vacated and the length of the unexpired
term.
The mayor shall, within four weeks after the regular meeting at which such notice
has been presented, or upon the death of the incumbent, call a special meeting
of the City Council, at which time the mayor shall submit the name of a qualified
elector to fill the vacancy for the balance of the unexpired term.
No officer who is removed at a recall election or resigns after the initiation of the
recall process shall be appointed to fill the vacancy resulting from his/her removal
or the removal of any other member of the City Council during the remainder of
his/her term of office.
Upon a majority vote of approval by the City Council, the vacancy shall be filled.
If a majority vote is not reached, the nomination shall be rejected and the mayor
shall, at the next regular meeting, submit the name of another qualified elector. If
the vote on the nominee fails to carry by majority vote, the mayor shall continue
at such meeting to submit the names of qualified electors and the City Council
shall continue to vote upon such nominations until the vacancy is filled.
The mayor shall cast his/her vote only in case of a tie vote of the City Council.
All City Council members shall cast a ballot for or against each nominee. The
mayor and Council may, in lieu of filling a vacancy in a city office as provided
above in this section, call a special city election to fill such vacancy.
If there are vacancies in the offices of a majority of the members of the City
Council, there shall be a special municipal election conducted by the Secretary of
State to fill such vacancies. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §32-568, 32-569)
SECTION 1-108: MAYOR; VACANCY
Whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor, or in case of his/her disability
or absence, the president of the Council shall exercise the office of mayor until
such vacancy is filled or such disability is removed, or in case of temporary absence,
until the mayor returns.
When the successful candidate for mayor shall be prevented from assuming office,
the incumbent mayor shall not be entitled to hold over the term, but such office
shall automatically become vacant and the president of the Council shall exercise
the office of mayor until such vacancy is filled.
If the president of the Council shall for any cause assume the office of mayor for
the remainder of the unexpired term, there shall be a vacancy on the Council
which shall be filled as provided in Section 1-106. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §32-568)
SECTION 1-109 ELECTED OFFICIALS; QUALIFICATIONS; RESTRICTIONS
ON OTHER EMPLOYMENT OR ELECTIVE OFFICE
Elected officials shall be residents and registered voters of the City.
A. The mayor and members of the Council shall hold no other elective or appointive
office or employment with the City.
B. For purposes of this section, (1) “elective office” means any office which has
candidates nominated or elected at the time of a statewide primary election; any
office which has candidates nominated at the time of a statewide primary election
and elected at the time of a statewide general election; any office which has candidates
elected at the time of a statewide general election; any office which has
candidates nominated or elected at a city election; and any office created by an
act of the Legislature which has candidates elected at an election and includes
an office which is filled at an election held in conjunction with the annual meeting
of a public body created by an act of the Legislature; and (2) “high elective office”
means a member of the Legislature, an elective office described in Article IV,
Sections 1 or 20, or Article VII, Sections 3 or 10 of the Constitution of Nebraska,
or a county, city or school district elective office.
C. No candidate for member of the Legislature or an elective office described in
Article IV, Sections 1 or 20, or Article VII, Sections 3 or 10 of the Constitution of
Nebraska shall be eligible to file as a candidate, to petition on the ballot as a
candidate, to accept nomination by a political party or by party convention, caucus
or committee to fill a vacancy or to be declared a write-in candidate for more
than one elective office to be filled at the same election, except for the position of
delegate to a county, state or national party convention. No candidate for any
other high elective office shall be eligible to file as a candidate, to petition on the
ballot as a candidate, to accept a nomination by a political party or by party convention,
caucus or committee to fill a vacancy or to be declared a write-in candidate
for more than one elective office to be filled at the same election.
D. Except as provided in subsection E or G of this section, no person shall be
precluded from being elected or appointed to or holding an elected office for the
reason that he/she has been elected or appointed to or holds another elected office.
E. No person serving as a member of the Legislature or in an elective office described
in Article IV, Sections 1 or 20 or Article VII, Sections 3 or 10 of the Constitution
of Nebraska shall simultaneously serve in another elective office which is
filled at an election held in conjunction with the annual meeting of a public body.
F. Whenever an incumbent serving as a member of the Legislature or in an elective
office described in Article IV, Sections 1 or 20 or Article VII, Sections 3 or 10
of the Constitution of Nebraska assumes another elective office, except an elective
office filled at an election held in conjunction with the annual meeting of a
public body, the office first held by the incumbent shall be deemed vacant.
G. No person serving in a high elective office shall simultaneously serve in any
other high elective office.
H. Notwithstanding subsections E through G of this section, any person holding
more than one high elective office on September 13, 1997, shall be entitled to
continue to serve the remainder of all terms for which he/she was elected or appointed.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-305, 16-311, 32-109, 32-603, 32-604)
SECTION 1-110 COMPENSATION; CITY OFFICIALS
The compensation of any elective official of the City shall not be increased or diminished
during the term for which he/she shall have been elected except when
there has been a merger of offices; provided, the compensation of the members
of the City Council or a board or commission may be increased or diminished at
the beginning of the full term of any member whether or not the terms of one or
more members commence and end at different times. No elected official may be
rehired at a greater salary if he/she resigns and desires to be rehired during the
unexpired term of office. Such person may be rehired after the term of office during
which he/she resigned at a greater salary. All salaries shall be set by ordinance
of the City Council and will be available for public inspection at the office of
the city clerk. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-310, 16-326)
SECTION 1-111: COMPENSATION; CONFLICT OF INTEREST
For purposes of this section, "officer" shall mean (a) any member of any board or
commission of the City, (b) any appointed official if such city official (i) serves on
a board or commission which spends and administers its own funds and (ii) is
dealing with a contract made by such board or commission, or (c) any elected
city official. Unless specified otherwise, volunteer firefighters and ambulance
drivers shall not be considered officers for purposes of this section with respect
to their duties as firefighters and ambulance drivers.
No officer of the City shall be permitted to benefit from any contract to which the
City is a party. The existence of such an interest in any contract renders the contract
voidable by decree of a court of competent jurisdiction as to any person who
entered into the contract or took assignment thereof with actual knowledge of the
prohibited conflict. An action to have a contract declared void under this section
may be brought by the City or by any resident thereof and must be brought within
one year after the contract is signed or assigned. Any such decree may provide
for the reimbursement of any person for the reasonable value of all money,
goods, material, labor or services furnished under the contract to the extent that
the City has benefited thereby.
The prohibition in this section shall apply only when the officer or his/her parent,
spouse, or child (a) has a business with which the individual is associated or a
business association which shall mean a business: (1) in which the individual is a
partner, director, or officer or (2) in which the individual or a member of the individual's
immediate family is a stockholder of a closed corporation stock worth
$1,000.00 or more at fair market value or which represents more than 5% equity
interest, or is a stockholder of publicly traded stock worth $10,000.00 or more at
fair market value or which represents more than 10% equity interest or (b) will
receive a direct pecuniary fee or commission as a result of the contract; provided,
however, if such officer (a) is an employee of the business involved in the contract
and (b) has no ownership interest or will not receive a pecuniary fee, such
officer shall not be deemed to have an interest within the meaning of this section.
The provisions of this section shall not apply if the interested officer:
A. Makes a declaration on the record to the City Council regarding the nature
and extent of his/her interest, prior to official consideration of the contract;
B. Does not vote on the matter of granting the contract, except that if the number
of members of the Council declaring an interest in the contract would
prevent the Council, with all members present, from securing a quorum on
the issue, then all members may vote on the matter; and
C. Does not act for the City as to inspection or performance under the contract
in which he/she has an interest.
The receiving of deposits, cashing of checks, and buying and selling of warrants
and bonds of indebtedness of any city by a financial institution shall not be considered
a contract under the provisions of this section. The ownership of less than
5% of the outstanding shares of a corporation shall not constitute an interest
within the meaning of this section. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections
A through C above, if an officer's parent, spouse or child is an employee of the
City, the officer may vote on all issues of the contract which are generally applicable
to all employees or all employees within a classification and do not single
out his or her parent, spouse, or child for special action. If an officer has the
power to employ personnel and he/she hires his/her parent, spouse, or child,
such officer shall disclose the hiring pursuant to subsections 1 through 5 below,
except that if the parent, spouse, or child is already employed in the position at
the time the officer takes office and such position does not change, no disclosure
need be made. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any contract
entered into with an interested officer shall be subject to applicable competitive
bidding requirements and shall be fair and reasonable to the City.
The city clerk shall maintain, separately from other records, a ledger containing
the information listed in subsections 1 through 5 of this section about every contract
entered into by the City in which an officer has an interest as specified
above for which disclosure is made as provided in subsections A through C
above. Such information shall be kept in the ledger for five years from the date
of the officer's last day in office and shall include:
1. Names of the contracting parties;
2. Nature of the interest of the officer in question;
3. Date that the contract was approved;
4. Amount of the contract; and
5. Basic terms of the contract.
The information supplied relative to the contract shall be provided to the clerk not
later than ten days after the contract has been signed by both parties. The ledger
kept by the clerk shall be available for public inspection during the normal
working hours of the office in which it is kept.
An open account established for the benefit of any City or entity thereof with a
business in which an officer has an interest shall be deemed a contract subject to
the provisions of this section. The statement required to be filed pursuant to this
section shall be filed within ten days after such account is opened. Thereafter,
the clerk shall maintain a running account of all amounts purchased on the open
account. Purchases made from petty cash or a petty cash fund shall not be subject
to the provisions of this section.
Any officer who knowingly violates the provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. §49-
14,103.01 through 49-14,103.03 shall be guilty of a Class III misdemeanor. Any
officer who negligently violates Neb. Rev. Stat. §49-14,103.01 through 49-
14,103.03 shall be guilty of a Class V misdemeanor.
All contracts involving $100.00 or less in which an officer of such City may have
an interest are exempt from the above and foregoing provisions.
No officer, including volunteer firefighters and ambulance drivers, shall receive
any pay or perquisites from the City other than his/her salary. The City Council
shall not pay or appropriate any money or other valuable thing to pay a person
who is not an officer for the performance of any act, service or duty, which shall
come within the proper scope of the duties of any officer of the City. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat. §16-502, 18-305 through 18-312, 49-14,103.01 through 49-14,103.03,
70-624.04)
ARTICLE II - APPOINTED OFFICIALS
SECTION 1-201: APPOINTMENT; REMOVAL
The mayor, with the consent of the City Council, may appoint such officers as
shall be required by ordinance or otherwise required by law. The mayor, by and
with the consent of the City Council, shall appoint a number of regular police officers
as may be necessary. The City Council may establish and provide for the
appointment of members of a law enforcement reserve force as provided by law.
All police officers and other appointed officials may be removed at any time by
the mayor with the approval of a majority of the Council; except that if the City
has a city water commissioner, he or she may at any time, for sufficient cause,
be removed from office by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the City Council. Removal of
police officers may be appealed pursuant to Section 1-1304. (Ref. Neb. Rev.
Stat. §16-308, 16-309)
SECTION 1-202: MERGER OF OFFICES
The City Council may, at its discretion, by ordinance, combine and merge any
elective or appointive office or employment or any combination of duties of any
such office(s) or employment(s), except mayor and Council members, with any
other elective or appointive office or employment so that one or more such office(
s) or employment(s) or any combination of duties of any such office(s) or
employment(s) may be held by the same officer or employee at the same time.
The office(s) or employment(s) so merged and combined shall always be construed
to be separate and the effect of the combination or merger shall be limited
to a consolidation of official duties only. The salary or compensation of the officer
or employee holding the merged or combined office(s) or employment(s) shall
not be in excess of the maximum amount provided by law for the salary or compensation
of the office(s) or employment(s) so merged and combined. For purposes
of this section, volunteer firefighters and ambulance drivers shall not be
considered officers. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-305, 16-318.01)
SECTION 1-203: CLERK-TREASURER POSITION CREATED
The appointive offices of city clerk and city treasurer are hereby combined and
merged in accordance with the authority granted to the City Council by Section 1-
202. The office so merged and combined shall always be construed to be separated,
and the effect of the combination or merger shall be limited to a consolidation
of official duties only. The salary of the officer holding the merged offices
shall not be in excess of the maximum amount provided by law for the salary of
the offices so combined. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-318.01)
SECTION 1-204: CITY CLERK
The city clerk shall attend the meetings of the City Council and keep a correct
journal of the proceedings of that body. He/she shall keep a record of all outstanding
bonds against the City and when any bonds are sold, purchased, paid
or cancelled, said record shall show the fact. At the end of the fiscal year, he/she
shall make a report of the business of the City transacted through the clerk's office
for the year. That record shall describe in particular the bonds issued and
sold during the year and the terms of the sale with each and every item and expense
thereof. He/she shall file all official bonds after the same shall have been
properly executed and approved. He/she shall make the proper certificate of
passage which shall be attached to original copies of all bond ordinances hereafter
enacted by the City Council.
The city clerk shall issue all licenses, permits and occupation tax receipts authorized
by law and required by the city ordinances. He/she shall collect all occupation
taxes and license money, except where another city officer is specifically
charged with that duty. He/she shall keep a register of all licenses granted in the
City and the purpose for which they have been issued.
The city clerk shall permit no records, public papers or other documents of the
City kept and preserved in the office to be taken therefrom, except by such officers
of the City as may be entitled to the use of the same, but only upon their leaving
a receipt therefor. He/she shall keep all the records of his or her office, including
a record of all licenses issued by him or her in a blank book with a proper
index. He/she shall include as part of his/her records all petitions under which
the City Council shall order public work to be done at the expense of the property
fronting thereon, together with references to all resolutions and ordinances relating
to the same. He/she shall endorse the date and hour of filing upon every paper
or document so filed in his/her office. All such filings made shall be properly
docketed. Included in his/her records shall be all standard codes, amendments
thereto, and other documents incorporated by reference.
The city clerk shall keep an accurate and complete account of the appropriation
of the several funds and draw, sign and attest all warrants ordered for the payment
of money on the particular fund from which the same is payable. At the end
of each month, he/she shall then make a report of the amounts appropriated to
the various funds and the amount of the warrants drawn thereon. Nothing herein
shall be construed to prevent any citizen, official, or other person from examining
any public records during the time that the clerk's office is regularly open for
business.
The city clerk shall deliver all warrants, ordinances and resolutions under his/her
charge to the mayor for his/her signature. He/she shall also deliver to officers,
employees and committees all resolutions and communications which are directed
at said officers, employees or committees. With the seal of the City,
he/she shall duly attest the mayor's signature to all ordinances, deeds and papers
required to be attested to when ordered to do so by the City Council. Within
30 days after any meeting of the City Council, the city clerk shall prepare and
publish the official proceedings of the City Council in a legal newspaper of general
circulation in the City, and which was duly designated as such by the City
Council. Said publication shall set forth a statement of the proceedings thereof
and shall also include the amount of each claim allowed, the purpose of the
claim, and the name of the claimant, except that the aggregate amount of all payroll
claims may be included as one item. Between July 15 and August 15 of each
year, the employee job titles and the current annual, monthly or hourly salaries
corresponding to such job titles shall be published. Each job title published shall
be descriptive and indicative of the duties and functions of the position. The
charge for such publication shall not exceed the rates provided by the statutes of
the State of Nebraska. Said publication shall be charged against the General
Fund. He/she shall then keep in a book with a proper index copies of all notices
required to be published or posted by the city clerk by order of the City Council or
under the ordinances of the City. To each of the file copies of said notices shall
be attached the printer's affidavit of publication, if the said notices are required to
be published, or the city clerk's certificate under seal where the same are required
to be posted only.
The city clerk shall receive all objections to creation of paving districts and other
street improvements. He/she shall receive the claims of any person against the
City, and in the event that the said claim is disallowed in part or in whole, the city
clerk shall notify such claimant, his or her agent, or attorney by letter within five
days after such disallowance, and the city clerk shall then prepare transcripts on
appeals of any disallowance of a claim in all proper cases.
The city clerk may charge a reasonable fee for certified copies of any record in
the office as set by resolution of the City Council. He/she shall destroy city
records under the direction of the State Records Board pursuant to Sections 84-
1201 through 84-1220; provided, the City Council shall not have the authority to
destroy the minutes of the city clerk, the permanent ordinances and resolution
books, or any other records classified as permanent by the State Records Board.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-317, 19-1102 through 19-1104, 84-1201 through 84-
1220, 84-712)
SECTION 1-205: CITY TREASURER
The city treasurer shall be the custodian of all money belonging to the City.
He/she shall keep a separate account of each fund or appropriation and the debits
and credits belonging thereto. He/she shall issue duplicate receipt for all
moneys received by him/her for the City. He/she shall give to every person paying
money into the city treasury a receipt therefor, specifying the date of payment
and the account paid. One of the receipts shall be filed with his/her monthly report,
and the last copy of the said receipt shall be kept on file in his/her office.
His/her books and accounts shall always be open for inspection by any citizen of
the City whenever any city fiscal record, audit, warrant, voucher, invoice, purchase
order, requisition, payroll check, receipt or other record of receipt, cash or
expenditure involving public funds is involved. He/she shall cancel all bonds,
coupons, warrants and other evidences of debt against the City, whenever paid
by him/her, by writing or stamping on the face thereof, "Paid by the city treasurer,"
with the date of payment written or stamped thereon. He/she shall collect all
special taxes, allocate special assessments to the several owners, and shall obtain
from the county treasurer a monthly report as to the collection of delinquent
taxes. The treasurer's daily cashbook shall be footed and balanced daily and
he/she shall adopt such bookkeeping methods as the City Council shall prescribe.
He/she shall invest and collect all money owned by, or owed to, the City
as directed by the City Council. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-318, 77-2210 through
77-2212, 84-712)
SECTION 1-206: TREASURER'S MONTHLY REPORT
The city treasurer shall, at the end of each and every month, and such other
times as the City Council may deem necessary, render an account to the City
Council under oath showing the financial state of the City at that date, the
amount of money remaining in each fund and the amount paid therefrom, and the
balance of money remaining in the treasury. He/she shall accompany the said
account with a statement of all receipts and disbursements, together with all warrants
redeemed and paid by him/her. He/she shall also produce depository evidence
that all city money is in a solvent and going bank in the name of the City.
If the city treasurer shall neglect or fail for the space of ten days from the end of
each and every month to render his/her accounts as aforesaid, the City Council
shall, by resolution, declare the office vacant, and appoint some person to fill the
vacancy. The city treasurer shall be present at each regular meeting of the City
Council at which time he/she shall read and file his/her monthly report. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat. §16-318))
SECTION 1-207: TREASURER'S ANNUAL REPORT
The city treasurer shall publish in a legal newspaper having general circulation
within the City, within 60 days following the close of the municipal fiscal year, a
report of the activities of his/her office, which said report shall show in detail all
receipts, disbursements, warrants outstanding, and the debit or credit balance of
the City. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-1101)
SECTION 1-208: CITY ATTORNEY
The city attorney is the City's legal advisor, and as such he/she shall commence,
prosecute and defend all suits on behalf of the City. When requested by the City
Council, he/she shall attend meetings of the City Council and shall advise any
city official in all matters of law in which the interests of the City may be involved.
He/she shall draft such ordinances, bonds, contracts and other documents as
may be required in the administration of the affairs of the City. He/she shall examine
all bonds, contracts and documents on which the City Council will be required
to act. He/she shall prepare complaints, attend and prosecute violations
of the city ordinances when directed to do so by the City Council. Without direction,
he/she shall appear and prosecute all cases for violation of the city ordinances
that have been appealed to and are pending in any higher court. He/she
shall also examine the ordinance records when requested to do so by the City
Council and shall advise and assist the city clerk as much as may be necessary
to the end that each procedural step will be taken in the passage of each ordinance
to insure that they will be valid. The City Council shall have the right to
compensate the city attorney for legal services on such terms as the City Council
and the city attorney may agree, and to employ any additional legal assistance
as may be necessary out of the funds of the City. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-319)
SECTION 1-209 CITY POLICE CHIEF
The City Police Chief shall direct the police work of the City and shall be responsible
for the maintenance of law and order. When requested to do so, he/she
shall act as sergeant-at-arms at council meetings. He/she shall file the necessary
complaints in cases arising out of violations of city ordinances and shall
make all necessary reports required by the city ordinances or the laws of the
State of Nebraska.
The Police Chief, or his/her designee, shall be responsible for maintaining and
properly policing nuisance violations in the City and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the City, shall have the full authority to execute notices and issue citations
for violations of such nuisance ordinances of the City. The Police Chief,
or his/her designee, also shall be responsible for maintaining and properly policing
animal control violations in the City, and shall have the full authority to execute
notices and issue citations for violations of such animal control ordinances
of the City. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-225, 16-323)
SECTION 1-210: CITY POLICE OFFICERS
City police officers shall be expected to be conversant with city and state laws
and shall have the duty to file such complaints and reports as may be required by
the city ordinances and the laws of the State of Nebraska. The city police,
whether regular or special, shall have the power to arrest all offenders against
the laws of the State of Nebraska or the City, by day or by night, and keep the
said offenders in the city jail or some other place to prevent their escape until trial
can be held before the proper official of the State of Nebraska or the City. It shall
be the duty of every city police officer making a lawful arrest to search all persons
in the presence of some other person, whenever possible, and shall carefully
keep and produce to the proper judicial official upon the trial everything found
upon the person of such prisoners. All personal effects other than contraband
or evidence of criminal activity so taken from prisoners aforesaid shall be restored
to them upon their release. Any city police officer who shall willfully fail,
neglect or refuse to make an arrest, or who purposely and willfully fails to make a
complaint after an arrest is made, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction shall be fined. Police officers shall have full power and authority
to call on any person whenever necessary to assist them in performing public duties;
and failure, neglect or refusal to render such assistance shall be deemed a
misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a fine. It shall be unlawful for the
City Council to retain any city police officer in that position after he/she shall have
been duly convicted of the willful violation of any law of the United States of
America, the State of Nebraska or any ordinance of the City, except minor traffic
violations. No law enforcement official shall have any interest in any establishment
having a liquor license. Suitable uniforms and badges shall be furnished to
the city police by the City. Any member who shall lose or destroy the same shall
be required to pay the replacement costs, and in the event that any member shall
leave the force, he/she shall immediately deliver his/her badge to the police chief.
The City Council may from time to time provide the city police with such equipment
and transportation as may be essential in the performance of their official
duties. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-225, 16-323)
SECTION 1-211: CITY ENGINEER
The city engineer shall make a record of the minutes of his/her surveys and all
other work done for the City. He/she shall, when directed by the City Council,
accurately make all plats, sections, profiles and maps as may be necessary in
the judgment of the City Council. He/she shall, upon request of the City Council,
make estimates of the costs of labor and material which may be done or furnished
by contract with the City, and make all surveys, estimates and calculations
necessary for the establishment of grades, bridges, building of culverts,
sewers, electric light system, waterworks, power plant, public heating system,
curbing and gutters, and the improvement of streets and erection and repair of
buildings, and shall perform such other duties as the City Council may require.
All records of the special engineer shall be public records which shall belong to
the City and shall be turned over to his/her successor. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-
320, 16-321)
SECTION 1-212: SPECIAL ENGINEER
The City Council may, whenever they deem it expedient, employ a special engineer
to make or assist in making any particular estimate or survey. Any such estimate
or survey shall have the same validity and serve in all respects as though
the same had been made by the city engineer. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-322)
SECTION 1-213 RECREATION DIRECTOR
1. There is hereby created the position of Recreation Director. The Recreation
Director shall be appointed by the Mayor, and his/her appointment shall be subject
to confirmation by the City Council. The Recreation Director, as a Mayoral
appointee, is subject to removal only as set forth in Section 1-201. The Mayor
shall set the compensation for the Recreation Director , subject to confirmation
by the City Council.
2. The Recreation Director, subject to the specific direction of the City Council
through the Mayor and subject to the general supervision of the City Administrator,
shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
a. to have general charge of all recreation programs at the Community
Center, Aquatic Park, Senior Center, and other recreational
facilities;
b. to develop a comprehensive community recreation program, and
to coordinate and administer all such recreation programs, including
those at the Community Center, Aquatic Park, Senior Center,
and other recreational facilities;
c. to make detailed reports to the Mayor and City Council regarding
the comprehensive community recreation program and the operations
of the Community Center, Aquatic Park, Senior Center, and
other recreational facilities;
d. supervise the full-time and part-time staff of the Community
Center, Aquatic Park, Senior Center, and other recreational facilities;
e. prepare and maintain all necessary and required reports and
records pertaining to public works;
f. coordinate screening and interviewing of all candidates for
recreation facilities jobs and make recommendations regarding hiring
to the City Administrator;
g. coordinate capital improvement projects with the Public Works
Director; and
h. participate in the preparation of the budget for the comprehensive
community recreation program.
SECTION 1-214 REPEALED
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 1775)
SECTION 1-215: STREET AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
SUPERINTENDENT
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 1776)
SECTION 1-216 CITY ADMINISTRATOR
The city administrator is the non-elected head of city government under the direction
and control of the mayor and City Council. The city administrator is appointed
by the mayor upon approval of a majority of the City Council and may be
removed at any time upon notice given by the mayor after approval by a majority
of the City Council.
The city administrator is the administrative supervisor of all city departments.
Except for purposes of inquiry and except as managed by the mayor and City
Council through its liaison committee, the mayor and City Council shall manage
the affairs of the City through the city administrator.
The city administrator shall direct the affairs of the City through planning and
coordination of functions. He/she will coordinate the operations of the departments
with the department heads. He/she will also ensure compliance with city
procedures and policies; promote training programs; and foster good employee
relations.
The city administrator shall:
1. Keep the mayor and City Council fully advised about the City's
financial condition and the City's needs, prepare the annual estimates
of revenues and expenditures, and prepare a proposed
budget to present a complete financial plan to the mayor and City
Council prior to the Council's consideration and adoption of the annual
appropriation ordinance; and supervise and control the budgeted
expenditures.
2. Initially review the department heads' proposed discipline and
discharge of an employee to ensure compliance with legal requirements
and to determine if it is necessary to refer the matter to the
city attorney for review before department heads take action. The
city administrator shall also ensure that the City complies with the
city Civil Service laws. The city administrator may also temporarily
transfer employees between departments, divisions and services to
meet emergencies.
3. Attend all meetings of the City Council and report any matter
concerning city affairs; and attend such other meetings of departments
and officials as these duties require or as directed by the
mayor and Council.
4. Investigate the affairs of the City and make recommendations to
the mayor and Council for action deemed necessary or expedient
for the good of the city government.
5. Investigate, or have investigated, all complaints filed against any
employee, department, division or service of the City and to report
such investigation with recommendations to the mayor and Council.
6. Serve as purchasing agent of the City; to purchase or contract
or supervise the same for all supplies and contractual services
needed by any department or agency of the City which derives its
support wholly or in part from the City, in accordance with purchasing
procedures as prescribed by this subsection, and such rules
and regulations as the Administrator shall adopt for the internal
management and operation of his or her duties as purchasing
agent, and such other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed
by the Mayor and/or the City Council.
7. Perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as
required by ordinance or prescribed by resolution of the mayor and
Council.
The city administrator shall not participate in any political activity on behalf of
candidates or issues involving public trust except for the casting of an individual
ballot. The administrator shall be an officer of the City within the meaning of
Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-502, and shall be subject to and bound by its provisions.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-308)
SECTION 1-217: UTILITIES SUPERINTENDENT
The utilities superintendent shall be the official who shall have the immediate
charge of the sewer and water departments of the City. The utilities superintendent
shall be under the direction and control of the city administrator at all times.
He/she shall be appointed by the mayor in the manner of other appointed officials
and may be removed by a majority vote of the City Council for any good and sufficient
cause. The utilities superintendent shall have the immediate control of the
water plant, pump house and machinery and appliances used in connection with
producing and distributing water to inhabitants of the City and the sewerage systems
of the City. The utilities superintendent shall read or cause to be read the
water meters of the customers of the water department. He/she shall supervise
and inspect repairs and maintenance work on the city water and sewer systems.
He/she shall enforce the laws of the City relating to the water and sewer departments
as well as carry out any order or directive of the city administrator. All
employees under his/her direction shall obey his/her orders. The utilities superintendent
or his/her duly authorized agent shall have free access at proper hours of
the day to all parts of each premises and building to or in which water or sewer
service is furnished to examine the pipes and fixtures and ascertain whether
there is any disrepair or violation of city law. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-308, 17-
541, 17-543)
SECTION 1-218: BUILDING INSPECTOR
The building inspector is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions
of the city code pertaining to building construction and repair. For such
purpose, he/she shall have the powers of the city police. Whenever any building
or construction work is being done contrary to the provisions of the building code,
electrical code, plumbing code or gas code, it shall be the duty of the building inspector
to order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged
in doing or causing the work to be done. Any such person shall immediately
stop, or cause to be stopped, said work until authorization is received
from the building inspector to continue the work. When any structure is in a dangerous
condition or the building is being used contrary to the provisions of the
laws of the City, the building inspector may order such use discontinued or the
structure or portion thereof in violation vacated. The building inspector, acting in
good faith and without malice in the discharge of his/her duties, shall not thereby
render himself/herself personally liable and is hereby relieved from all personal
liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as the result of
any act or omission in the discharge of his/her duties. Any suit brought against
the building inspector because of an alleged act or omission performed by
him/her in the enforcement of any provisions of the city codes relating to buildings
or building construction shall be defended by the legal department of the
City until final termination of the proceedings. The building inspector may request
the assistance and cooperation of other officials of the City and shall receive
the same insofar as may be necessary in the discharge of his/her duties.
The inspector shall have such other additional duties and make such reports as
the City Council may prescribe from time to time. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-308)
SECTION 1-219: ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR
The electrical inspector shall be appointed in the manner of other appointed officials
and shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Council. He/she may be removed
from office for cause only after a full hearing before the City Council. It
shall be unlawful for the electrical inspector to engage in the business of installing
or selling electrical supplies or materials, either directly or indirectly, and
he/she shall have no financial interest in any concern engaged in such business
at any time while he/she holds the office of electrical inspector. All records of the
electrical inspector shall be filed and preserved in the office of the city clerk unless
some other place is specifically provided for the keeping of such records. All
records of the electrical inspector shall be public records and shall remain the
property of the City at all times. The electrical inspector shall have the duty and
authority to order electrical service shut off and service disconnected during any
period when the use of such service appears hazardous to the occupant of the
premises served. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any premises or property
to neglect or fail to properly repair or replace any defective electrical work, appliance
or appurtenance to the electrical system of the City after notice to do so
has been served upon said owner by the electrical inspector. When acting within
the scope of his/her duties and without malice or gross negligence, the electrical
inspector shall not render himself/herself personally liable for damage caused by
him/her and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may
accrue to persons or property as the result of any act or omission. Any suit
brought against the electrical inspector because of an alleged act or omission
performed by him/her in the enforcement of any provision of the city code relating
to electrical work shall be defended by the legal department of the City until final
termination of the proceedings. The electrical inspector may request, and shall
receive insofar as may be necessary in the discharge of his/her duties, the assistance
and cooperation of other officials of the City. The electrical inspector shall
have the duty of inspecting and approving all connections with the city electrical
system. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-308)
SECTION 1-220: PLUMBING INSPECTOR
The plumbing inspector shall be appointed in the manner of other appointed officials
and shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Council. He/she may be removed
from office for cause only after a full hearing before the City Council. It
shall be unlawful for the plumbing inspector to engage in the business of installing
or selling plumbing fixtures, supplies or materials, either directly or indirectly,
and he/she shall have no financial interest in any concern engaged in such business
at any time while he/she holds the office of plumbing inspector. All records
of the plumbing inspector shall be filed and preserved in the office of the city
clerk unless some other place is specifically provided for the keeping of such
records. All records of the plumbing inspector shall be public records and shall
remain the property of the City at all times. Whenever the plumbing inspector
shall determine that any premises or property is unfit for human habitation by
reason of a defective plumbing, heating, water treatment, sewage or drainage
system, appliance or accessory, he/she may order the property vacated by posting
a copy of his/her order of vacation in a conspicuous place on such premises
and by serving a copy thereof upon every person owning or occupying such
premises or property. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply
with such notice. The plumbing inspector shall have the duty and authority to
order water and sewer service shut off and service disconnected during any period
when the use of such service appears hazardous to the occupant of the
premises served. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any premises or property
to neglect or fail to properly repair or replace any defective plumbing or heating
appliance or appurtenance to the utility systems of the City after notice to do so
has been served upon said owner by the plumbing inspector. When acting within
the scope of his/her duties and without malice or gross negligence, the plumbing
inspector shall not render himself/herself personally liable for damage caused by
him/her and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may
accrue to persons or property as the result of any act or omission. Any suit
brought against the plumbing inspector because of an alleged act or omission
performed by him/her in the enforcement of any provision of the city code relating
to plumbing shall be defended by the legal department of the City until final termination
of the proceedings. The plumbing inspector may request, and shall receive
insofar as may be necessary in the discharge of his/her duties, the assistance
and cooperation of other officials of the City. The plumbing inspector shall
have the duty of inspecting and approving all connections with the city water and
sewer systems. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-308)
SECTION 1-221: ZONING INSPECTOR
The zoning inspector shall be appointed in the manner of other appointed officials
and shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Council. He/she shall enforce
the various provisions of the city code that relating to zoning. He/she shall
act in an advisory capacity to the Planning Commission. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat.
§16-308)
SECTION 1-222: ZONING DIRECTOR
The zoning director shall be appointed in the manner of other appointed officials
and shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Council. He/she shall enforce the
various provisions of the city code that relating to zoning.
SECTION 1-223: CITY INSPECTOR POSITION CREATED
The appointive offices of building inspector, electrical inspector, plumbing inspector,
zoning inspector and zoning director are hereby combined and merged, in
accordance with the authority granted to the City Council by Section 1-202. The
title for the merged office is city inspector. The offices so merged and combined
shall always be construed to be separate, and the effect of the combination or
merger shall be limited to a consolidation of official duties only. In addition to the
official duties of the merged or combined offices, the city inspector also has the
duty to view and inspect all lots and parcels of land for weeds and worthless vegetation
and to view and inspect all sidewalks contiguous to public property within
the City to ascertain if any snow, ice, mud or other obstructions encroach upon
the sidewalks. The salary of the officer holding the merged offices shall not be in
excess of the maximum amount provided by law for the salary of the offices so
combined.
The city inspector has the power to enforce all city ordinances which he/she has
the duty to enforce. In enforcing these ordinances, the city inspector is authorized
to issue citations, on oath, for any violation of these city ordinances following
training on the issuance of citations. The city inspector shall not have the
power to arrest or detain any person for any alleged violation. The city inspector,
or any other official authorized, is empowered to serve notices pertaining to these
matters.
SECTION 1-224: (Not assigned)
SECTION 1-225 PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR
1. There is hereby created the Department of public works and the position of
Public Works Director. The Public Works Director shall be appointed by the
Mayor, and his/her appointment shall be subject to confirmation by the City
Council. The Public Works Director, as a Mayoral appointee, is subject to removal
only as set forth in Section 1-201. The Mayor shall set the compensation
for the Public Works Director, subject to confirmation by the City Council.
2. The Public Works Director shall also be the Utilities Superintendent.
3. The Public Works Director, subject to the specific direction of the City Council
through the Mayor and subject to the general supervision of the City Administrator,
shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
a. to have general charge, direction, supervision and control of all
improvements to and maintenance of the City’s streets, sidewalks,
culverts and bridges, gutters and drains, real property, buildings,
cemetery, grounds, parks (with park improvements as planned by
the Park Board), recreational areas, water system, and sewerage
system;
b. to have general charge of the management and daily operations
of the Public Works Department through the development, coordination,
direction and administration of maintenance, repair and operational
activities for all functions relating to public works;
c. to have general charge, direction, supervision and control of all
maintenance of all City equipment;
d. to make detailed reports to the Mayor and City Council on the
condition of the City’s streets, sidewalks, culverts and bridges, gutters
and drains, real property, buildings, parks, recreational areas,
water system, and sewerage system, and equipment;
e. to issue such permits as the Mayor shall direct in implementing
the policies adopted by the City Council;
f. supervise assistant public works director(s), streets, public works
shop, water department, wastewater department, cemetery, property
maintenance, and administrative staff in the making of such improvements
and in performing such maintenance as is set forth
above;
g. oversee contractual projects with private contractors and other
governmental agencies;
h. inspect and determine approval of improvements made by Sanitary
and Improvement Districts (SID’s) and other developments
within the City’s zoning jurisdiction to ensure compliance with applicable
city codes and ordinances;
i. prepare and maintain all necessary and required reports and
records pertaining to public works;
j. coordinate screening and interviewing of all candidates for public
works jobs and make recommendations regarding hiring to the City
Administrator;
k. participate in the preparation of the budget for public works, including
for the water system and sewer system.
SECTION 1-226 STREET COMMISSIONER
1. There is hereby created the position of Street Commissioner. The Street
Commissioner shall be appointed by the Mayor, and his/her appointment shall be
subject to confirmation by the City Council. The Street Commissioner is under
the immediate supervision of the City Administrator. The Mayor shall set the
compensation for the Street Commissioner, subject to confirmation by the City
Council.
2. The Street Commissioner shall be subject to the orders of the Mayor and City
Council by resolution, and shall have general charge over the "One (1) and Six
(6) Year Highway and Street Improvement Plan." (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-324)
ARTICLE III - ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 1-301: BONDS; FORM
Official bonds of the City shall be in form, joint and several, and shall be made
payable to the City in such penalty as set by Nebraska law or as the City Council
may set by resolution; provided, the penalty amount on any bond shall not fall
below the legal minimum, when one has been set by the State of Nebraska, for
each particular official. All official bonds of the city officials shall be executed by
the principal named in such bonds and by at least two sufficient sureties who
shall be freeholders of the county, or by the official as principal and by a guaranty,
surety, fidelity or bonding company; provided no city official, while still in
his/her official term of office, shall be accepted as surety on any other official's
bond, contractor's bond, license bond or appeal bond under any circumstances.
Only companies that are legally authorized to transact business in the State of
Nebraska shall be eligible for suretyship on the bond of an official of the City. All
said bonds shall obligate the principal and sureties for the faithful discharge of all
duties required by law of such principal, and shall insure to the benefit of the City
and any persons who may be injured by a breach of the conditions of such
bonds. No bond shall be deemed to be given or complete until the approval of
the City Council, and all sureties are endorsed in writing on the said instrument
by the mayor and city clerk pursuant to the said approval of the City Council.
The premium on any official bond required to be given may be paid out of the
General Fund or other proper city fund upon a resolution to that effect by the City
Council at the beginning of any city year. All official bonds meeting the conditions
herein shall be filed with the city clerk for his/her official records, and it shall
be the duty of the city clerk to furnish a certified copy of any bond so filed upon
the payment of a fee which shall be set by resolution of the City Council. In the
event that the sureties on the official bond of any officer of the City become insufficient
in the opinion of the City Council, the Council may, by resolution, fix a reasonable
time within which the said officer may give a new bond or additional sureties
as directed. In the event that the officer should fail, refuse or neglect to
give a new bond or additional sureties to the satisfaction and approval of the City
Council, then the office shall, by such failure, refusal or neglect, become vacant,
and it shall be the duty of the City Council to appoint a competent and qualified
person to fill the said office. Any official who is re-elected to office shall be required
to file a new bond after each election. [Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §11-103
through 11-118, 16-219]
SECTION 1-302: OATH OF OFFICE; CITY OFFICIALS
All officials of the City, whether elected or appointed, except when a different
oath is specifically provided herein, shall take and subscribe the following oath
which shall be endorsed upon their respective bonds:
"I, _______________________, do solemnly swear that I will support the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Nebraska
against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance
to the same; that I take this obligation freely and without mental reservation
or for the purpose of evasion; and that I will faithfully and impartially perform
the duties of the office of _______________________ according to law and to
the best of my ability. And I do further swear that I do not advocate, nor am I a
member of any political party or organization that advocates, the overthrow of the
government of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that
during such time as I am in this position I will not advocate, nor become a member
of any political party or organization that advocates, the overthrow of the
government of the United States or of this State by force or violence. So help me
God." [Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §11-101]
SECTION 1-303: SEAL; OFFICIAL CORPORATE
The official corporate seal of the City shall be kept in the office of the city clerk,
and shall bear the following inscription: ''Corporate Seal, City of Plattsmouth, Nebraska,
Incorporated 1855.'' The city clerk shall affix an impression of the said
official seal to all warrants, licenses, permits, ordinances and all other official papers
issued by order of the City Council and countersigned by the city clerk.
[Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-115]
SECTION 1-304: MEETINGS; DEFINED
Meetings, as used in this article, shall mean all regular, special or called meetings,
formal or informal, of a public body for the purposes of briefing, discussion
of public business, formation of tentative policy or the taking of any action. [Ref.
Neb. Rev. Stat. §84-1409(2)]
SECTION 1-305: MEETINGS; PUBLIC BODY DEFINED
"Public body" as used in this article shall mean:
A. The City Council of the City;
B. All independent boards, commissions, bureaus, committees, councils,
subunits or any other bodies, now or hereafter created by Constitution,
statute, ordinance or otherwise pursuant to law; and
C. Advisory committees of the bodies listed above.
This article shall not apply to subcommittees of such bodies unless a quorum of
the public body attends a subcommittee meeting or unless such subcommittees
are holding hearings, making policy or taking formal action on behalf of their parent
body. [Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §84-1409(1)]
SECTION 1-306: MEETINGS; PUBLIC
All meetings shall be held in the public building in which the City Council usually
holds such meetings, unless the publicized notice hereinafter required shall designate
some other public building or other specified place. Council meetings
shall normally be held within the corporate limits of Plattsmouth but may be held
outside of the City if proper notice is given as set forth below. The advance publicized
notice of all public, convened meetings shall be simultaneously transmitted
to all members of the City Council and to the public by a method designated
by the City Council or by the mayor if the City Council has not designated a method.
Such notice shall contain the time and specific place for each meeting and
either an enumeration of the agenda subjects known at the time of the notice, or
a statement that such an agenda, kept continually current, shall be readily available
for public inspection at the office of the city clerk. Except for items of an
emergency nature, the agenda shall not be altered later than (a) 24 hours before
the scheduled commencement of the meeting or (b) 48 hours before the scheduled
commencement of a meeting of the City Council scheduled outside the
corporate limits of the City. The City Council shall have the right to modify the
agenda to include items of an emergency nature only at such public meetings.
The minutes of the city clerk shall include the record of the manner and advance
time by which the publicized notice was given, a statement of how the availability
of an agenda of the then known subjects was communicated, the time and specific
place of each meeting, and the names of all members of the City Council
present or absent at each convened meeting. The minutes of the City Council
shall be a public record open to inspection by the public upon request at any reasonable
time at the office of the city clerk. Any official action on any question or
motion duly moved and seconded shall be taken only by roll call vote of the City
Council in open session. The record of the city clerk shall show how each member
voted, or that the member was absent and did not vote. [Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat.
§84-1408, 84-1409, 84-1411, 84-1413]
SECTION 1-307: MEETINGS; ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER
Robert's Rules of Order are hereby adopted and shall govern the conduct of all
meetings.
SECTION 1-308 MEETINGS; CLOSED SESSIONS
1. Any public body may hold a closed session by the affirmative vote of a majority
of its voting members if a closed session is clearly necessary for the protection
of the public interest or for the prevention of needless injury to the reputation of
an individual and if such individual has not requested a public meeting. Closed
sessions may be held for, but shall not be limited to, such reasons as:
a. Strategy sessions with respect to collective bargaining, real estate purchases,
pending litigation or litigation which is imminent as evidenced by communication
of a claim or threat of litigation to or by the public body;
b. Discussion regarding deployment of security personnel or devices;
c. Investigative proceedings regarding allegations of criminal misconduct;
or
d. Evaluation of the job performance of a person when necessary to prevent
needless injury to the reputation of a person and if such person has not requested
a public meeting.
2. Nothing in this section shall permit a closed meeting for discussion of the appointment
or election of a new member to any public body. The city administrator,
city attorney and city clerk shall attend all closed sessions unless the Council
votes to enter closed session without such officials.
3. To hold a closed session, a member of the council shall make a motion which
includes the purpose for the same. Upon a second, the Mayor shall restate the
motion including the purpose and the vote on the motion shall be taken in open
session. If passed by an affirmative vote of a majority of all elected officials, the
Mayor shall restate the purpose for the closed session while still in open session.
The vote of each member on the question of holding a closed session, the reason
for the closed session, the Mayor’s restatement of the purpose of the closed
session and the time when the closed session commenced and concluded shall
be recorded in the minutes. The public body holding such a closed session shall
restrict its consideration to matters during the closed portions to only those purposes
set forth in the minutes as the reason for the closed session. The meeting
shall be reconvened in open session before any formal action may be taken. For
purposes of this section, formal action shall mean a collective decision or a collective
commitment or promise to make a decision on any question, motion, proposal,
resolution, order or ordinance or formation of a position or policy, but shall
not include negotiating guidance given by members of the public body to legal
counsel or other negotiators in closed sessions authorized under subdivision (a)
of this section.
4. Any member of the public body shall have the right to challenge the continuation
of a closed session if the member determines that the session has exceeded
the reason stated in the original motion to hold a closed session or if the member
contends that the closed session is neither clearly necessary for (a) the protection
of the public interest or (b) the prevention of needless injury to the reputation
of an individual. Such challenge shall be overruled only by a majority vote of the
members of the public body. Such challenge and its disposition shall be recorded
in the minutes.
5. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that any meeting be
closed to the public. No person or public body shall fail to invite a portion of its
members to a meeting and no public body shall designate itself a subcommittee
of the whole body for the purpose of circumventing the provisions of this article.
No closed session, informal meeting, chance meeting, social gathering, or electronic
communication shall be used for the purpose of circumventing the provisions
of this article.
6. The provisions of this article shall not apply to chance meetings, or to attendance
at or travel to conventions or workshops of members of a public body at
which there is no meeting of the body then intentionally convened and there is no
vote or other action taken regarding any matter over which the public body has
supervision, control, jurisdiction or advisory power. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §84-
1410)
7. All matters discussed in closed session shall remain confidential and the
members of the Council and other parties present at such a closed session shall
not reveal the discussions undertaken or statements made by any person in the
closed session.
SECTION 1-309: MEETINGS; EMERGENCY MEETINGS
When it is necessary to hold an emergency meeting without reasonable advance
public notice, the nature of the emergency shall be stated in the minutes and any
formal action taken in such meeting shall pertain only to the emergency. Such
emergency meetings may be held by means of electronic or telecommunication
equipment. The provisions of Section 1-312 of this article shall be complied with
in conducting emergency meetings. Complete minutes of such emergency meetings
specifying the nature of the emergency and any formal action taken at the
meeting shall be made available to the public by no later than the end of the next
regular business day. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §84-1411)
SECTION 1-310: MEETINGS; MINUTES
Each public body shall keep minutes of all meetings showing the time, place,
members present and absent, and the substance of all matters discussed.
The minutes shall be public records and open to public inspection during normal
business hours. Minutes shall be written and available for inspection within ten
working days or prior to the next convened meeting, whichever occurs earlier.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §84-1412, 84-1413)
SECTION 1-311: MEETINGS; VOTES
Any action taken on any question or motion duly moved and seconded shall be
by roll call vote of the public body in open session, and the record shall state how
each member voted, or if the member was absent or not voting.
The vote to elect leadership within a public body may be taken by secret ballot,
but the total number of votes for each candidate shall be recorded in the minutes.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-503, 84-1413)
SECTION 1-312: MEETINGS; NOTICE TO NEWS MEDIA
The city clerk, secretary or other designee of each public body shall maintain a
list of the news media requesting notification of meetings and shall make reasonable
efforts to provide advance notification to them of the time and place of each
meeting and the subjects to be discussed at that meeting. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat.
§84-1411)
SECTION 1-313: MEETINGS; PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
Subject to the provisions of this article, the public shall have the right to attend
and the right to speak at meetings of public bodies and all or any part of a meeting
of a public body, except for closed meetings called pursuant to Section 1-308,
may be videotaped, televised, photographed, broadcast or recorded by any person
in attendance by means of a tape recorder, camera, video equipment, or any
other means of pictorial or sonic reproduction or in writing.
It shall not be a violation of this section for any public body to make and enforce
reasonable rules and regulations regarding the conduct of persons attending,
speaking at, videotaping, televising, photographing, broadcasting or recording its
meetings. A body may not be required to allow citizens to speak at each meeting,
but it may not forbid public participation at all meetings. No public body shall
require members of the public to identify themselves as a condition for admission
to the meeting. The body may require any member of the public desiring to address
the body to identify himself or herself. No public body shall for the purpose
of circumventing the provisions of this article hold a meeting in a place known by
the body to be too small to accommodate the anticipated audience. No public
body shall be deemed in violation of this section if it holds its meeting in its traditional
meeting place which is located in this State. An agency which contracts
with municipalities outside the State of Nebraska may hold meetings of any
committee outside the State of Nebraska if such meetings are held only in such
contracting municipalities. Final action on any agenda item shall only be taken
by the agency at a meeting in the State of Nebraska, which meeting shall comply
with Sections 84-1408 to 84-1414 RS Neb. The public body shall, upon request,
make a reasonable effort to accommodate the public's right to hear the discussion
and testimony presented at the meeting. Public bodies shall make available
at the meeting, for examination and copying by members of the public, at least
one copy of all reproducible written material to be discussed at an open meeting.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §84-1412, 18-2438)
SECTION 1-314: MEETINGS; CITY COUNCIL
Regular meetings of the mayor and City Council shall be held on the first and
third Monday of each month. All regular meetings will commence at the hour of
7:00 P.M. (Ordinance No. 1750 – May 21, 2007)
At all meetings of the Council a majority of the Councilmembers shall constitute a
quorum to do business. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-401)
SECTION 1-315: MEETINGS; ORDER OF BUSINESS
All meetings of the City Council shall be open to the public. Promptly at the hour
set by law on the day of each regular meeting, the members of the City Council,
the city clerk, the mayor and such other city officials that may be required shall
take their regular stations in the meeting place, and the business of the City shall
be taken up for consideration and disposition in the manner prescribed by the
official agenda on file at the office of the city clerk.
SECTION 1-316: MEETINGS; CHANGE IN OFFICE
The change in office shall be made as follows: The mayor and Council shall meet
on the first regular meeting date in December of each year in which a city election
is held and the outgoing officers and the outgoing members of the Council
shall present their reports, and upon the old Council having completed its business
up to the said time, the outgoing members of the Council shall surrender
their offices to the incoming members, and the outgoing officers shall thereupon
each surrender to his/her successor in office all property, records, papers and
monies belonging to the same. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-302.01)
SECTION 1-317: MEETINGS; ORGANIZATIONAL
The newly elected Council shall convene at the regular place of meeting in the
City on the first regular meeting in December of each year in which a city election
is held immediately after the prior Council adjourns and proceed to organize
themselves for the ensuing year. The mayor elected for the new municipal year
shall call the meeting to order. The Council shall then proceed to examine the
credentials of its members and other elective officers of the City to see that each
has been duly and properly elected, and to see that such oaths and bonds have
been given as are required. After ascertaining that all members are duly qualified,
the Council shall then elect one of its own body who shall be styled as
"President of the Council." The mayor shall then nominate his/her candidates for
appointive offices. He/she shall then proceed with the regular order of business.
It is hereby made the duty of each and every member of the Council, or his/her
successor in office, and of each officer elected to any office to qualify prior to the
first regular meeting in December following his/her election. All appointive officers
shall qualify within two weeks following their appointments. Qualification for
each officer who is not required to give bond shall consist in his/her subscribing
and taking an oath to support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution
of the State of Nebraska, the laws of the City and to perform faithfully and
impartially the duties of his/her office, said oath to be filed in the office of the city
clerk. Each officer who is required to give a bond shall file the required bond in
the office of the city clerk with sufficient sureties, conditioned on the faithful discharge
of the duties of his/her office, with the oath endorsed thereon. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat. §16-302.01)
SECTION 1-318: MEETINGS; SPECIAL MEETINGS
Special meetings may be called by the mayor or by four members of the City
Council, the object of which shall be submitted to the Council in writing. The call
and object, as well as the disposition thereof, shall be entered upon the journal
by the city clerk. On filing the call for a special meeting, the city clerk shall notify
the Councilmembers of the special meeting, stating the time and its purpose.
Notice of a special meeting need not be given to a Councilmember known to be
out of the state or physically unable to be present. A majority of the members of
the City Council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a
smaller number may adjourn from day to day and compel the attendance of the
absent members. Whether a quorum is present or not, all absent members shall
be sent for and compelled to attend.
At the hour appointed for the meeting, the city clerk shall proceed to call the roll
of members and announce whether a quorum is present. If a quorum is present,
the Council shall be called to order by the mayor, if present, or if absent, by the
president of the Council. In the absence of both the mayor and the president of
the Council, the City Councilmembers shall elect a president pro tempore. All
ordinances passed at any special meeting shall comply with procedures set forth
in Chapter I, Article IV herein. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-401)
SECTION 1-319: MEETINGS; QUORUM
A majority of all the members elected to the City Council shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of any business, but a fewer number may adjourn from
time to time and compel the attendance of absent members. Unless a greater
vote is required by law, an affirmative vote of at least one-half of the elected
members shall be required for the transaction of any business. (Ref. Neb. Rev.
Stat. §16-401)
SECTION 1-320: MEETINGS; VIDEOCONFERENCING, WHEN ALLOWED
1. A meeting of an organization created under the Interlocal Cooperation Act or
the Municipal Cooperative Financing Act or of the governing body of a risk management
pool or advisory committee organized in accordance with the Intergovernmental
Risk Management Act may be held by means of videoconferencing if:
(a) Reasonable advance publicized notice is given;
(b) Reasonable arrangements are made to accommodate the public's right
to attend, hear and speak at the meeting, including seating, recordation by
audio or visual recording devices, and a reasonable opportunity for input
such as public comment or questions to at least the same extent as would
be provided if videoconferencing was not used;
(c) At least one copy of all documents being considered is available to the
public at each site of the videoconference;
(d) At least one member of the governing body or advisory committee is
present at each site of the videoconference; and
(e) No more than one-half of the governing body's or advisory committee's
meetings in a calendar year are held by videoconference.
Videoconferencing shall not be used to circumvent any of the public government
purposes established in this article.
2. For purposes of this section, “videoconferencing” shall mean conducting a
meeting involving participants at two or more locations through the use of audiovideo
equipment which allows participants at each location to hear and see each
meeting participant at each other location, including public input. Interaction between
meeting participants shall be possible at all meeting locations. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat. §84-1409, 84-1411)

ARTICLE IV - ORDINANCES
SECTION 1-401: ORDINANCES, RULES, AND RESOLUTIONS; GRANT OF
POWER
The City Council may make all ordinances, bylaws, rules, regulations and resolutions,
not inconsistent with the laws of the State of Nebraska, as may be expedient
for maintaining the peace, good government and welfare of the City and its
trade, commerce and manufactures, for preserving order and securing persons
or property from violence, danger and destruction, for protecting public and private
property, and for promoting the public health, safety, convenience, comfort
and morals and the general interests and welfare of the inhabitants of the City.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-246)
SECTION 1-402: INTRODUCTION
Ordinances and resolutions may be introduced by any member of the City Council.
Such introduction shall be followed by a reading by title of such ordinance or
resolution by the city administrator or city attorney.
The Council may immediately consider passage of any ordinance and proceed to
do so pursuant to Section 1-406 set forth hereafter or may, by majority vote, table
consideration of the ordinance until a later date.
Resolutions, once introduced, may be immediately acted upon by vote of the City
Council or may, by motion and majority vote of the Council, be tabled for later
consideration.
SECTION 1-403: RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS; PROCEDURE
A majority vote shall be required to pass any resolution or motion. The vote on
any resolution or motion shall be by roll call vote.
SECTION 1-404: STYLE
The style of all city ordinances shall be:
"Be it ordained by the mayor and Council of the City of Plattsmouth, Nebraska."
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-405)
SECTION 1-405: TITLE
No ordinance shall contain a subject not clearly expressed in its title. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat. §16-404)
SECTION 1-406: ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, ORDERS, BY- LAWS;
READING; PASSAGE
Ordinances of a general or permanent nature, except annexation ordinances,
shall be read by title on three different days unless three-fourths (3/4) of the City
Council vote to suspend this requirement. Any ordinance for the annexation of
territory shall be read on three separate occasions. In case such reading requirement
is suspended, the ordinance shall be read by title and then moved for
final passage. Prior to passage, all ordinances to be considered shall be read by
title unless ¾ of the Council vote to have the entire ordinance read prior to passage.
All ordinances, resolutions and motions require a majority vote of the Council for
passage. The city clerk shall record the yeas and nays of all votes taken and the
names of the councilmembers, and how they voted on each issue. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat. §16-404)
SECTION 1-407: PUBLICATION OR POSTING
All ordinances of a general nature shall be published one time within 15 days after
they are passed in some newspaper published in the City or, if no paper is
published in the City, then by posting a written or printed copy in each of three
public places in the City. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-405)
SECTION 1-408: CERTIFICATE OF PUBLICATION OR POSTING
The passage, approval, and publication or posting of all ordinances shall be sufficiently
proven by a certificate under the seal of the City from the city clerk showing
that the said ordinance was passed and approved, and when and in what paper
the same was published, or when, by whom and where the same was posted.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-403)
SECTION 1-409: EFFECTIVE DATE; EMERGENCY ORDINANCES
1. Except as provided in subsection 2 of this section, an ordinance for the government
of the City which has been adopted by the City Council without submission
to the voters of the City shall not go into effect until published as required by
Nebraska law.
2. In the case of riot, infectious or contagious diseases, or other impending danger,
failure of a public utility, or any other emergency requiring its immediate operation,
an ordinance shall take effect upon the proclamation of the mayor and
the posting thereof in at least three of the most public places in the City. Such
emergency ordinance shall recite the emergency, be passed by a three-fourths
(3/4) vote of the City Council, and be entered of record on the city clerk's minutes.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-405, 19-3701)
SECTION 1-410: AMENDMENTS AND REVISIONS
No ordinance or section thereof shall be revised or amended unless the new ordinance
contains the entire ordinance or section as revised or amended and the
ordinance or section so amended is repealed, except that an ordinance revising
all the ordinances of the City and modifications to zoning or building districts may
be adopted as otherwise provided by law. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-404)
ARTICLE V - FISCAL MANAGEMENT
SECTION 1-501: FISCAL YEAR
The fiscal year of the City and any public utility of the City commences on
October 1 and extends through the following September 30 except as provided in
the Municipal Proprietary Function Act. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-701)
SECTION 1-502: PROPOSED BUDGET STATEMENT; FILING
1. The City Council shall, not later than the first day of August of each year, on
forms prescribed and furnished by the Nebraska State Auditor, prepare in writing
and file with the city clerk a proposed budget statement containing the following:
(a) For the immediate two prior fiscal years, the revenue from all sources,
other than revenue received from taxation, allocated to each of the several funds
and separately stated as to each such source and for each fund: The
unencumbered cash balance of such fund at the beginning and end of the year;
the amount received by taxation allocated to each fund; and the amount of actual
expenditure for each fund;
(b) For the current fiscal year, actual and estimated revenue from all
sources, allocated to each of the several funds and separately stated as to each
such source and for each fund: The actual unencumbered cash balance
available for such fund at the beginning of the year; the amount received from
taxation allocated to each fund; and the amount of actual and estimated
expenditure, whichever is applicable.
(c) For the immediately ensuing fiscal year, an estimate of revenue from
all sources, other than revenue to be received from taxation, separately stated as
to each such source to be allocated to each of the several funds, and for each
fund: The actual or estimated unencumbered cash balances, whichever is
applicable, to be available at the beginning of the year; the amounts proposed to
be expended during the year; and the amount of cash reserve, based on actual
experience of prior years, which cash reserve shall not exceed fifty percent
(50%) of the total budget adopted exclusive of capital outlay items;
(d) A statement setting out separately the amount sought to be raised from
the levy of a tax on the taxable value of real property (i) for the purpose of paying
the principal or interest on bonds issued by the City Council and (ii) for all other
purposes;
(e) A uniform summary of the proposed budget statement which shall
include a separate total for each fund, including each proprietary function fund
included in a separate proprietary budget statement prepared pursuant to the
Municipal Proprietary Function Act, and a grand total of all funds maintained by
the City Council; and
(f) A list of the proprietary functions which are not included in the budget
statement if a separate proprietary budget statement has been prepared for such
proprietary functions pursuant to the Municipal Proprietary Function Act.
2. The actual or estimated unencumbered cash balance of each fund required to
be included in the budget statement by this section shall include deposits and
investments of the City as well as any funds held by the county treasurer for the
City and shall be accurately stated on the proposed budget statement.
3. The estimated expenditures plus the required cash reserve for the ensuing
fiscal year less all estimated and actual unencumbered balances at the beginning
of the year and less the estimated income from all sources other than taxation
shall equal the amount to be received from taxes, and such amount shall be
shown on the proposed budget statement filed pursuant to this section. The
amount to be raised from taxation, as determined above, plus the estimated
revenue from sources other than taxation and the unencumbered balances shall
equal the estimated expenditures, plus the necessary required cash reserve, for
the ensuing year. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §13-504, 13-505)
SECTION 1-503: BUDGET HEARING
Subsequent to the filing of the proposed budget statement, the City Council shall
publish a proposed budget and conduct a public hearing on the proposed budget
statement. Notice of the place and time of the said hearing, as well as a copy of
the proposed budget, shall be published at least five days prior to the date set for
the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. After such hearing,
the statement shall be adopted, or amended and adopted as amended, and a
written record shall be made of such hearing. If the adopted budget statement
reflects a change from that shown in the published proposed budget statement, a
summary of such changes shall be published within 20 days after its adoption.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §13-506)
SECTION 1-504: ADOPTED BUDGET STATEMENT; FILING
The City Council shall file with and certify to the levying board on or before
September 20th of each year, and file with the Nebraska State Auditor, a copy of
the adopted budget statement, together with the amount of tax to be levied,
setting out separately the amount to be levied for the payment of principal or
interest on bonds issued by the City Council and the amount to be levied for all
other purposes. Proof of publication shall be attached to the statements. The
City Council shall not certify any tax that exceeds the maximum levy prescribed
by State law, except that in certifying the amount to be so levied, allowance may
be made for delinquent taxes not exceeding 5% of the amount to be levied plus
the actual percentage of delinquent taxes for the preceding tax year. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat. §13-508)
SECTION 1-505: EXPENDITURES PRIOR TO ADOPTION OF BUDGET
1. On and after the first day of its fiscal year until the adoption of the budget by
the City Council in September, the City Council may expend any balance of cash
on hand for the current expenses of the City. Except as provided in subsection 2
of this section, such expenditures shall not exceed an amount equivalent to the
total amount expended under the last budget in the equivalent period of the prior
budget year. Such expenditures shall be charged against the appropriations for
each individual fund or purpose as provided in the budget when adopted.
2. The restriction on expenditures in subsection 1 of this section may be
exceeded upon the express finding of the City Council that expenditures beyond
the amount authorized are necessary to enable the City to meet its statutory
duties and responsibilities. The finding and approval of the expenditures in
excess of the statutory authorization shall be adopted by the City Council in open
public session. Expenditures authorized by this section shall be charged against
appropriations for each individual fund or purpose as provided in the budget
when adopted, and nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize
expenditures by the City in excess of that authorized by any other statutory
provision. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §13-509.01, 13-509.02)
SECTION 1-506: BUDGET PROCEDURE
The Manual of Instructions for City/Village: Budgets, prepared by the Auditor of
Public Accounts, State Capitol, Lincoln, Nebraska 68509 is incorporated by
reference for the purpose of proper budget preparation.
SECTION 1-507: APPROPRIATIONS
The City Council shall adopt a budget statement pursuant to the Nebraska
Budget Act, to be termed "The Annual Appropriation Bill", in which are
appropriated such sums of money as may be deemed necessary to defray all
necessary expenses and liabilities of the City. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-704)
SECTION 1-508: GENERAL PROPERTY TAX
The City Council shall cause to be certified to the county clerk the amount of tax
to be levied upon the assessed value of all the taxable property of the City for the
requirements of the adopted budget for the ensuing year, including all special
assessments and taxes. The maximum amount of tax which may be certified and
assessed shall not require a tax levy in excess of the legal maximum as
prescribed by state law. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-702)
SECTION 1-509: EXPENDITURES
No city official shall have the power to appropriate, issue or draw any order or
warrant on the city treasury for money, unless the same has been appropriated
or ordered by ordinance. No expenditure for any improvement to be paid for out
of the general fund of the City shall exceed in any one year the amount provided
for that improvement in the adopted budget statement. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat.
§16-706, 16-726 through 16-729)
SECTION 1-510: CONTRACTS AND PURCHASING
1. Purchasing Authority.
a. Except as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 18-412.01
and as provided below, the City Council shall, before
making any contract in excess of the dollar limitation
imposed by state law, as estimated by the city
engineer, for general improvements, such as water
extensions, sewers, public heating system, bridges, or
work on streets, or any other work or improvement
where the cost of such improvement shall be
assessed to the property, advertise for bids.
b. The city electric utility may enter into a contract for
the enlargement or improvement of the electric
system or for the purchase of equipment used for
such enlargement or improvement without advertising
for bids if the price is: (a) $20,000.00 or less; (b)
$40,000.00 or less and the city electric utility has
gross annual revenue from retail sales in excess of
$1,000,000.00; (c) $60,000.00 or less and the city
electric utility has gross annual revenue from retail
sales in excess of $5,000,000.00; or (d) $80,000.00 or
less and the city electric utility has gross annual
revenue from retail sales in excess of
$10,000,000.00.
c. Except as otherwise provided in regard to
emergencies, all contracts and purchases in excess
of $20,000.00 shall require City Council approval prior
to inviting bids or proposals.
d. Except as otherwise provided in regard to
emergencies, all non-budgeted purchases (those
items with a value remaining within the budgeted
amount, but not specifically set forth in the budget
detail) in excess of $5,000.00 shall require City
Council approval prior to inviting bids or proposals.
e. Except as otherwise provided in regard to
emergencies, budgeted purchases (those items
specifically set forth in the budget detail) between the
value of $1,001 and $20,000.00 shall require prior
written approval of the City Administrator.
f. Except as otherwise provided in regard to
emergencies, all non-budgeted purchases (those
items with a value remaining within the budgeted
amount, but not specifically set forth in the budget
detail) between the value of $1,001 and $5,000.00
shall require prior written approval of the City
Administrator.
g. Purchases of $1,000 or less may be approved by
the Department Head. In circumstances when more
strict budget controls are necessary, the City
Administrator may impose more stringent spending
requirements, which shall be communicated to all
department heads.
2. Formal Contract Procedure
a. When the estimated cost of construction projects,
supplies, equipment or contractual services exceeds
twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), no invitation for
bids, nor any formal contract for purchase or sale,
shall be authorized without prior approval of the city
council. All construction, supplies, equipment, and
contractual services in this category shall be
purchased or sold by formal written contract, from the
lowest responsible and responsive bidder, after due
notice inviting bids, which notice shall be published or
solicited as provided below.
b. In advertising for bids as provided below, the
Council may publish the amount of the estimate.
c. Supplies, equipment and/or contractual services
from single source suppliers may be exempted from
the requirement for publication and sealed bids,
provided that there is no statutory obligation to publish
for sealed bids related to construction of certain
improvements or the purchase of equipment related
to such construction.
d. Professional services are exempt from this
procedure.
e. Bid specifications for any construction project in
the public right of way for which the cost exceeds
$5,000.00 shall include the requirement of a “payment
bond” equal to the contract price.
f. Bid specifications, the notice to bidders, bidding
instructions and the bid sheet (if any) shall be
required for all purchases pursuant to paragraph (1),
and the same shall be reviewed and approved by the
purchasing agent and city attorney before being
published. The contract for the purchase or services
shall be prepared prior to the advertisement for bids
and shall be included in the plans and specifications.
g. The advertisement provided for herein shall be
published at least seven days prior to the bid closing
in a legal newspaper published in or of general
circulation in the City; provided that in case of a public
emergency resulting from infectious or contagious
diseases, destructive windstorms, floods, snow, an
exigency or pressing necessity or unforeseen need
calling for immediate action or remedy to prevent a
serious loss of or serious injury or damage to life,
health or property, or war, estimates of costs and
advertising for bids may be waived in the emergency
ordinance when adopted by a three-fourths (3/4) vote
of the City Council and entered of record. In the
event the purchasing agent is more than temporarily
unavailable, the department head may authorize such
purchases in the following departments: Water,
Sewer, or Street and Property Maintenance. In such
event, the department head shall notify the
purchasing agent as soon as possible, and thereafter
promptly submit a written report regarding the nature
of the emergency.
(1) The notice shall include, in addition
to other language required by the city
attorney, a general description of the
articles to be purchased or sold, and
shall state where bid sheets and, plans
and specifications, may be secured, and
the date, time and place for opening
bids.
(2) The purchasing agent shall also
endeavor to distribute bid documents to
responsible prospective suppliers of
whom the purchasing agent may be
aware.
(3) The purchasing agent shall also
advertise all pending purchases or sales
by a notice posted for public view at a
prominent location in City Hall.
h. When deemed necessary by the purchasing agent,
bid deposits shall be prescribed in the public notice
inviting bids. When so required, the notice shall state
that the bid security shall be sent in a separate sealed
envelope, in the form of a certified check on a solvent
bank or a bid bond from a surety company registered
to do business in the State of Nebraska in the amount
not less than five (5) percent of the total amount of the
bid made payable to “Plattsmouth City Clerk.” The
unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to a return of
surety required by the purchasing agent. The
successful bidder shall forfeit his or her bid deposit
upon failure on his or her part to enter a contract
within ten (10) days after receiving the previously
prepared contract.
i. The bid notice shall require that all bids be
submitted in sealed envelopes to the purchasing
agent and shall be identified as bids, specifying the
project, on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in
public on the date and at the time and place stated in
the published notice. A tabulation of all bids received
shall be available for public inspection.
(1) The City Council shall have the
authority to reject all bids, parts of all
bids, or all bids for any one or more
supplies or contractual services included
in the proposed contract, when the
public interest will be served thereby.
(2) The City Council shall have the
authority to reject the bid of a contractor
who is in default on the payment of
taxes, licenses, or other monies due the
city.
j. Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest
responsible and responsive bidder. In determining
“lowest responsible bidder,” in addition to price, the
following shall be considered:
(1) The ability, capacity, and skill of the
bidder to perform the contract required;
(2) The experience and efficiency of the
bidder;
(3) Whether the bidder can perform the
contract within the time specified;
(4) The quality of performance of
previous contracts;
(5) The previous and existing
compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to contracts;
(6) The life-cost of the personal
property in relation to the purchase price
and specific use of the item;
(7) The performance of the personal
property, taking into consideration any
commonly accepted tests and standards
of product usability and user
requirements;
(8) Energy efficiency ratio as stated by
the bidder for alternative choices of
appliances or equipment;
(9) The information furnished by each
bidder, when deemed applicable by the
purchasing agent, concerning life-cycle
costs between alternatives for all
classes of equipment, evidence of
expected life, repair and maintenance
costs, and energy consumption on a
per-year basis; and
(10) Such other information as may be
secured having a bearing on the
decision to award the contract.
k. A “responsive bidder” shall be defined as a person
or company who has submitted a bid which conforms
in all material respects to the “Invitation for Bids.”
l. When the award is not given to the lowest bidder, a
full and complete statement of the reasons for placing
the order elsewhere shall be prepared by the
purchasing agent and filed with other papers relating
to the transaction. No recommendation for an award
to other than the lowest bidder shall be made without
first having the matter reviewed by the purchasing
agent and the city attorney.
m. All contracts for bid awards (formal and informal)
shall be prepared for the Mayor’s signature and shall
be submitted to the City Attorney for review prior to
requests for City Council approval.
n. No contract in excess of twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00) for enlargement or general
improvements, such as water extensions, sewers,
public heating system, bridges, works on streets, or
any other work or improvement when the cost of such
enlargement or improvement is assessed to the
property shall be awarded by the City Council until an
estimate of the cost shall be made by the City
Engineer and submitted to the Council.
o. Except in the case of tie bids, there shall be
neither formal nor tacit local vendor’s preference
policies. The City shall neither impose nor condone
any bidding or procurement policies that result in
exclusionary or anti-competitive bidding or violate
state or federal antitrust laws. If all bids received are
for the same total amount or unit price, quality and
service being equal, the contract shall be awarded to
a local bidder. Where there is no local bidder or when
two (2) or more local bidders are equal, the City
Council shall award the contract to one of the tie
bidders by drawing lots in public.
p. The formal bid requirements as set forth in this
section “may be waived by the city council or board of
public works (1) when materials or equipment are
purchased at the same price and from the same seller
as materials or equipment which have formerly been
obtained pursuant to the state bidding procedure in
sections 81-145 to 81-162 or (2) when the contract is
negotiated directly with a sheltered workshop
pursuant to section 48-1503.”
q. Except as otherwise provided in this policy and by
law, pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §49-14,102, no
public official or public employee, a member of that
individual’s immediate family, or business with which
the individual is associated shall enter into a contract
valued at two thousand dollars or more, in any one
year, with a government body unless the contract is
awarded through an open and public process.
(1) For purposes of this section, an
open and public process includes prior
public notice and subsequent availability
for public inspection during the regular
office hours of the contracting
government body of the proposals
considered and the contract awarded.
(2) No contract may be divided for the
purpose of evading the requirements of
this section.
(3) This section shall not apply to a
contract when the public official or public
employee does not in any way represent
either party in the transaction.
(4) This section prohibits public officials
and public employees from engaging in
certain activities under circumstances
creating a substantial conflict of interest.
This section is not intended to penalize
innocent persons, and a contract shall
not be absolutely void by reason of this
section.
r. If, after advertising for bids as provided in this
section, the Council receives fewer than two bids on a
contract or if bids received by the Council contain a
price which exceeds the estimated cost, the mayor
and Council may negotiate a contract in an attempt to
complete the proposed enlargement or general
improvements at a cost commensurate with the
estimate given.
s. If the materials are of a nature that, in the opinion
of the manufacturer and with the concurrence of the
City Council, no cost can be estimated until the
materials have been manufactured or assembled to
the specific qualifications of the purchasing city, the
City Council may authorize the manufacture and
assemblage of such materials and may thereafter
approve the estimated cost expenditure when it is
provided by the manufacturer.
t. Notwithstanding any other provisions of law or a
home rule charter, if the City has established, by an
interlocal agreement with any county, a joint
purchasing division or agency may purchase personal
property without competitive bidding if the price for the
property has been established by the Federal General
Services Administration or the material division of the
Department of Administrative Services. For purposes
of this subsection: (a) Personal property includes, but
is not limited to, supplies, materials and equipment
used by or furnished to any officer, office, department,
institution, board or other agency; and (b) Purchasing
or purchase means the obtaining of personal property
by sale, lease or other contractual means. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat. §16-321, 16-321.01 and 18-1756)
3. Informal Bidding
a. When the estimated cost of supplies, equipment or
contractual services is less than twenty thousand
dollars ($20,000.00), or except in the event of an
emergency as detailed above, the purchase shall be
made in the open market, without newspaper
advertisement and without observing the procedure
prescribed for the award of formal contracts and shall
be referred to as open market purchases. All such
purchases shall be awarded by the purchasing agent.
b. All open market purchases in an amount greater
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), but less than
twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) shall, whenever
possible, be based on at least three (3) competitive
bids, and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible
and responsive bidder in accordance with the same
criteria established in this article for the formal
contract procedure. When informally bidding for
competitive bids, all procedures for formal bidding will
be followed except for the publication requirement.
All such purchases shall be awarded by the
purchasing agent.
c. All open market purchases greater than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) and not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) may be acquired after
solicitation of three (3) informal quotes without
following the publication requirement and without
obtaining competitive sealed bids. Prior to soliciting
the informal quotes, the purchasing agent or his or
her designee shall have assigned a purchase order.
If a repair of equipment or facilities is time sensitive
for providing services to the public for water, sewer,
police protection and street maintenance, this
provision is waived and the department head may
proceed with the repair.
d. Purchases provided for under this subsection
should be made from the lowest responsible and
responsive bidder in accordance with the same
criteria established in this article for the formal
contract procedure.
e. All open market purchases of two hundred dollars
($200.00) or less may be made by utilizing open
monthly purchase orders or by purchasing from
available sources without the necessity of a formal or
informal bid.
f. When obtaining sealed bids for informal bidding,
the purchasing agent shall mail all bid documents,
and post a notice in City Hall, to all local persons who
might have an interest in bidding, and to others in the
industry.
g. The purchasing agent may solicit informal quotes
from prospective vendors, by notice posted for public
view at a prominent location in City Hall, by
telephone, by facsimile transmission, by electronic
mail or other electronic means.
h. The purchasing agent shall keep a record of all
open market orders, and the bids submitted in
competition thereon, and such records shall also be
open to public inspection.
4. Surplus Stock
a. All departments shall submit to the purchasing
agent, at such time and in such form as he or she
shall prescribe, reports showing stocks of all supplies
which are no longer used or which have become
obsolete, worn out or scrapped.
b. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to
sell or dispose of all surplus supplies and equipment
of less than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) in
value which have become unsuitable or unnecessary
for public use. The purchasing agent shall sell or
dispose of the property by any method which is most
advantageous to the city, including auction, sealed
bid, private or public sale, or trade-in for other
property. All sales of equipment or supplies of twenty
thousand dollars ($20,000.00) or more in value shall
require the prior approval of the City Council and shall
be sold by way of auction or sealed bid.
SECTION 1-511: ANNUAL AUDIT
The City Council shall cause an audit of the city accounts to be made by a
qualified accountant as expeditiously as possible following the close of the fiscal
year. The said audit shall be completed and the annual audit report made not
later than six months after the close of the fiscal year. The accountant making the
audit shall submit not less than three copies of the audit report to the City
Council. All public utilities or other enterprises which substantially generate their
own revenue shall be audited separately, and the results of such audits shall
appear separately in the annual audit report, and such audits shall be on an
accrual basis and shall contain statements and materials which conform to
generally accepted accounting principles. The audit report shall set forth the
financial position and results of financial operations for each fund or group of
accounts of the City as well as an opinion by the accountant with respect to the
financial statements. Two copies of the annual audit report shall be filed with the
city clerk and shall become a part of the public records of the city clerk's office,
and will at all times thereafter be open for public inspection. One copy shall be
filed with the Auditor of Public Accounts. The City Council shall provide and file
with the city clerk, not later than August 1 of each year, financial statements
showing its actual and budgeted figures for the most recently completed fiscal
year. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-2901 through 19-2909)
SECTION 1-512: CLAIMS
All claims against the City shall be presented to the City Council in writing with a
full account of the items, and no claim or demand shall be audited or allowed
unless presented as provided for in this section. Upon the filing of any claim, the
party shall state therein his/her post office address; and upon the disallowance of
any such claim, it will be the duty of the city clerk to notify the claimant, his/her
agent or attorney by letter mailed to such address within five days after such
disallowance. No costs shall be recovered against the City in any action brought
against it for an unliquidated claim which has not been presented to the City
Council to be audited, nor upon claims allowed in part, unless the recovery shall
be for a greater sum than the amount allowed, with the interest due. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat. §16-726)
SECTION 1-513: WARRANTS
All warrants drawn upon the city treasury must be signed by the mayor and
countersigned by the city clerk, stating the particular fund to which the warrant is
chargeable, the person to whom it is payable, and the purpose of the
expenditure. No money shall be otherwise paid than upon warrants so drawn.
Each warrant shall specify the amount included in the adopted budget statement
for the fund upon which it is drawn, and the amount already expended of such
fund. No order or warrant shall be drawn in excess of 85% of the current levy for
the purpose for which it is drawn unless there shall be sufficient money in the city
treasury for the appropriate fund against which it is to be drawn; provided that in
the event there exists obligated funds from the federal and/or state government
for the general purpose of such warrant, then such warrant may be drawn in
excess of 85%, but not more than 100% of the current levy for the purpose for
which said warrant is drawn. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-718)
SECTION 1-514: TRANSFER OF FUNDS
The City Council may, whenever during the current fiscal year it becomes
apparent due to unforeseen emergencies that there is temporarily insufficient
money in a particular fund to meet the requirements of the adopted budget of
expenditures for that fund, by a majority vote transfer money from other funds to
such fund. No expenditure during any fiscal year shall be made in excess of the
amounts indicated in the adopted budget statement, except as authorized herein.
If, as the result of unforeseen circumstances, the revenue of the current fiscal
year shall be insufficient, the City Council may propose to supplement the
previously adopted budget statement and shall conduct a public hearing at which
time any taxpayer may appear or file a written statement protesting the
application for additional money. A written record shall be kept of all such
hearings. Notice of a place and time for the said hearing shall be published at
least five days prior to the date set for the hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City. The published notice shall set forth the time and place of
the proposed hearing, the amount of additional money required, the purpose of
the required money, a statement setting forth the reasons why the adopted
budget of expenditures cannot be reduced to meet the need for additional
money, and a copy of the summary of the originally adopted budget previously
published. Upon the conclusion of the public hearing on the proposed
supplemental budget and the approval by the City Council, the City Council shall
file with the county clerk and the Nebraska State Auditor a copy of the
supplemental budget and shall certify the amount of additional tax to be levied.
The City Council may then issue warrants in payment for expenditures
authorized by the adopted supplemental budget. The said warrants shall be
referred to as "registered warrants," and shall be repaid during the next fiscal
year from funds derived from taxes levied therefor. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §13-
510, 13-511)
SECTION 1-515: SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUND
All money received on special tax assessments shall be held by the city treasurer
as a special fund to be applied to the payment of the improvement for which the
assessment was made, and such money shall be used for no other purpose
unless to reimburse the City for money expended for any such improvement.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §17-710)
SECTION 1-516: SINKING FUNDS
The City Council, subject to the limitations set forth herein, shall have the power
to levy a tax not to exceed that prescribed by state law upon the assessed value
of all taxable property within the City for a term not to exceed that prescribed by
State law in addition to the amount of tax which may be annually levied for the
purposes of the adopted budget statement of the City, for the purpose of
establishing a sinking fund for the construction, purchase, improvement,
extension or repair of the approved uses as authorized by state law. To initiate
the said sinking fund, the City Council shall declare its purpose by resolution to
submit to the qualified electors of the City the proposition to provide the
improvement at the next general city election. The resolution shall set forth the
improvement, the estimated cost, the amount of the annual levy, the number of
years required to provide the required revenue, the name of the sinking fund
proposed, and the proposition as it will appear on the ballot. Notice of the said
proposition shall be published in its entirety three times on successive weeks
before the day of the election in a legal newspaper of general circulation in the
City. The sinking fund may be established after the election if a majority or more
of the legal votes were in favor of the establishment of the fund. The City Council
may then proceed to establish the said fund in conformity with the provisions of
the proposition, and applicable state law. The funds received by the city
treasurer shall, as they accumulate, be immediately invested with the written
approval of the City Council in the manner provided by state law. No sinking
fund so established shall be used for any purpose or purposes contrary to the
purpose as it appeared on the ballot unless the City Council is authorized to do
so by 60% of the qualified electors of the City voting at a general election
favoring such a change in the use of the sinking fund. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-
1301 through 19-1304, 77-2337, 77-2339)
SECTION 1-517: GENERAL FUND
All money not specifically appropriated in the annual appropriation bill shall be
deposited in and known as the General Fund.
SECTION 1-518: DEPOSIT OF FUNDS
The city treasurer shall deposit, and at all times keep on deposit, for safe
keeping, in state or national banks of approved and responsible standing, all
money collected, received or held by him/her. Such deposits shall be subject to
all regulations imposed by law or adopted by the City Council for the receiving
and holding thereof. The fact that a stockholder, director or other officer of such
banking institution shall also be serving as mayor, councilmember, member of a
Board of Public Works or as any other officer of such city shall not disqualify such
bank from acting as a depository for such city funds. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-
712)
SECTION 1-519: CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT; SECURITY REQUIRED
The city treasurer may, upon resolution of the mayor and Council authorizing the
same, purchase certificates of deposit from and make time deposits in banks
selected as depositories of city funds under the provisions herein. The
certificates of deposit purchased and time deposits shall bear interest, and shall
be secured as set forth herein; provided that the penal sum of such bond or the
sum of such pledge of assets shall be reduced in the amount of the time deposit
or certificate of deposit insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-713)
SECTION 1-520: BOND ISSUES
The City Council may, after meeting all the requirements of state law, issue
bonds, fund bonds, and retire bonds for such purposes as may be permitted by
state law. The City Council shall have the authority to levy special assessments
for the payment of interest and principal on such bonds, and may spread the
payments up to the maximum number of years permitted by state law. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat. §10-201 through 10-411, 10-606 through 10-612, 12-1001, 17-529.01,
17-529.08, 17-534, 17-905, 17-908, 17-911, 17-939, 17-958, 17-968, 18-1801
through 18-1805, 23-3513)
SECTION 1-521: DEBT COLLECTION; AUTHORITY TO CONTRACT WITH
COLLECTION AGENCY
1. The City may contract to retain a collection agency licensed pursuant to Neb.
Rev. Stat. §45-601 to 45-622, within or without this state, for the purpose of
collecting public debts owed by any person to the City.
2. No debt owed pursuant to subsection 1 of this section may be assigned to a
collection agency unless (a) there has been an attempt to advise the debtor by
first-class mail, postage prepaid, at the last-known address of the debtor (i) of the
existence of the debt and (ii) that the debt may be assigned to a collection
agency for collection if the debt is not paid and (b) at least 30 days have elapsed
from the time the notice was sent.
3. A collection agency which is assigned a debt under this section shall have
only those remedies and powers which would be available to it as an assignee of
a private creditor.
4. For purposes of this section, debt shall include all delinquent fees or
payments except delinquent property taxes or real estate. In the case of debt
arising as a result of an order or judgment of a court in a criminal or traffic matter,
a collection fee may be added to the debt. The collection fee shall $25.00 or
4½% of the debt, whichever is greater. The collection fee shall be paid by the
person who owes the debt directly to the person or agency providing the
collection service. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §45-623)
SECTION 1-522: COLLECTION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS; PROCEDURE
The City shall collect the special assessments which it levies and perform all
other necessary functions related thereto, including foreclosure. Notice that
special assessments are due shall be mailed or otherwise delivered to the lastknown
address of the person against whom such special assessments are
assessed or to the lending institution or other party responsible for paying such
special assessments and any interest or penalties accrued thereon. Failure to
receive such notice shall not relieve the taxpayer from any liability pay such
special assessments and any interest or penalties accrued thereon. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat. §18-1216)

ARTICLE VI – EMPLOYEE REGULATIONS AND PENSION PROGRAMS
SECTION 1-601 EMPLOYEE MANUAL
The City Council may, by resolution, from time to time, adopt an employee
manual to set forth rules and regulations between the City and its full-time and
part-time employees who are not employed in positions governed by a union
contract or collective bargaining agreement. Such manual, if the same is
adopted, shall be delivered in its current form to each employee and to each new
employee at the employee’s time of hiring by the City, and shall be made
available at all reasonable times to all other city employees or their
representatives. The City, through the City Council, reserves the right to modify
the contents of such manual as deemed necessary for the best interests of the
City. None of the provisions of such manual shall remain in effect if modified by
proper Council action. Any modification shall be transmitted by the City in writing
to all employees. The terms of the employee manual do not constitute a contract
of employment between the City and any city employee unless it is incorporated
by the terms of a separate contract.
SECTION 1-602 PROHIBITIONS
1. No action affecting the employment status of an employee or applicant for a
position in the City, including examination, appointment, promotion, demotion,
suspension or removal, or other conditions and privileges of employment, shall
be taken or withheld by reason of the race, creed, color, sex, disability, national
origin, religion or political affiliation of the affected person; provided nothing in
this section shall be construed as prohibiting any action affecting the employment
status of an employee or applicant in those instances where disability or sex is a
bonafide occupational qualification reasonably necessary for the normal
operation of the City. No person shall be employed or retained who advocates or
belongs to an organization advocating the overthrow or change of our
government by force or violence.
2. No non-elective officer or employee in the city’s service shall during working
hours or while such employee is otherwise engaged in the performance of his/her
official duties or while wearing a uniform required by his/her city service, solicit or
contribute funds for any candidate in any election for Mayor or City Council; take
part in or manage the campaign of any candidate for Mayor or City Council;
address or take an active part in any rally or meeting for or in support of any
candidate for Mayor or City Council; solicit votes, assist voters at the polls, or
help any candidate for Mayor or City Council get voters to the polls; participate in
the distribution of campaign literature supporting any candidate for Mayor or City
Council; initiate or circulate any petition nominating a candidate for Mayor or City
Council; ride in any caravan for any candidate for Mayor or City Council. Nothing
in this section shall prohibit any non-elective officer or employee in the city
service from exercising the right at a citizen to express opinions, vote, or do
partisan or non-partisan political acts not expressly prohibited.
3. Unclassified employees shall not hold any office in, or be employed by, any
other public body which would interfere with the performance of official duties.
Unclassified employees shall attempt to avoid, and if it cannot be avoided must
disclose to the City, the existence or the possibility of a conflict of interest.
4. No person seeking appointment to or promotion in employment shall give,
render or pay any money, service or other valuable thing to any person in
connection with testing, appraisal, appointment, promotion or other term or
condition of employment. Any person who willfully or corruptly violates any of the
provisions of this section shall be subject to discharge and any other available
punishment by the City that is provided by law.
5. This section does not apply to any positions which are the subject matter of
collective bargaining in the event that a collective bargaining agreement
addresses the position or the possible action by the City Council.
SECTION 1-603 PENSION PROGRAM; ADMINISTRATION
The City Council may from time to time designate by resolution a committee
which shall have full responsibility for the administration of the pension program
and shall hold, invest, reinvest and distribute all funds or other property received
pursuant hereto, in trust, for the purposes of the pension program under a plan or
plans adopted by the City Council.
SECTION 1-604 PENSION PROGRAM; POWERS AND DUTIES OF
COUNCIL
1. The Council, in the administration of this program, shall create a General
Pension Fund (hereinafter referred to as “Fund”) which shall consist of
appropriations which this city may from time to time allocate for such purposes
and any funds or property obtained from other lawful sources for such purposes,
and shall include employee contributions. The Council shall have full power and
authority by majority action of its members, either directly or through their
designated representative, to do all acts, execute, acknowledge and deliver all
instruments and to exercise for the sole benefit of the participants hereunder any
and all powers and discretions necessary to implement and effectuate the
purposes of this article, including for purposes of illustration but not limitation any
and all of the following:
2. To hold, invest and reinvest in any form of property whatsoever without
restriction to legal investments all funds received pursuant to Sections 1-603 to
1-608; to enter into contracts or deposit agreements on behalf of this city with
one or more insurance companies in order to provide the pension and other
benefits hereinbefore set forth and to pay the premiums and deposits required by
the purchase of said contracts; to retain or purchase as an investment any form
of life insurance, retirement income, annuity or other contracts of similar nature
and to exercise with respect thereto any right or incident of ownership to retain
any property which may at any time become an asset of the Fund as long as said
council may deem it advisable; and to make distribution of the funds in the
Fund in accordance with the terms of this article; provided, however, that the
Council’s exercise of its power to enter into, acquire or purchase any contracts or
agreements which provide pension and other benefits hereinbefore set forth shall
be in conformity with a uniform standard and non-discriminatory as between
participants hereunder.
SECTION 1-605 PENSION PROGRAM; FUNDING
The benefits conferred upon city employees by any city pension program may be
funded from such appropriations which this city, through the City Council, may
from time to time allocate for such purposes, and funds received from any lawful
source, including employee contributions.
SECTION 1-606: PENSION PROGRAM; TRANSFER OF ASSIGNMENT
No participant or beneficiary of such participant shall have the right to alienate,
encumber or assign any assets in the Fund held by the Council on his/her behalf,
or any of the benefits, payments, proceeds or avails of any contract or agreement
purchased or acquired by the City hereunder. Any contract or agreement issued
pursuant to Section 1-603 to 1-608 upon the life of such participant shall contain
a provision, in substance, that to the extent permitted by law none of the benefits,
payments or proceeds of such contract or agreement shall be subject to any
legal process by any creditor of such participant or of any beneficiary of such
participant.
SECTION 1-607 PENSION PROGRAM; RESERVATION OF RIGHTS
The Council reserves to itself the right any time and from time to time to alter and
amend any or all of the provisions of Sections 1-603 to 1-608 and revoke
Sections 1-603 through 1-608 in their entirety; provided, however, that in the
event of revocation each participating employee shall be entitled to have
assigned to him/her all contracts or agreements then held by the City hereunder
and in effect which provide annuity or death benefits for such employee.
SECTION 1-608: POLICE PENSION PROGRAM
Separate and apart from and distinct to any other available pension program
created by the City for the benefit of city employees, The City shall initiate a
separate system for the pension of members of the police department. The
pension program shall be established and administered pursuant to state statute
and all provisions of state statute applicable to the pension programs for
policemen in cities of the first class shall control and regulate the administration
of the program by the City, including but not limited to, the qualifications,
payments, funding, options of payments and the amount to be contributed from
the salary of the employee policemen. Further, this section shall in no way
affect or limit the police officers’ right to participate in any other system or collect
benefits under any other applicable state and federal statute.
ARTICLE VII - ELECTIONS
SECTION 1-701: ELECTION OF OFFICERS; CERTIFICATION
All city elections involving the election of officers shall be held in accordance with
the Election Act and in conjunction with the statewide general election. No later
than July 1 of each even-numbered year, the City Council shall certify to the
Secretary of State, the election commissioner or the county clerk, the name of
the City, the number of officers to be elected, the length of the terms of office, the
vacancies to be filled by election and length of remaining term, and the number
of votes to be cast by a registered voter for each office. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat.
§16-302.01, 32-401, 32-404, 32-556)
SECTION 1-702: PRIMARY ELECTION; NUMBER OF CANDIDATES FILING
If the number of candidates properly filed for nomination at the primary election
does not exceed two for each vacancy to be filled, all candidates properly filed
shall be considered nominated, and no primary election for their nomination shall
be required.
SECTION 1-703: TIE VOTES
In the case of a tie vote of any of the candidates in either the primary or general
election, the county clerk shall notify such candidates to appear at his/her office
on a given day and hour to determine the same by lot before the canvassing
board, and the certificate of nomination or election shall be given accordingly.
Notice to appear shall be given by certified mail. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §32-1122)
SECTION 1-704: FILING FEE
Prior to the filing of any nomination papers, there shall be paid to the city
treasurer a filing fee which shall amount to 1% of the annual salary for the office
for which the candidate will file; provided, there shall be no filing fee for any
candidate filing for an office in which a per diem is paid rather than a salary, or an
office for which there is a salary of less than $500.00 per year. No nominating
papers shall be filed until the proper city treasurer's receipt, showing payment of
the filing fee, shall be presented to the election officer with whom the nomination
papers are to be filed. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §32-608)
SECTION 1-705: VOTER QUALIFICATIONS
"Elector" shall mean a person of the constitutionally prescribed age or upwards,
who shall have the right to vote for all officers to be elected to public office, and
upon all questions and proposals, lawfully submitted to the voters at any and all
elections authorized or provided for by the Constitution or the laws of the State of
Nebraska, except school elections; provided, no person shall be qualified to vote
at any election unless such person shall be a resident of the State and shall have
been properly registered with the election official of the county. (Ref. Neb. Rev.
Stat. §17-602, 32-110)
SECTION 1-706: CANDIDATES
Any registered voter who was not a candidate in the primary election may have
his/her name placed on the general election ballot for a partisan office by filing
petitions as prescribed in this section and Neb. Rev. Stat. §32-621, or by
nomination by political party convention or committee.
Any candidate who was defeated in the primary election and any registered voter
who was not a candidate in the primary election may have his/her name placed
on the general election ballot if a vacancy exists on the ballot under subsection
(1) of Neb. Rev. Stat. §32-626 and the candidate files for the office by petition as
prescribed in this section.
The number of signatures of registered voters needed to place the name of a
candidate upon the nonpartisan ballot for the general election shall be at least
10% of the total number of registered voters voting for Governor or President of
the United States at the immediately preceding general election in the City.
The number of signatures of registered voters needed to place the name of a
candidate upon the partisan ballot for the general election shall be at least 20%
of the total vote for Governor or President of the United States at the immediately
preceding general election within the City, not to exceed 2000.
Petitions for nomination shall conform to the requirements of Neb. Rev. Stat.
§32-628. Petitions shall state the office to be filled and the name and address of
the candidate. Petitions for partisan office shall also indicate the party affiliation
of the candidate. Petitions shall be signed by registered voters residing in the
City and shall be filed with the filing officer in the same manner as provided for
candidate filing forms in Neb. Rev. Stat. §32-607. Petition signers and circulators
shall conform to the requirements of Neb. Rev. Stat. §32-629 and 32-630. No
petition for nomination shall be filed unless there is attached thereto a receipt
showing payment of the required filing fee. The petitions shall be filed by
September 1 in the year of the general election. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §32-616
through 32-618)
SECTION 1-707: NOMINATION BY WRITE-IN VOTES
Candidates for elected office may be nominated by write-in; however, when the
name of a candidate who did not file or become a petition candidate for
nomination is written in and voted for as a candidate for a councilmember, such
person shall not be entitled to a certificate of nomination at a statewide primary
election or have his/her name placed on the general election ballot unless he/she
shall have received not less than 20% of the total vote cast for the candidate
receiving the greatest number of votes in the precinct or ward at the preceding
election in which candidates were elected to serve the precinct or ward.
SECTION 1-708: SPECIAL JOINT ELECTIONS
Any issue to be submitted to the registered voters at a special election by the
City shall be certified by the city clerk to the election commissioner or county
clerk at least 50 days prior to the election. A special election may be held by mail
as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. §32-952 through 32-959. No special election to
be conducted by the election commissioner or county clerk shall be held within
30 days prior to or 60 days after the statewide primary election, and no special
election to be conducted by the election commissioner or county clerk shall be
held within 30 days prior to or 60 days after the statewide general election.
In lieu of submitting the issue at a special election, the City may submit the issue
at a statewide primary or general election or at any scheduled county election,
except that no such issue shall be submitted at a statewide election or scheduled
county election unless the issue to be submitted has been certified by the city
clerk to the election commissioner or county clerk by March 1 for the primary
election and by September 1 for the general election.
After the election commissioner or county clerk has received the certification of
the issue to be submitted, he/she shall be responsible for all matters relating to
the submission of the issue to the registered voters, except that the city clerk
shall be responsible for the publication or posting of any required special notice
of the submission of such issue other than the notice required to be given of the
statewide election issues. The election commissioner or county clerk shall
prepare the ballots and issue absentee ballots and shall also conduct the
submission of the issue, including the receiving and counting of the ballots on the
issue. The election returns shall be made to the election commissioner or county
clerk. The ballots, including absentee ballots, shall be counted and canvassed at
the same time and in the same manner as the other ballots. Upon completion of
the canvass of the vote by the county canvassing board, the election
commissioner or county clerk shall certify the election results to the City Council.
The canvass by the county canvassing board shall have the same force and
effect as if made by the City Council. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §32-559)
SECTION 1-709 CERTIFICATE OF NOMINATION OR ELECTION
1. If the county election commissioner does not certify the election results, the
city clerk shall, within 40 days after the election, prepare, sign and deliver a
certificate of nomination or certificate of election to each person whom the
canvassing board has declared to have received the highest vote for each
municipal office. No person shall be issued a certificate of nomination as a
candidate of a political party unless such person has received a number of votes
at least equal to 5% of the total ballots cast at the primary election by registered
voters affiliated with that political party in the district which the office for which
he/she is a candidate serves.
2. A certificate of election prepared by the city clerk shall be in the form as nearly
as possible prescribed in Neb. Rev. Stat. §32-1033 and shall be signed by the
mayor under the seal of the City and countersigned by the city clerk. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat §19-3041, 32-558, 32-1033)
SECTION 1-710: INABILITY TO ASSUME OFFICE
In any general election, where the person who received the highest number of
votes is ineligible, disqualified, deceased, or for any other reason is unable to
assume the office for which he was a candidate, and the electorate had
reasonable notice of such disability at the time of election, the candidate in such
election who received the highest number of votes shall be declared elected, and
shall be entitled to the certificate of election; provided that any candidate so
declared elected received not less than 35% of the total number of votes cast for
such office in the election. If any of the qualifications of this section are not met
by the candidate to be declared elected, or reasonable notice of the winner's
ineligibility is not available to the voters, a vacancy in such office shall be
declared to exist at the time of commencement of the term and shall be filled as
prescribed by law.
SECTION 1-711 RECALL PROCEDURE
1. Any or all of the elected officials of the City may be removed from office by
recall pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §32-1301 to 32-1309. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat.
§32-1301 through 32-1309)
SECTION 1-712: BALLOTS
The county clerk or election commissioner shall provide printed ballots for every
general municipal election and the expense of printing and delivering the ballots
and cards of instruction shall be a charge upon the City. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat.
§32-1202)
SECTION 1-713: WARDS AND PRECINCTS
The City of Plattsmouth, for the purpose of elections, is divided into
four wards with certain wards further divided into precincts as
follows:
FIRST WARD
First Ward shall consist of all of that part of the City of Plattsmouth
lying north of Avenue A from the eastern corporate limit of the City
of Plattsmouth, west to 10TH Street; that part lying east of 10TH
Street, north to Avenue B; that part lying north of Avenue B, west to
13TH Street; that part lying west of 13TH Street, south to Avenue A;
that part lying north of Avenue A, west to 15TH Street; that part lying
east of 15TH Street, north to Avenue B; and that part lying north of
Avenue B west to the corporate limits of the city.
a. The FIRST PRECINCT of First Ward shall
consist of that part of First Ward lying north of Avenue
A from the east city limits, west to 8TH Street; that part
lying east of 8TH Street, north to Avenue G; that part
lying north of Avenue G, west to 12TH Street; and that
part lying east of 12TH Street, north to the city limits.
b. The SECOND PRECINCT of First Ward shall
consist of that part of the First Ward lying south of the
city limits where it intersects N. 12TH Street; thence
following the north and west city limits to Avenue B;
that part lying north of Avenue B, east to 15TH Street;
that part lying east of 15TH Street, south to Avenue A;
that part lying north of Avenue A, east to 13TH Street;
that part lying west of 13TH Street, north to Avenue B;
that part lying north of Avenue B, east to 10TH Street;
that part lying east of 10TH Street, south to Avenue A;
that part lying north of Avenue A, east to 8TH Street;
that part lying west of 8TH Street, north to Avenue G;
that part lying south of Avenue G west to 12TH street;
that part lying west of 12TH street, north to the city
limits.
SECOND WARD
Second Ward shall consist of all that part of the City of Plattsmouth
lying south of Avenue A from 6TH Street, west to 10TH Street; that
part lying west of 10TH Street, north to Avenue B; that part lying
south of Avenue B, west to 13TH Street; that part lying east of 13TH
Street, south to Avenue A; that part lying south of Avenue A, west
to 15TH Street; that part lying west of 15TH Street, north to Avenue
B; that part lying south of Avenue B, west to the city limits; that part
lying north of 8TH Avenue, east from the city limits to Chicago
Avenue; that part lying west of Chicago Avenue, northeast to 5TH
Avenue; that part lying north of 5TH Avenue, east to 7TH Street; that
part lying west of 7TH Street, north to 3RD Avenue; the part lying
north of 3RD Avenue, east to 6TH Street; and that part lying west of
6TH Street, north to Avenue A. Second Ward includes the
incorporated area in west Plattsmouth between Oak Hill Road and
a non-visible line extending west from 1ST Avenue to the cemetery.
a. The FIRST PRECINCT of Second Ward shall
consist of all of that part of Second Ward lying south
of Avenue A from 6TH Street, west to 10TH Street; that
part lying west of 10TH Street, north to Avenue B; that
part lying south of Avenue B, west to 13TH Street; that
part lying east of 13TH Street, south to Avenue A; that
part lying south of Avenue A, west to 15TH Street; that
part lying west of 15TH Street, north to Avenue B; that
part lying south of Avenue B, west to the city limits;
that part lying north of a non-visible line extending
from 2ND Avenue, east from the city limits, east to 8TH
Street; that part lying east of 8TH Street, south to 3RD
Avenue; that part lying north of 3RD Avenue, east to
6TH Street; and that part lying west of 6TH Street, north
to Avenue A. First Precinct includes the incorporated
area in west Plattsmouth between Oak Hill Road and
a non-visible line extending west from 1st Avenue to
the cemetery.
b. The SECOND PRECINCT of Second Ward
shall consist of all that part of Second Ward lying
south of 3RD Avenue from 7TH Street, west to 8TH
Street; that part lying west of 8TH Street, north to 2ND
Avenue; that part lying south of 2ND Avenue, west
along a non-visible line extending from 2ND Avenue to
the city limits; thence following the city limits south to
8TH Avenue; that part lying north of 8TH Avenue, east
to Chicago Avenue; that part lying west of Chicago
Avenue, northeast to 5TH Avenue, that part lying north
of 5TH Avenue, east to 7TH Street; and that part lying
west of 7TH Street, north to 3RD Avenue.
THIRD WARD
Third Ward shall consist of all that part of the City of Plattsmouth
beginning at 9TH Street and 5TH Avenue, lying south of 5TH Avenue,
west to Chicago Avenue; that part lying east of Chicago Avenue,
southwest to 8TH Avenue; that part lying south of 8TH Avenue
extending west to the city limits. Third Ward is bounded by the
west city limits; Third Ward extends south to the south city limits;
Third Ward follows the city limits east, said point being the
intersection of the center line of 15TH Street/Chicago Avenue and
the south city limits; that part lying west of 15TH Street/Chicago
Avenue north to Lincoln Avenue; that part lying west of Lincoln
Avenue, northeast to 12TH Avenue; that part lying South of 12TH
Avenue, west to the alley between 8TH Street and 9TH Street; that
part lying west of the alley between 8TH Street and 9TH Street, north
to 11TH Avenue; that part lying south of 11TH Avenue, west to 9TH
Street; that part lying west of 9TH Street, north to 7TH Avenue; that
part lying south of 7TH Avenue, west to 9TH Street; and that part
lying west of 9TH Street, north to 5TH Avenue.
a. The FIRST PRECINCT of Third Ward shall
consist of all of that part of Third Ward beginning at
9TH Street and 5TH Avenue, lying south of 5TH Avenue,
west to Chicago Avenue; that part lying east of
Chicago Avenue continuing southwest to the
east/west private drive serving 1715 S. 15TH Street
(also known as The Pines, Lot 1); that part lying north
of the private drive referenced above; that part east of
the north/south portion of the same private drive that
runs south between mobile home space numbers 51,
52, 53 and 54 on its west side and mobile home
space numbers 50, 49, 48, 47, 33, 31 and 29 on its
east side, terminating at 17TH Avenue; that part lying
north of 17TH Avenue, east to Lincoln Ave; that part
lying northwest of Lincoln Avenue, northeast to 12TH
Avenue; that part lying south of 12TH Avenue, west to
the alley between 8TH Street and 9TH Street; that part
lying west of the alley between 8TH Street and 9TH
Street, north to 11TH Avenue; that part lying south of
11TH Avenue, west to 9TH Street; that part lying west
of 9TH Street, north to 7TH Avenue; that part lying
south of 7TH Avenue, west to 9TH Street; and that part
lying west of 9TH Street, north to 5TH Avenue.
b. The SECOND PRECINCT of Third Ward shall
consist of all that part of Third Ward lying south of 8TH
Avenue from Chicago Avenue extending west to the
city limits; Third Ward is bounded by the west city
limits; Third Ward extends south to the south city
limits; Third Ward follows the city limits to a point
being the intersection of the centerline of 15TH
Street/Chicago Avenue and the south city limits; that
part of Third Ward lying west of 15TH Street/Chicago
Avenue north to Lincoln Avenue; that part of Third
Ward lying west of Lincoln Avenue, northeast to 17TH
Avenue; that part of Third Ward lying south of 17TH
Avenue, (includes the east/west private drive serving
1715 S. 15TH Street, also known as “The Pines, Lot
1,” beginning south of the intersection of Highway 34
and South 15TH Street on the east side of S. 15TH
Street, then going east to the north/south portion of
the same private drive that runs south between
mobile home space numbers 51, 52, 53 and 54 on its
west side and mobile home space numbers 50, 49,
48, 47, 33, 31 and 29 on its east side, terminating at
17th Avenue), west to Chicago Avenue; and that part
of Third Ward lying west of Chicago Avenue, north
then northeast to 8TH Avenue.
FOURTH WARD
Fourth Ward shall consist of all that part of the City of Plattsmouth
lying south of Avenue A extending west from the east city limits to
6TH Street; that part lying east of 6TH Street, south to 3RD Avenue;
that part lying south of 3RD Avenue, west to 7TH Street; that part
lying east of 7TH Street, south to 5TH Avenue; that part lying south of
5TH Avenue, west to 9TH Street; that part lying east of 9TH Street,
south to 7TH Avenue; that part lying north of 7TH Avenue, east to 9TH
Street; that part lying east of 9TH Street, south to 11TH Avenue; that
part lying north of 11TH Avenue, east to the alley between 9TH Street
and 8TH Street; that part lying east of the alley between 9TH Street
and 8TH Street, south to 12TH Avenue; that part lying north of 12TH
Avenue, east to Lincoln Avenue; that part lying east of Lincoln
Avenue, southwest to 15TH Street/Chicago Avenue; that part lying
east of 15TH Street/Chicago Avenue, south to the corporate limits of
the city. Fourth Ward is bounded by the city limits east of 15TH
Street/Chicago Avenue and follows the east city limits north to
Avenue A.
a. The FIRST PRECINCT of Fourth Ward shall
consist of all of that part of Fourth Ward lying south of
Avenue A extending west from the east city limits to
6TH Street; that part lying east of 6TH Street, south to
3RD Avenue; that part lying south of 3RD Avenue, west
to 7TH Street; that part lying east of 7TH Street, south
to 5TH Avenue; that part lying south of 5TH Avenue,
west to 9TH Street; that part lying east of 9TH Street,
south to 7TH Avenue; that part lying north of 7TH
Avenue, east to 9TH Street; that part lying east of 9TH
Street, south to 11TH Avenue; that part lying north of
11TH Avenue, east to the alley between 9TH Street and
8TH Street; that part lying east of the alley between
9TH Street and 8TH Street, south to 12TH Avenue; that
part lying north of 12TH Avenue, east to Lincoln
Avenue; that part lying west of Lincoln Avenue,
northeast to 3RD Avenue; that part lying north of 3RD
Avenue, east to 2ND Street; that part lying west of 2ND
Street, north to Livingston Road; and that part lying
north of Livingston Road extending east along a nonvisible
line from Livingston Road to the east city limits.
First Precinct then follows the east city limits north to
Avenue A.
b. The SECOND PRECINCT of Fourth Ward shall
consist of all of that part of Fourth Ward lying south of
Livingston Road extending west along a non-visible
line from Livingston Road from the east corporate
limits of the city, east to 2ND Street; that part lying east
of 2ND Street, south to 3RD Avenue; that part lying
south of 3RD Avenue, west to Lincoln Avenue; that
part lying east of Lincoln Avenue, southeast to
Chicago Avenue/15TH Street; that part lying east of
Chicago Avenue/15TH Street, south to where Chicago
Avenue/15TH Street meet the south city limits.
Second Precinct then follows the city limits east and
north until it intersects the non-visible line extending
east from Livingston Road.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §§16-104, 16-105) (Amended by Ordinance No. ____,
SECTION 1-714: EXIT POLLS
No person shall conduct any exit poll, public opinion poll, or any other interview
with voters on election day seeking to determine voter preference within 20 feet
of the entrance to any polling place or, if inside the polling place or building,
within 100 feet of any voting booth. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §32-1525)

ARTICLE VIII - PENAL PROVISION
SECTION 1-801: VIOLATION; PENALTY
Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this chapter, set forth at full length herein or incorporated by
reference, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not more than $500.00 dollars for each offense. A new violation
shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of such failure to
comply.
CHAPTER II COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
ARTICLE I – BOARD OF HEALTH
2-101 MEMBERS; OFFICERS; DUTIES
ARTICLE II - BOARD OF PARK COMMISSIONERS
2-201 MEMBERS; TERM; OATH; COMPENSATION
2-202 ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS
2-203 DUTIES
2-204 OPERATION AND FUNDING
2-205 INJURY TO PARK PROPERTY
2-206 CURFEW IN CITY PARKS
ARTICLE III - CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
2-301 MEMBERS; OATH; COMPENSATION
2-302 TERM OF OFFICE; REMOVAL
2-303 ORGANIZATION; OFFICERS
2-304 RECORDS
2-305 MEETINGS
2-306 DUTIES
2-307 CONCURRENCE BY MAJORITY
2-308 RULES AND REGULATIONS
2-309 INVESTIGATIONS
2-310 HEARINGS
ARTICLE IV – HOUSING AUTHORITY
2-401 HOUSING AUTHORITY BOARD
2-402 MISCONDUCT IN OFFICE
2-403 REPORTS
2-404 OWNERSHIP
2-405 DEFINITIONS
2-406 OPERATION AND MANAGEMENT
ARTICLE V - UTILITY SERVICES BOARD
***All of Chapter 2, Article 5 repealed by Ordinance No. 1776
ARTICLE VI - CEMETERY BOARD
2-601 MEMBERS; TERM OF OFFICE; OATH; COMPENSATION
2-602 ORGANIZATION; OFFICERS
2-603 MEETINGS
2-604 DUTIES
2-605 REPORTS
2-606 CONTROL AND CUSTODY OF FUNDS AND PROPERTY
2-607 POTTERS FIELD
2-608 LOT BOOK
2-609 CEMETERY CURFEW
2-610 CEMETERY SPEED LIMIT
ARTICLE VII – LIBRARY BOARD
2-701 ESTABLISHMENT OF A PUBLIC LIBRARY
2-702 OPERATION
2-703 FUNDING, CUSTODY OF FUNDS AND DONATIONS
2-704 LIBRARY ADVISORY BOARD
2-705 USE OF THE LIBRARY
2-706 DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED
2-707 PENALTIES; RECOVERY; DISPOSITION
ARTICLE VIII – POLICE DEPARTMENT
2-801 CHIEF OF POLICE; APPOINTMENT
2-802 DUTIES
2-803 RESERVE OFFICER BOND
2-804 ARREST JURISDICTION
2-805 POLICE OFFICERS; DISCIPLINE OR REMOVAL FROM
DUTY; NOTICE AND HEARING; DETERMINATION
(REPEALED October 5, 2009)
ARTICLE IX - AIRPORT AUTHORITY
2-901 JURISDICTION
2-902 MEMBERS; TERM OF OFFICE; COMPENSATION
2-903 REMOVAL FROM OFFICE
2-904 DUTIES
ARTICLE X - PLANNING COMMISSION
2-1001 MEMBERS; TERM OF OFFICE; OATH; COMPENSATION
2-1002 ORGANIZATION; OFFICERS
2-1003 MEETINGS
2-1004 DUTIES
2-1005 FUNDS, LIMITS UPON EXPENDITURES
2-1006 REPORTS
2-1007 ACTIONS BY CITY COUNCIL; RECOMMENDATION OF
COMMISSION
ARTICLE XI - PERSONNEL BOARD (REPEALED)
ARTICLE XII - CITIZEN ADVISORY REVIEW COMMITTEE
2-1201 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
2-1202 MEMBERS; VACANCIES, MEETINGS
2-1203 DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
2-1204 MAYOR; DUTIES
ARTICLE XIII - PENAL PROVISION
2-1301 VIOLATION; PENALTY
ARTICLE XIV- BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
2-1401 CREATED
2-1402 QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS
2-1403 TERM OF OFFICE AND REMOVAL
2-1404 APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS
2-1405 OATH; COMPENSATION
2-1406 ORGANIZATION AND OFFICERS
2-1407 MEETINGS
2-1408 DUTIES
CHAPTER II COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
ARTICLE I – BOARD OF HEALTH
SECTION 2-101: MEMBERS; OFFICERS; DUTIES
1. The City Council shall appoint a Board of Health, which shall consist of five
members. The members of the Board shall include the mayor, who shall serve
as chairperson; a physician who shall be the Board's medical advisor; the chief of
police, who shall serve on the Board as secretary and quarantine officer; the
President of the City Council; and one other member. The members of the
Board shall serve a one-year term of office, unless reappointed, without compensation,
and shall reorganize at the first meeting in December of each year. No
member of the Board of Health shall hold more than one Board of Health position.
2. The secretary shall keep full and correct minutes and records of all meetings
and file the same with the city clerk where they shall be available for public inspection
during office hours. The Board of Health shall be funded by the City
Council from time to time out of the General Fund. A majority of the Board shall
constitute a quorum for the purpose of doing business. The Board shall meet at
such times as the City Council may designate. Special meetings may be held
upon the call of the chairperson or any two members of the Board.
3. The Board shall enact rules and regulations, which shall have the full force
and effect of law, to safeguard the health of the people of the City. The Board
shall enforce the rules and regulations and provide fines and punishments for
any violations thereof. It may regulate, suppress and prevent the occurrence of
nuisances and enforce all laws of the State of Nebraska and ordinances of the
City relating to nuisances and to matters of sanitation, which affect the health,
and safety of the people. The Board shall regularly inspect such premises and
businesses as the City Council may direct. All members of the Board shall be
responsible for making such reports and performing such other duties as the City
Council may, from time to time, designate. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-238)

ARTICLE II –BOARD OF PARK COMMISSIONERS
SECTION 2-201: MEMBERS; TERM; OATH; COMPENSATION
The mayor, with the consent and approval of the City Council, shall appoint the
Board of Park Commissioners. The Board shall consist of not less than six members,
who shall be residents of the City. No member of the City Council shall
serve as a park commissioner while serving as a member of the City Council.
The members of the Board shall serve a three-year term of office unless reappointed.
Before entering upon his/her duties, each park commissioner shall take
an oath, filing it with the city clerk, that he/she will faithfully perform the duties of
his/her office and not in any manner be influenced by personal or political motivation.
The Board shall serve without compensation and may be required, in the
discretion of the City Council, to give a bond in a sum set by resolution of the City
Council and conditioned upon the faithful performance of their duties. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat. §16-696)
SECTION 2-202: ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS
At the time of the Board's first meeting in February of each year, the members
shall organize by selecting from their number a president and a secretary. It
shall be the duty of the secretary to keep the full and correct minutes and records
of all meetings and to file the same with the city clerk where they shall be available
for public inspection at any reasonable time. A majority of the Board members
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The Board shall
meet once a month at such time as the City Council may designate. Special
meetings may be held upon the call of the president or any two of the Board
members. A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business and a majority vote of the total membership shall be required to pass
any motion or resolution. A tie vote of the Board shall be broken by the mayor.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-696)
SECTION 2-203 DUTIES
The Board shall have the following authority and responsibility for the parks:
1. To establish appropriate rules and regulations for the management, use and
operation of all parks and recreational facilities owned or operated by the City.
These rules can establish special use areas within the public park system for
specific activities, which are identified in the rules.
2. To plan the recreational equipment, landscaping and overall improvements for
all parks. The Board shall have the authority to make expenditures for these
purposes from funds collected by taxes as provided by state statute or by donations
to the credit of the Park Fund, subject to review and approval by the City
Council for expenditures exceeding $1,000.00. Prior to making any expenditure,
regardless of the amount, the Board will confirm with the city administrator or the
city clerk that the funds are within the park budget and are available. The city
treasurer shall have the physical custody of all park funds, monies, credits, securities,
and all other financial assets as required by law.
3. To prohibit the use of the parks and recreational facilities by automobiles and
all other motor powered vehicles regardless of the number of wheels on them.
The Board shall have authority to establish certain areas within which certain vehicles
may be used and to limit the use to specific purposes.
4. To regulate the circumstances in which animals are allowed in the parks, and
to require the owners to dispose of excrement deposited in the park by the animals
in a proper receptacle.
5. The Board of Park Commissioners shall carry out its responsibilities through
the city administrator or the public works director, and if these persons are unavailable,
then through the mayor. The city administrator shall be responsible for
carrying out the decisions of the Board in regard to the use of city employees to
accomplish any actions taken by the Board and for the actual purchase of items
for the parks and recreational facilities. All employees of the City doing work in
or for the city parks and recreational facilities shall be under the supervision and
direction of the city administrator or the public works director, or if these persons
are not available, the mayor. All actions and proposed actions of the Board shall
be subject to the review and control of the City Council. The Board shall be responsible
for making such reports and performing such other duties as the City
Council may, from time to time, designate.
SECTION 2-204: OPERATION AND FUNDING
The City owns and operates the city parks and other recreational areas through
the Board of Park Commissioners. The City Council, for the purpose of defraying
the cost of the care, management, and maintenance of the city parks, may each
year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state law on the
actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within the corporate limits
that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the said tax shall be placed into the
General Fund and shall remain in the custody of the city clerk/treasurer. Monies
so levied and collected will be set aside by the City Council in the city budget for
operation and maintenance of the city parks and this will be known as the Park
Fund. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-697)
SECTION 2-205: INJURY TO PARK PROPERTY
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or willfully cut down, injure or
destroy any tree, plant or shrub. It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or
destroy any sodded or planted area, or injure or destroy any building, structure,
equipment, fence, bench, table or any other property of the city parks and recreational
areas. No person shall commit any waste on or litter the city parks or other
public grounds. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-697.01)
SECTION 2-206 CURFEW IN CITY PARKS
All areas designated by the City as public parks shall be closed to the public from
11:00 P.M. until 5:00 A.M., and no person shall enter upon said property during
that time; provided that this section shall not be applicable to (1) a sports event in
progress and those persons in attendance are within the immediate area of such
event, which must have had prior approval by the proper city officials and (2) the
City’s boat dock and immediate area when parking is used solely for the purpose
of fishing.

ARTICLE III – CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
SECTION 2-301: MEMBERS; OATH; COMPENSATION
The Civil Service Commission shall consist of three members appointed by the
mayor with the advice and consent of a majority of the City Council. Each commissioner
shall be: (1) able to read and write the English language; (2) a citizen
of the United States; (3) a resident of the City of Plattsmouth for at least three
years immediately preceding his/her appointment; and (4) an elector of Cass
County; except that at the time of any appointment, not more than two commissioners,
including the ones to be appointed, shall be registered electors of the
same political party.
Before entering upon his/her duties, each commissioner shall take an oath to be
filed with the city clerk that he/she will faithfully perform the duties of his/her office
and will not in any manner be actuated or influenced therein by personal or political
motivation. All civil service commissioners shall serve without compensation.
SECTION 2-302: TERM OF OFFICE; REMOVAL
The term of office of commissioners shall be six years and until their successors
are appointed and qualified, unless sooner removed. Any member may be removed
from office for incompetence, dereliction of duty, malfeasance in office or
other good cause by the mayor and City Council; except that no member of the
Commission shall be removed until written charges have been preferred, due notice
given such member, and a full hearing had before the mayor and City Council.
SECTION 2-303: ORGANIZATION; OFFICERS
Immediately after the appointment of the Commission and annually thereafter,
the Commission shall organize by electing one of its members as chairperson;
the Commission shall further appoint a secretary and chief examiner.
The Commission may merge the positions of secretary and chief examiner and
appoint one person to perform the duties of both positions. The commission secretary
and chief examiner shall be subject to suspension or discharge upon the
vote of a majority of the appointed members of the Commission.
SECTION 2-304: RECORDS
It shall be the duty of the secretary and chief examiner to keep the records of the
Commission, preserve all reports made to it, superintend and keep records of all
examinations held under its direction and perform such other duties as the
Commission may prescribe.
SECTION 2-305: MEETINGS
The Civil Service Commission shall hold meetings as may be required for the
proper discharge of its duties. Two members of the Commission shall constitute
a quorum for the transaction of business.
SECTION 2-306: DUTIES
It shall be the duty of the Civil Service Commission to:
1. Adopt and promulgate procedural rules and regulations consistent with the
Civil Service Act, which shall provide in detail the manner in which examinations
may be held and any matters assigned by the mayor and City Council.
All actions of the Civil Service Commission shall conform to and be governed
by the Civil Service Act.
2. To provide that all tests shall be practical and consist of subjects which will
fairly determine the capacity of persons who are to be examined to perform
the duties of the position to which an appointment is to be made and may include,
but not be limited to, tests of physical fitness and of manual skill and
psychological testing.
3. To provide rules and regulations for credit to be given to all applicants for entry
level positions for service to, and honorable discharge from, the armed
forces of the United States, and who have equaled or exceeded the minimum
qualifying standard established by the mayor and City Council; such credit to
be that directed by statute. Entry level positions eligible for such credits are
to be defined by the mayor and City Council.
4. To conduct an investigation concerning and report upon all matters regarding
the enforcement and effect of the Civil Service Act and the rules and regulations
prescribed.
5. To provide that all hearings and investigations before the Commission, designated
commissioner or chief examiner shall be governed by the Civil Service
Act and the rules of practice and procedure to be adopted by the Commission.
6. To establish and maintain in suitable form a roster of officers and employees.
7. To provide for, establish and hold competitive tests to determine the relative
qualifications of persons who seek employment in any position, and as a result
thereof, establish eligible lists for the various positions. Upon the request
of the mayor and City Council, the Commission shall establish a list of those
eligible for appointment to a promotion within the Civil Service Department
and to maintain such list for a period of time as set by the mayor and City
Council.
8. To certify, upon request when a vacant position is to be filled, to the mayor
and City Council the names of the persons who are the three highest on the
eligible list following the most recent examinations, and whose qualifications
have been validated by the Commission.
9. To keep such records as may be necessary for the proper administration of
their responsibilities.
10. To begin and conduct civil suits which may be necessary for the proper enforcement
of the Civil Service Act and the rules of the Commission.
11. To make recommendations concerning reductions in force policy to the mayor
and City Council.
SECTION 2-307: CONCURRENCE BY MAJORITY
An order, decision, rule or regulation made by any designated commissioner
conducting any hearing or investigation alone shall not have any force or effect
unless it is concurred in by a majority of the appointed members of the Commission,
including the vote of the commissioner making the investigation.
SECTION 2-308: RULES AND REGULATIONS
Any rules, regulations or amendments thereto promulgated by the Civil Service
Commission shall be filed with the city clerk, with at least one copy of such rules,
regulations and amendments being made available for examination and reproduction
by members of the public, and one copy being given to each fulltime firefighter
and police officer. Such procedures shall comply with the minimum due
process requirements.
SECTION 2-309: INVESTIGATIONS
The Commission may inspect all institutions, departments, positions and employments
affected by the Civil Service Act to determine whether such Act and all
rules and regulations adopted by the Commission are being obeyed. Such investigations
may be conducted by the Commission or by any commissioner designated
by the Commission for that purpose. The designated commissioner or
chief examiner shall have the power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas, require
the attendance of witnesses, require the production of books, paper, documents
and accounts pertinent to the investigation and to cause deposition of witnesses
residing within or without the state in the manner prescribed by law.
Such investigation shall also be made upon the written petition of a citizen, duly
verified, stating that irregularities or abuses exist or setting forth, in concise language,
the necessity for such investigation.
SECTION 2-310: HEARINGS
Upon completion of investigations in accordance with Section 2-309, the Commission
shall hold a public hearing after giving reasonable notice to the accused
of the time and place of such hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less than
ten or more than 20 days after filing of the written demand for an investigation
and a decision shall be rendered no later than ten days after the hearing.

ARTICLE IV – HOUSING AUTHORITY
SECTION 2-401: HOUSING AUTHORITY BOARD
1. The City Council shall appoint five persons who shall constitute the Housing
Authority and such persons shall be called the commissioners. One commissioner
shall be appointed each year. Each commissioner shall serve a fiveyear
term of office or until his/her successor is duly appointed; provided that
all vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms. The City Council may
appoint one of its members to serve as one of the five members of such
Housing Authority for such term as the Council may determine.
2. No person shall serve as a commissioner unless he or she resides within the
area of operation of the Housing Authority. A certificate of the appointment or
reappointment of any commissioner shall be filed with the city clerk and such
certificate shall be conclusive evidence of the proper appointment of such
commissioner.
3. A commissioner shall receive no compensation for his/her services, but
he/she shall be entitled to the necessary expenses, including travel expenses,
incurred in discharge of his/her duties.
4. A majority of commissioners shall constitute a quorum of the Authority for the
purpose of conducting its business, exercising its powers, and for all other
purposes. Action may be taken by the Authority upon the vote of the majority
of the commissioners present, unless in any case the bylaws of the Authority
shall require a larger number.
5. The commissioners shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from among
their number and shall have the power to employ an executive director who
shall serve as ex officio secretary of the Authority. The Authority may also
employ legal counsel, or it may call upon the chief law officer of the City for
such services as it may require. It may employ technical experts and such
other officers, agents and employees as it may require and shall determine
their qualifications, duties, compensations and terms of office. The Authority
may delegate such other powers and duties to its agents or employees as it
may deem proper.
6. During his/her tenure, and for one year thereafter, no commissioner, officer or
employee of the Municipal Housing Authority shall voluntarily acquire any interest,
direct or indirect, in any project or in any property included or planned
to be included in any project, or in any contract or proposed contract relating
to any housing project. If any such commissioner, officer or employee involuntarily
acquires any such interest, or voluntarily or involuntarily acquired any
such interest prior to appointment or employment as commissioner, officer or
employee, he/she shall immediately disclose his/her interest in writing to the
Authority. Such disclosure shall be entered upon the minutes of the Authority
and he/she shall not participate in any action by the Authority relating to the
property or contract in which he/she has any such interest; provided that nothing
herein shall apply to the acquisition of any interest in notes or bonds of the
Authority issued in connection with any housing project, or to the execution of
agreements by banking institutions for deposit or handling of funds in connection
with a project or to act as trustee under any trust indenture, or to utility
services, the rates for which are fixed or controlled by a governmental agency.
7. The mayor may remove a commissioner for neglect of duty or misconduct in
office in the manner prescribed hereinafter. The mayor shall send a notice of
removal to such commissioner, which notice shall contain a statement containing
the charges against him/her. Unless within ten days from the receipt of
such notice such commissioner files with the clerk a request for a hearing before
the City Council, he/she shall be deemed to be removed from office. If a
request for a hearing is filed with the clerk, the City Council shall hold a hearing
at which the commissioner shall have the right to appear in person or by
counsel and the City Council shall determine whether the removal shall be
disapproved or upheld. If the removal is disapproved, the commissioner shall
continue to hold his/her position.
SECTION 2-402: MISCONDUCT IN OFFICE
Misconduct in office shall apply to the Housing Authority commissioners, the executive
director and all other employees. Such officials and employees shall not
engage in any political activities on Housing Authority property nor make any political
statements to any residents of such Housing Authority. To engage in such
political activities or make such political statements shall be grounds for immediate
removal of any official and dismissal of any employee engaging in such conduct.
SECTION 2-403: REPORTS
The Housing Authority shall keep an accurate account of all its activities and of
all its receipts and disbursements and shall make a report to the City Council on
all such information.
SECTION 2-404: OWNERSHIP
The Municipal Housing Authority is owned by the City and operated through the
Housing Authority commission members. The Housing Authority shall constitute
a body corporate and politic, and shall have all the powers necessary or convenient
to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of the Nebraska
Housing Authority Law.
SECTION 2-405: DEFINITIONS
Except as otherwise specifically provided, the definitions and terms set out in the
Nebraska statutes relating to housing authorities under the Nebraska Housing
Authority Law are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or may hereafter
be amended.
SECTION 2-406: OPERATION AND MANAGEMENT
The Authority shall at all times observe the following duties with respect to rentals
and tenant selection:
1. It may rent or lease dwelling accommodations therein only to persons of low
income, elderly or handicapped persons of low income, and displaced persons
in need.
2. There shall be no discrimination in the eligibility or occupancy of tenants on
the basis of race, sex, marital status, religion, color, creed, national origin or
ancestry.
3. The Authority shall not accept any person as a tenant in any dwelling in the
housing project if the persons who occupy the dwelling have an aggregate
annual income which equals or exceeds the amount which the Authority has
conclusively determined to be sufficient to enable one to secure, safe, sanitary
and uncongested dwelling accommodations within the area served by the
Authority and to provide an adequate standard of living.
4. The Authority may rent or lease to a tenant a dwelling consisting of a number
of rooms which is deemed necessary to provide safe and sanitary accommodations
to the occupants without overcrowding.
5. The Authority shall fix income limits for occupancy and rents after taking into
consideration:
a. The family size, composition, age, physical handicaps, and other factors
which might affect the rent-paying ability of the person.
b. The economic factors which affect the financial stability and solvency
of the project.
6. The Authority may accept as tenants any displaced persons in need, regardless
of income, but in no event shall such persons remain as tenants of the
Authority for more than a period of six months unless such persons also qualify
as persons of low income, elderly or handicapped persons of low income.
7. All persons of low income, elderly, or handicapped persons of low income, or
displaced persons in need, shall be entitled to the benefits of this Article; and
the Authority may establish rules and regulations consistent with the purposes
of this Article concerning eligibility and occupancy of the housing project or
other such shelter.
8. Nothing herein shall prohibit the right of the Authority to inquire into the financial
condition, family composition, medical, personal and employment history
of any tenant or prospective tenant.
9. The Authority shall prohibit subletting by tenants.
The Authority may from time to time establish rules and regulations consistent
with federal and state laws and regulations and with the purposes of this Article
concerning the termination of tenancy. Any tenant so terminated shall be sent a
written notice setting out the reasons for such termination. Any tenant served
with a notice shall be given the opportunity to contest the termination in an appropriate
hearing, except that tenants who have created or maintained a threat
constituting a serious and clear danger to the health or safety of other tenants or
Authority employees need not be given such a hearing by the Authority. Such
notice may provide that if the tenant fails to pay his or her rent or comply with any
covenant or condition of his or her lease or the rules and regulations of such Authority,
or cure a violation or default thereof, as the case may be, as specified in
such notice, or follow the procedure for a hearing as set forth in the notice, all
within the time or times set forth in such notice, the tenancy shall then be automatically
terminated and no other notice(s) need be given of such termination or
the intent to terminate the tenancy. Upon such termination and without any notice
other than as provided for in this section, the Authority may file suit against
any tenant for recovery of possession of the premises and may recover the same
as provided by law.
The Authority may from time to time establish rules and regulations consistent
with the purposes of this Article concerning personal property of tenants and other
persons located in projects of the Authority, and if such personal property is
not removed from a dwelling unit at the time of the termination of the lease, at the
time of vacation or abandonment of the dwelling unit, or at the time of the death
of any tenant, then the Authority may remove the same and store such property
at the tenant's risk and expense. In the event that possession of such personal
property is not taken by the tenant or other person authorized by law to take possession
within 45 days after such termination, vacation or abandonment, and any
storage removal charges remain unpaid, then the Authority may, at its option,
dispose of the personal property in any manner which the Authority deems fit,
except that any proceeds from the disposal of such personal property shall be
paid to the general fund of the body which created the Authority. No tenant or
other person shall have any cause of action against the Authority for such removal
or disposition of such personal property.
ARTICLE V – UTILITY SERVICES BOARD
(All of Chapter 2, Article 5 repealed by Ordinance No. 1776)
ARTICLE VI – CEMETERY BOARD
SECTION 2-601: MEMBERS; TERM OF OFFICE; OATH; COMPENSATION
The Cemetery Board shall consist of six members appointed by the mayor with
the advice and consent of a majority of the City Council. Each board member
shall be a resident of the City. No member of the City Council shall serve as a
board member while serving a term of office as a member of the City Council.
The term of office of the Cemetery Board shall be three years and until their successors
are appointed and qualified, unless sooner removed. After a public
hearing before the City Council, all members may be removed by the mayor, by
and with the consent of the City Council, for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance
in office or other good and sufficient cause. Vacancies occurring in the
Cemetery Board shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term.
Before entering upon his/her duties, each board member shall take an oath to be
filed with the city clerk that he/she will faithfully perform the duties of his/her office
and not in any manner be actuated or influenced therein by personal or political
motivation. Members of the Cemetery Board shall serve without compensation.
SECTION 2-602: ORGANIZATION; OFFICERS
At the time of the Cemetery Board's first meeting in February of each year, the
Board shall organize by selecting from their number a president and secretary;
provided, no member shall serve in the capacity of both president and secretary.
It shall be the duty of the secretary to keep full and correct minutes and records
of all meetings and to file the same with the city clerk where they shall be available
for public inspection at any reasonable time.
SECTION 2-603: MEETINGS
The Cemetery Board shall meet once a month on such date and at such time as
designated by the City Council. Special meetings may be held upon the call of
the president or any three of the board members. A majority of the Cemetery
Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and a majority
vote of the total membership shall be required to pass any motion or resolution. A
tie vote of the Board shall be broken by the vote of the mayor.
SECTION 2-604: DUTIES
The Cemetery Board shall have the following duties:
1. To take charge of the cemetery facilities of the City; to adopt rules and regulations
for the management, use and operation of the same, including but not
limited to the platting, charges for care and maintenance, use of equipment,
the erection of monuments, platting of land into lots, purchase of additional
land and lot improvements.
2. The Board shall have the duty to draw a set of rules and bylaws governing the
management and care of the cemetery; a copy of such rules, bylaws and regulations
when adopted, amended, altered or revised, shall be forwarded to
the City Council and filed with the city clerk.
3. The Cemetery Board shall further have the duty to employ a sexton, who shall
be appointed by the mayor with approval of a majority of the City Council, and
all other necessary labor and assistants as they may deem necessary from
persons not belonging to said board, to the extent that funds may be provided
for such purpose, and shall have supervisory authority over such employees.
All actions of the Cemetery Board shall be subject to the review and supervision
of the City Council.
SECTION 2-605: REPORTS
The Cemetery Board shall be responsible for making such reports and performing
such other duties as the City Council may from time to time designate.
SECTION 2-606 CONTROL AND CUSTODY OF FUNDS AND PROPERTY
1. The city may survey, plat, map, grade, fence, ornament, and otherwise improve
all burial and cemetery grounds and avenues leading thereto owned by
such city. It may construct walks, rear and protect ornamental trees therein, and
provide for paying the expenses thereof.
2. After the burial and cemetery grounds are fully paid for, the city may set aside
the proceeds of the sale of lots as a perpetual fund to be invested as provided by
ordinance. The income from the fund may be used for the general care, management,
maintenance, improvement, beautifying, and welfare of the cemetery.
The principal of the perpetual fund may be used for the general care, management,
maintenance, improvement, beautifying, and welfare of the cemetery as
long as no more than twenty percent of the principal is so used in any fiscal year
and no more than forty percent of the principal is so used in any period of ten
consecutive fiscal years. The principal of the perpetual fund may also be used
for the purchase and development of additional land to be used for cemetery
purposes as long as no more than twenty-five percent of the principal is so used
in any fiscal year and no more than thirty-five percent of the principal is so used
in any period of ten consecutive fiscal years.
3. The city may receive money by donation, bequest, or otherwise for credit to
the perpetual fund to be invested as provided by ordinance or as conditioned by
the donor. The income therefrom may be used for the general care, management,
maintenance, improvement, beautifying, and welfare of the cemetery as
the donor may designate. The principal therefrom may be used for the general
care, management, maintenance, improvement, beautifying, and welfare of the
cemetery as the donor may designate as long as no more than twenty percent of
the principal is so used in any fiscal year and no more than forty percent of the
principal is so used in any period of ten consecutive fiscal years. The principal
therefrom may also be used for the purchase and development of additional land
to be used for cemetery purposes as the donor may designate as long as no
more than twenty-five percent of the principal is so used in any fiscal year and no
more than thirty-five percent of the principal is so used in any period of ten consecutive
fiscal years.
4. The city treasurer shall be the custodian of such funds, and the same shall be
invested by a board composed of the mayor, city treasurer, and city clerk.
5. This section does not limit the use of any money that comes to the city by donation,
bequest, or otherwise that is not designated to be credited to the perpetual
fund or that allows greater use for purchase or development of additional land
to be used for cemetery purposes. . (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-242)
SECTION 2-607: POTTER'S FIELD
Lots number 488 to 456, inclusive, 523 to 531, inclusive, and 560 to 568, inclusive,
in Oak Hills Cemetery shall be and hereby set apart for a Potter's Field. It
shall be the responsibility of the sexton to determine whether or not a deceased
person may be buried in Potter's Field and the sexton shall issue a permit for burial,
upon application, designating the lot and number thereof.
SECTION 2-608: LOT BOOK
A lot book shall be kept at the office of the Cemetery Board which shall show actual
dimensions of each lot and the location of each grave thereon.
SECTION 2-609 CURFEW IN THE PLATTSMOUTH CEMETERY
The Plattsmouth Cemetery shall be closed to the public from 11:00 P.M.
until 5:00 A.M., and no person shall enter upon said property during that
time. A violation of this provision shall be punishable by a fine of up to
$25.00.
SECTION 2-610 SPEED LIMIT IN THE PLATTSMOUTH CEMETERY
No person shall drive any motor vehicle within the limits of the city cemetery
at a higher rate of speed than ten miles per hour. A violation of this
provision shall be punishable by a fine as follows:
1-5 $10
6-10 $25
11-15 $75
16-20 $125
21 and above $200
ARTICLE VII – LIBRARY
SECTION 2-701 ESTABLISHMENT OF A PUBLIC LIBRARY
The City owns and operates a library known as the Plattsmouth Public Library.
The City shall keep and maintain the same and the term "public library" shall be
held to mean the Plattsmouth Public Library. (Neb. Rev. Stat. § 51-201)
SECTION 2-702 OPERATION
1. The Mayor and City Council shall have the power to make and adopt such bylaws,
rules, and regulations for the government of the library and reading room
as it may deem expedient, not inconsistent with Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 51-201
through -219. (Neb. Rev. Stat. § 51-205)
2. The Mayor and City Council shall have exclusive control of expenditures, of all
money collected or donated to the credit of the library fund, of the renting and
construction of any library building, and the supervision, care, and custody of the
grounds, rooms, or buildings constructed, leased, or set apart for that purpose.
They shall have the power to establish rules and regulations for the government
of the library as may be deemed necessary for its preservation and to maintain
its usefulness and efficiency. They shall have the power to fix and impose, by
general rules, penalties and forfeitures for trespass upon or injury to the library
grounds, rooms, books, or other property, for failure to return any book or for violation
of any bylaw, rule, or regulation. The Mayor and City Council shall have
and exercise such power as may be necessary to carry out the spirit and intent of
Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 51-201 through -219 in establishing and maintaining the library
and reading room.
3. A library director may be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by
the City Council. The library director shall have the care and custody of the
grounds, buildings, rooms, equipment, books and supplies owned or used by the
public library, and the general supervision thereof. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 51-207
and -211)
SECTION 2-703 FUNDING, CUSTODY OF FUNDS, AND DONATIONS
1. The governing body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of management,
purchases, improvements, and maintenance of the library may each year levy a
tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state law, on the taxable value
of all the taxable property within the municipality.
2. The city treasurer shall have the custody of all tax monies and penalties collected,
as well as other funds acquired for erection, maintenance or support of
the public library, including any donations made to the City of Plattsmouth for the
library. All monies received by the public library, exclusive of funds belonging to
any library foundation or other private organization established by citizens to help
promote the library, shall be paid, not less than weekly, to the city treasurer.
These funds shall include all gifts, grants, deeds of conveyance, bequests, or
other valuable income-producing personal property and real estate from any
source for the purpose of endowing the municipal library accepted by the Mayor
and City Council.
3. If a library foundation or other private organization is established by citizens to
help promote the library, the city treasurer shall not have the custody of funds belonging,
or donated specifically, to such foundation of other private organization.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 51-201, -209 and -215)
SECTION 2-704 LIBRARY ADVISORY BOARD
1. There is hereby established a library advisory board which shall consist of five
(5) residents of the City, appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city
council, serving four year terms. Neither the mayor nor a member of the city
council shall be a member of such board. In the case of a vacancy, the mayor
shall appoint a replacement, with approval of the city council, for the unexpired
term. The existing terms of the members of the library board at the time of the
passage of this chapter shall remain in effect. No member of the library advisory
board shall receive pay or compensation for his or her services as a member of
the board.
2. The library advisory board shall work with the library director, city administrator,
mayor and city council to develop the public library, and shall have the following
specific responsibilities to:
a. advise the library director in developing and implementing policies;
b. advise the library director regarding maintenance and expansion
of the materials collection and programs;
c. advise the library director in preparing an annual library budget,
which budget shall be prepared by the library director in the format
used by other city departments and divisions, and to periodically
review library claims to ensure budgetary compliance;
d. receive citizen input, comments and complaints regarding the
materials collection, programs and services offered at the public library,
and to report the same to the library director, with recommendations
in response thereto;
e. encourage use of the public library and promote its programs
and services;
f. represent the city and public library within professional associations
and at library functions;
g. adopt bylaws, rules and regulations for its own guidance as the
board may deem necessary and as such shall not be inconsistent
with this chapter; and
h. create, and recommend to the Mayor and City Council, appropriate
rules and regulations for the use of the public library. (Neb.
Rev. Stat. § 51-202)
SECTION 2-705 USE OF THE LIBRARY
1. The Mayor and City Council may exclude from the use of the library and reading
rooms any person who willfully violates or refuses to comply with rules and
regulations established for the government thereof. (Neb. Rev. Stat. § 51-212)
2. The basic services offered at the library shall be available without charge to all
residents of the municipality. The Mayor and City Council may fix and impose
reasonable fees, not to exceed the library’s actual cost, for nonbasic services.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 51-211)
3. For purposes of this section:
a. Basic services shall include, but not be limited to, free loan of
circulating print and nonprint materials from the local collection and
general reference and information services; and
b. Nonbasic services shall include, but not be limited to, use of
photocopy equipment; telephones, facsimile equipment, and other
telecommunications equipment; media equipment; personal computers;
and video recording and playing equipment. (Neb. Rev.
Stat. § 51-201.01)
SECTION 2-706 DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED
No library service shall be denied to any person because of race, sex, religion,
age, color, national origin, ancestry, physical handicap, or marital status. (Neb.
Rev. Stat. § 51-211)
SECTION 2-707 PENALTIES; RECOVERY; DISPOSITION
Penalties imposed or accruing pursuant to the City’s fee ordinance, and any
court costs and attorney’s fees, may be recovered in a civil action before any
court having jurisdiction, such action to be instituted in the name of the City.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. § 51-214)


ARTICLE VIII – POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION 2-801: CHIEF OF POLICE; APPOINTMENT
The police department shall consist of the chief of police and such further number
of regular policemen as may be duly ordered by resolution of the Council.
The chief of police shall be appointed and serve the term of office and be subject
to removal, suspension and demotion by the mayor with the advice and consent
of the City Council upon the certification of the Civil Service Department. (Ref.
Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-225, 16-323)
SECTION 2-802: DUTIES
It shall be the duty of the chief of police and all members of the police department:
1. To arrest all offenders against the laws of Nebraska or of the City, by day or
by night, in the same manner as a sheriff or constable, and keep them in the
city jail or other place to prevent their escape until a trial or examination may
be had before the proper officer;
2. To exercise the same power as a sheriff in relation to all criminal matters arising
out of a violation of the city law and all processes issued by the county
court in connection with a violation of city law;
3. To arrest and detain any person found violating any law of Nebraska or any
law of the City until a legal warrant can be obtained;
4. To have charge of traffic control on the city streets;
5. To execute and serve or cause to be served all processes;
6. To make and file or cause to be made and filed complaints for violations of
the laws of the City;
7. To perform such other duties as are assigned to or required of them by the
mayor and Council or otherwise provided by law;
and in addition, the chief of police shall have the duty:
8. To have custody of all city property used by the city police;
9. To be a member of the Board of Health and the secretary and quarantine officer
thereof; and
10. To report monthly to the mayor all expenditures of the Department.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-225, 16-323)
SECTION 2-803: RESERVE OFFICER BOND
No appointment of a law enforcement reserve officer shall be valid until a bond in
the amount of $2,000.00, payable to the City, has been filed with the city clerk by
the individual appointed, or a blanket surety bond arranged and paid for by the
City Council and bonding all such officers of the City Council has been filed.
Such bonds shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 11, Article 1, Nebraska
Revised Statutes. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §81-1444)
SECTION 2-804 ARREST JURISDICTION
1. Every city police officer shall have the power and authority to enforce the laws
of this state and the City or otherwise perform the functions of that office anywhere
within his or her primary jurisdiction. Primary jurisdiction shall mean the
geographic area within territorial limits of the City of Plattsmouth. The City Council
may by resolution authorize, and has by Resolution No. 11-004 authorized,
city police officers to exercise the City’s police powers and jurisdiction on all real
property owned by the City which is outside the territorial limits.
2. Any city police officer who is within this state but beyond the territorial limits of
his or her primary jurisdiction shall have the power and authority to enforce the
laws of this state or any legal ordinance of the City or otherwise perform the functions
of his or her office, including the authority to arrest and detain suspects, as
if enforcing the laws or performing the functions within the territorial limits of his
or her primary jurisdiction in the following cases:
(a) Any city police officer, if in a fresh attempt to apprehend a person suspected
of committing a felony, may follow such person into any other jurisdiction
in this state and there arrest and detain such person and return such person to
the officer's primary jurisdiction;
(b) Any city police officer, if in a fresh attempt to apprehend a person suspected
of committing a misdemeanor or a traffic infraction, may follow such person
anywhere in an area within 25 miles of the boundaries of the officer's primary
jurisdiction and there arrest and detain such person and return such person to
the officer's primary jurisdiction;
(c) Any city police officer shall have such enforcement and arrest and detention
authority when responding to a call in which a local, state or federal law
enforcement officer is in need of assistance. A law enforcement officer in need
of assistance shall mean (i) a law enforcement officer whose life is in danger or
(ii) a law enforcement officer who needs assistance in making an arrest and the
suspect (A) will not be apprehended unless immediately arrested, (B) may cause
injury to himself or herself or others or damage to property unless immediately
arrested, or (C) may destroy or conceal evidence of the commission of a crime;
and
(d) If the City, under the provisions of the Interlocal Cooperation Act, enters
into a contract with any other municipality or county for law enforcement services
or joint law enforcement services, law enforcement personnel may have
such enforcement authority within the jurisdiction of each of the participating political
subdivisions if provided for in the agreement. Unless otherwise provided in
the agreement, the City shall provide liability insurance coverage for its own law
enforcement personnel as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. §13-1802. (Ref. Neb. Rev.
Stat. §§ 29-215; 18-1706)
SECTION 2-805 WAS REPEALED (October 5, 2009)
ARTICLE IX - AIRPORT AUTHORITY
SECTION 2-901: JURISDICTION
The Airport Authority Board shall have the full and exclusive jurisdiction and control
over all facilities owned or hereafter acquired by the City for the purpose of
aviation operation, air navigation and air safety operation. The Board is a body
corporate and politic, constituting a public corporation and an agency of the City.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §3-502)
SECTION 2-902: MEMBERS; TERM OF OFFICE; COMPENSATION
The Board shall consist of five members, nominated and elected in the manner
provided by law for the election of other elected officials, and such members shall
take office at the same time as other elected officers. Members of the Board
shall be residents of the City and shall serve a term of six years. Two members
of the Board shall be elected in each municipal election year; provided that in
each third election year, only one member shall be elected to the Board. Any vacancy
on the Board resulting from any cause other than the expiration of a term
of office shall be filled by temporary appointment, by the mayor with the approval
of the City Council, to serve the unexpired portion of the term until a successor
can be elected at the next general municipal election.
The members of the Board shall not be entitled to compensation for their services,
but shall be entitled to reimbursement of expenses paid or incurred in the
performance of their duties. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §3-502)
SECTION 2-903: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE
A member of the Board may be removed from office for incompetence, neglect of
duty, or malfeasance in office. An action for the removal of such officer may be
brought, upon resolution of the City Council, in the District Court of the County.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §3-502)
SECTION 2-904: DUTIES
The Board shall report to the City Council biannually, in writing or orally, on airport
activities and issues, and shall have such other powers and duties as may
be prescribed by state law. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §3-501 through 3-514)

ARTICLE X - PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION 2-1001: MEMBERS; TERM OF OFFICE; OATH; COMPENSATION
The City Planning Commission shall consist of nine members who shall be appointed
by the mayor, by and with the approval of 3/4 vote of the City Council.
Two of such members may be residents of the area over which the City exercises
extraterritorial zoning and subdivision regulations.
The term of office of members of the Planning Commission shall be three years
and until their successors are appointed and qualified, unless sooner removed.
All members may, after a public hearing before the City Council, be removed by
the mayor, by and with a 3/4 vote of the City Council, for inefficiency, neglect of
duty or malfeasance in office or other good and sufficient cause.
At the first meeting of the City Council in January of each year, the vacancy created
by expiration of the commissioners' terms shall be filled by appointment of
new members or reappointment of members. Vacancies occurring in the Planning
Commission shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term. Before
entering upon his/her duties, each planning commissioner shall take an oath to
be filed with the city clerk that he/she will faithfully perform the duties of his/her
office and not in any manner be actuated or influenced therein by personal or political
motivation. The members of the Planning Commission shall serve without
compensation. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-926)
SECTION 2-1002: ORGANIZATION; OFFICERS
At the time of the Planning Commission's first meeting in February of each year,
the commissioners shall organize by selecting from their number a chairman and
such other officers as the Commission shall determine to be required. The term
of the chairman shall be one year and he/she shall be eligible for re-election. It
shall be the duty of the Commission to keep full and correct minutes and records
of all meetings and to file the same with the city clerk where they shall be available
for public inspection at any reasonable time. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-927)
SECTION 2-1003: MEETINGS
The Planning Commission shall meet once each month on such date and time as
designated by the City Council. Special meetings may be held upon the call of
the chairman or any four of the commissioners. A majority of the Planning
Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and a majority
vote of the total membership shall be required to pass any motion or resolution.
Tie vote of the commissioners shall be broken by the vote of the mayor.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-927)
SECTION 2-1004: DUTIES
It shall be the function and duty of the Commission to:
1. Make and adopt plans for the physical development of the City, including any
areas outside its boundaries which, in the Commission's judgment, bear relation
to the planning of the City, and including a comprehensive development
plan as defined by Nebraska statutes.
2. Prepare and adopt such implementing means as a capital improvement program,
subdivision regulations, building codes and zoning ordinance in cooperation
with other interested city departments.
3. Consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public utilities, civic organizations,
educational institutions and citizens with relation to the promulgation
and implementation of the comprehensive development plan and its implementing
programs.
4. Have the power to delegate authority to any such group to conduct studies
and make surveys for the Commission, make preliminary reports on its findings
and hold public hearings before submitting its final reports.
5. The Commission may, with the consent of the City Council, in its own name,
make and enter into contracts with public or private bodies, receive contributions,
bequests, gifts or grant funds from public or private sources, expend the
funds appropriated to it by the City, employ agents and employees and acquire,
hold and dispose of property.
6. The Commission may on its own authority make arrangements consistent
with its program; conduct or sponsor special studies or planning work for a
public body or appropriate agency; receive grants, remuneration or reimbursement
for such studies or work; and at its public hearings, summon witnesses,
administer oaths and compel the giving of testimony.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-929)
SECTION 2-1005: FUNDS, LIMITS UPON EXPENDITURES
The City Council may provide the funds, equipment and accommodations necessary
for the work of the Commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the
amounts appropriated for that purpose by the City Council; and no expenditures
or agreements for expenditures shall be valid in excess of such amounts. (Ref.
Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-928)
SECTION 2-1006: REPORTS
The Planning Commission shall be responsible for making such reports and performing
such other duties as the City Council may from time to time designate.
SECTION 2-1007: ACTIONS BY CITY COUNCIL; RECOMMENDATION OF
COMMISSION
The City Council shall not hold its public meetings or take action on matters relating
to the comprehensive development plan, capital improvements, building
codes, subdivision development or zoning until it has received the recommendation
of the Planning Commission; provided, the City Council may set a reasonable
time within which the recommendation is to be received. (Ref. Neb. Rev.
Stat. §19-901, 19-916, 19-919, 19-929)

ARTICLE XI – PERSONNEL BOARD
(REPEALED)
ARTICLE XII - CITIZEN ADVISORY REVIEW COMMITTEE
SECTION 2-1201 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
The mayor and City Council have been authorized by the electors of the City, at
the City's primary elections held May 14, 2002, to adopt by ordinance an economic
development program for the City as authorized by the Local Option Municipal
Economic Development Act, Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-2701 et seq. The Economic
Development Program of the City is amended as follows and shall be
placed on file at the office of the City Clerk, and is adopted as authorized by the
Local Option Municipal Economic Development Act:
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN
FOR THE CITY OF PLATTSMOUTH, NEBRASKA
Section I. General Community and Economic Development Strategy
Due to the extremely competitive nature of economic development at the national,
state, and local levels, there is intense competition among states, counties
and municipalities of our nation to expand and/or locate businesses in their respective
jurisdictions. This intense competition for new job creation has forced
states and municipalities to provide incentives to businesses in order to remain
competitive. Plattsmouth has been consistently hampered in its efforts to effectively
compete in the business recruitment and expansion area. Even though the
community has not had a shortage of opportunities, the city has been unable to
respond quickly to those opportunities by not controlling available property or being
able to raise sufficient capital from local sources to provide incentives for
business location and expansion decisions that are tailored to meet the needs of
our local community. Our ability to encourage business location and expansion
has a direct impact not only upon the economic well being of our community and
its residents but upon the State of Nebraska as well.
There is a need to empower Nebraska cities with the opportunity to provide assistance
to business enterprises in their communities, whether for expansion of
existing operations or the creation of new businesses, by use of the funds raised
by local taxation when the voters in the municipality determine that it is in the
best interest of the community to do so. The general strategy for this Economic
Development Plan and the effort to be undertaken in accordance with the Local
Option Municipal Economic Development Act (LB840, 1991-Section 18-2701,
RRS1997, et.seq.) is to significantly enhance the city’s involvement and leadership
in future economic development efforts and to create new jobs in the area.
On June 3, 1991 Legislative Bill 840 was signed into law. This important piece of
legislation authorizes incorporated cities and villages to appropriate and spend
local sales and property tax revenues for approved economic development purposes.
Consequently, this law allows Nebraska communities the opportunity to
determine their own destiny by identifying shortcomings and providing, through
self-determination those incentives necessary to businesses looking at their
community. The economic development plan formulated by the city implementing
this legislation and the mechanism for funding the plan is subject to a vote of
the people of the city. The core of the plan of the LB840 process involves the
formulation of a proposed plan (the “Plan”) for a local economic development
program. The Plan forms the foundation for the collection and expenditure of local
tax revenues for economic development and the provisions of the plan become
the basis under which the municipality’s program operates.
Section II. Statement of Purpose Describing General Intent and Goals
It is the intent of the City of Plattsmouth, Nebraska to implement an economic
development program with the general purpose and goals of:
1. Creating high paying quality jobs by generating employment
opportunities and expanding the available work force within the labor
market of Plattsmouth and Cass County.
2. Attracting new capital investment to the community.
3. Broadening the tax base, alleviate the community’s reliance on
property taxes and provide economic diversification to ensure economic
stability and vitality for the community of Plattsmouth and the
surrounding area.
In order to have a successful economic development strategy and help the community
grow by providing existing and prospective residents with local economic
opportunities Plattsmouth must complete the following actions:
1. The City must diversify its economy by recruitment of new industries
from outside and developing new businesses from inside the
City. Plattsmouth must have a program that is a nurturing environment
for small businesses and is a center for economic opportunity.
This atmosphere can encourage people (entrepreneurs) with the
skills and ideas to come to Plattsmouth to conduct business.
2. The City must have a marketing program. Business recruitment
will continue to be an effective and important part of Plattsmouth’s
economic development strategy. In addition to recruitment, the city
can open job opportunities by helping existing business in the city
to expand their markets and compete more successfully. Finally,
the successful marketing of Plattsmouth as a center for opportunity
is important to the city’s effort to expand its labor force and attract
new residents.
3. The City must provide for the acquisition of industrial land and
the provision of supporting infrastructure.
4. Economic Development needs capital; therefore, the city must
expand access to venture and risk capital both inside and outside
the community.
Section III. Eligible Economic Activities
This Economic Development Plan provides that the proceeds of funds generated
from the use of LB840 may be used to fund any project or program providing direct
and indirect financial assistance to a qualifying business and the payment of
related costs and expenses as allowed by Local Option Municipal Economic Development
Act.
Priority activities include the purchase of industrial site(s) and obtaining options
for the purchase of such real estate. Land to be purchased or optioned may be
within or outside the corporate limits of the City of Plattsmouth and will be identified
through local analysis. If land outside the corporate limits is considered for
purchase, close analysis will be made of the cost of extending infrastructure to
the location and the burden on property owners of any special assessment districts
that might be used to make such infrastructure improvements.
Furthermore, these funds may be used to provide the infrastructure to these sites
or other sites to make them attractive to new or expanding businesses. Eligible
infrastructure improvements, include but are not limited to the following:
1. Streets
2. Storm drainage
3. Water, sewer, gas, electric
4. Railroad extension and spurs
5. Telecommunications, cable, fiber optics, satellite service
6. Airport expansion and upgrades
Infrastructure improvements and costs may extend beyond the corporate limits of
the City of Plattsmouth. Priority should be given to improvements within the City’s
corporate limits, but, if extension of such improvements beyond the corporate
limits is necessary to achieve the goals of this program, such improvements may
be funded. Only in exceptional circumstances, shall economic development
(LB840) funds be used for improvements that extend beyond the City’s zoning
jurisdiction as it exists at the time.
The funds may also be used to construct facilities, structures, and/or appurtenances
for new or proposed development or on a speculative basis to attract new
business or industry. In addition, these facilities, structures and appurtenances
are not required to be within the corporate limits of the City of Plattsmouth, but in
only exceptional circumstances should the same extended outside the City’s zoning
jurisdiction as it exists as the time.
Eligible activities also include, but are not limited to the following:
1. Payments for salaries and support staff or contract staff to implement
the program.
2. Job credits for full-time jobs created (2080 hrs/yr) to include
grants that are subject to job creation performance.
3. Expenses related to business recruitment, promotional activities
and related administrative expenses.
4. Expenses for locating a qualified business in the area.
5. Grants or agreements for job training.
6. Provision of technical assistance to businesses, such as marketing
assistance, management counseling, preparing financial packages,
engineering assistance.
7. Direct loans or grants to qualifying businesses for fixed assets or
working capital or both; loan guarantees for qualifying business;
grants for public works improvements which are essential to the location
or expansion of, or the provision of new services by, a qualifying
business; grants or loans for job training; the purchase of real
estate, options for such purchases, and the renewal or extension of
such options; the issuance of bonds as provided for in the Local
Option Municipal Economic Development Act; and payments for
salaries and support of city staff to implement the economic development
program or the contracting of such to an outside entity.
The City recognizes that the attraction of new business and industry to a community,
or the expansion of existing business or industry, takes place in an extremely
competitive market place. In order to make Plattsmouth, Nebraska as
competitive as possible in that market place and in the creation/retention of jobs
in the Plattsmouth area, the use of funds for any project or program for the purpose
of providing direct or indirect financial assistance to a qualifying business
and the payment of related costs and expenses allowed by Section 6 of LB840,
shall be eligible activities under this Economic Development Plan.
The level of funding assistance is based, in part, on the number of jobs to be
created/retained and the total amount of investment in the community. Funds
from this program shall not be considered the sole funding source.
Eligible Types of Businesses
1. A qualifying business shall mean any corporation, partnership, limited liability
company or sole proprietorship, which derives its principal source of income from
any of the following:
A. The manufacture of articles of commerce;
B. The conduct of research and development;
C. The processing, storage, transport, or sale of goods or commodities
which are sold or traded in interstate commerce;
D. The sale of services in interstate commerce;
E. Tourism related activities;
F. Telecommunications activities;
G. Headquarters facilities relating to eligible activities as listed in
this section.
2. If a business, which would otherwise be a qualifying business, employs people
and carries on activities in more than one city in Nebraska or will do so at any
time during the first year following its application for participation in an economic
development program, it shall be a qualifying business only if, in each such city, it
maintains employment for the first two years of its participation in the economic
development program at a level not less than its average employment in such
city over the twelve month period preceding participation.
3. Any other business deemed as a qualifying business through future action of
the Nebraska Legislature.
4. A qualifying business need not be located within the territorial boundaries of
the city from which it is or will be receiving financial assistance, but only in exceptional
circumstances be outside the City’s zoning jurisdiction.
Section IV. Source of Funding for Economic Development Program
The Plattsmouth Economic Development Program will be funded by one-third of
the city sales and use tax with a maximum amount of not more than four-tenths
of one percent (.4 of 1%) of the City’s assessed valuation to be appropriated in
each year for the economic development program. That amount not appropriated
shall be held in a reserved restricted to the Economic Development Fund of
the City.
Plattsmouth may have a business opportunity or other economic development
project that requires up-front funds that exceed the single year proceeds of the
local option sales tax. In order to take maximum advantage of such an opportunity,
Plattsmouth shall have the ability to issue bonds. These bonds are then
retired by future sales tax receipts. Under LB732 (September 1993), a bill that
made changes in LB840, communities may include this bonding authority within
their economic development programs. Therefore, in this program the City
Council may authorize the issuance of bonds to carry out the economic development
program, following a public hearing.
A maximum of 10% of amounts collected for the Program may be used for administration.
All remaining funds will be used for approved plan activities.
Section V. Application Process for Financial Assistance to Businesses
For a qualifying business to be considered for direct or indirect financial assistance
under the Plattsmouth Economic Development Program an applicant must
provide to the Program Administrator:
1. Necessary entity or personal financial information about the Applicant,
including name, address, past experience, work history,
and related information.
2. A detailed description of the proposed project which clearly
states what assistance the business is requesting from the program,
including evidence that the project qualifies for assistance
under the Local Option Municipal Economic Development Act and
is consistent with the goals of the Plattsmouth Economic Development
Program.
3. A personal financial statement of owners or guarantors including
documentation verifying assets and liabilities.
4. Income statement covering the last three years of business operation,
or if a new business, personal income statements.
5. A business plan for the project and the company, including employment
and financial projections.
6. Total project costs and financing requirements.
7. Evidence of private financing commitments for investors or
lenders.
8. A review of key management and employees and their experience
as related to the proposed project.
9. Past three year tax returns.
10. Other information as requested.
Upon receipt of all required information the Program Administrator will conduct a
verification process. Minimum verification will include a credit check and contact
of business references. Additional forms of verification of the information may be
required. The applicant will be responsible for furnishing verification of significant
financial assets.
Additional information, as necessary, to determine the economic viability of the
proposed project(s) may be requested by the Program Administrator prior to recommendation
to the City Council and/or by the City Council prior to final action.
The Program Administrator will review applications and requests for direct or indirect
financial assistance in the order in which they are received. Application review
and approval, or disapproval, will be based on project feasibility as determined
by review of the applicant’s business plan and other requested information
by the Program Administrator and the potential future economic benefit to the
community of Plattsmouth and Cass County. When considering an application
and its merits, the Program Administrator may consult with the Executive Director
of the Cass County Nebraska Economic Development Council, and other professional
economic developers, including staff members from the Nebraska Department
of Economic Development.
Program Administrator may use any or all of the following methods to verify the
information provided by the applicant.
1. Credit check
2. Dunn & Bradstreet Report
3. Examine internal records
4. Other activities as deemed necessary
Completed Application Review Process
Based on the information obtained from the business which is listed and through
personal discussions with the potential applicant and business, a preliminary determination
is made by the Program Administrator as to whether the:
1. Applicant is eligible.
2. Activities are eligible and comply with eligible business and job
creation/retention requirements.
3. Applicant or business has no legal actions underway that may
significantly impact its capacity.
4. Business complies with the provisions of the application guidelines.
Upon a favorable preliminary determination by the Program Administrator, the
terms and conditions of assistance will be negotiated with the applicant. Upon
completion of negotiations, the project will be submitted to an Application Review
Committee that will be composed of five members to be appointed by the Mayor
with approval of the City Council. The ARC will have the following make up:
1. Two (2) members from the financial services and/or accounting
field.
2. Three (3) members of the community at large.
Term of office for ARC members shall be three (3) years and/or until their successors
are appointed and qualified. Initially, two members shall be appointed to
a term of one year, two members shall be appointed to a term of one year, two
members shall be appointed to a term of two years and one member shall be appointed
to a term of three years.
The ARC will make a recommendation to the Program Administrator that:
1. The project will be approved.
2. The project will be disapproved.
3. The project will be renegotiated.
Approval of disapproval will be based on whether the negotiations show (1) that
funding is appropriate for a business meeting the job creation/retention and eligible
business criteria, and (2) that the type of level of assistance will not unduly
enrich the business or be unreasonable in relation to the reasons to achieve public
benefit. The Program Administrator and the ARC will review the application
and make recommendations to the City Council. The City Council will have final
decision on all projects to be assisted and all allocations of funds. The ARC will
be responsible for establishing criteria, determining projects, and applying cost
benefit analysis.
Application Review Committee Members shall disclose for the public record any
personal and/or professional financial interest(s) in the project which is the subject
of an application for economic development assistance. Any member who
makes such disclosure shall not participate in discussion and review of the application,
nor shall such member vote on any recommendation for further negotiations
or recommendations to the City Council.
The Program Administrator and City Attorney, or outside counsel engaged by the
City in the event of a conflict of interest for the City Attorney to represent the City,
shall be present at all meetings of the Application Review Committee.
Process to Insure Confidentiality of Business Information Received
In the process of gathering information about a qualifying business, the city may
receive information about the businesses that is confidential which, if released,
could cause harm to the business or give unfair advantage to competitors. State
law authorizes cities and other public entities to maintain the confidentiality of
business records that come into their possession.
The Program Administrator will be responsible for development of procedures to
insure the confidentiality of business information received from applicants for financial
assistance. These procedures will be subject to approval by the
Plattsmouth City Council.
To protect the businesses applying for assistance:
1. The adoption of an ordinance which makes such information
confidential and prohibits unauthorized disclosure.
2. A restriction on the number of people with access to the files
with the Program Administrator primarily responsible for their safe
keeping.
3. Requiring personnel that is involved in the program review to
sign statements of confidentiality regarding all personal and private
submittals by qualified businesses.
Administration System of Economic Development
A description of the administration of the plan follows. Additional responsibilities
as well as positions may be needed to carry out the program during the course of
the Program as dictated by economic conditions.
The Plattsmouth City Council designates the City Administrator as the municipal
employee with the responsibility for the administration of the program and that
designee will also serve as an ex-officio, but non-voting, member of the Citizen
Advisory Review Committee. The responsibility and duties of the City Administrator
would include:
1. Administration of the Program.
2. Serve as an ex-officio but non-voting member of the Citizen Advisory
Review Committee.
3. Provide the Citizen Advisory Review Committee with necessary
information and advise the Committee on the program.
4. Track employment figures for participating businesses for two
years if businesses employ persons in other Nebraska communities.
5. Will review qualifying businesses on a regular basis to ensure
that qualifying businesses are following the appropriate laws and
regulations.
6. Coordinate with the Citizen Advisory Review Committee.
7. Maintain records and files as required by ordinance and/or statute.
Process to Assure Laws and Regulations are being met by the City and
Participating Businesses
The City of Plattsmouth will ensure that all applicable laws and requirements are
met by the City and the qualifying businesses that receive assistance.
The administration of an LB840program involves a compact with the citizens of
the city. Plattsmouth residents are agreeing to pay a sales tax in return for an investment
in the future of the community. The residents have a right to review the
effectiveness of that investment through a separate voice and authority. Therefore,
the ordinance establishing the program shall provide for the creation of a
Citizen Advisory Review Committee. The duties of the Citizen Advisory Review
Committee are as follows:
1. Review the functioning and progress of the economic development
program at regular meetings of the advisory board, as set
forth in the ordinance, and advise the governing body of the municipality
with regard to the Program.
2. Report to the city council on its findings and suggestions at a
public hearing called for that purpose, at least once every six-month
period after the effective date of the ordinance.
The members shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council,
and consist of five to ten members. All members shall be registered voters of the
city, reside within the city’s zoning jurisdiction, own, operate or be employed by a
business located in Plattsmouth, Nebraska area. No member shall be an elected
or compensated appointed city official, an employee of the city, a participant in a
decision-making position regarding expenditures of the Program funds, an official
or employee of any financial institution participating directly in the Program.
Except in circumstances when the City Attorney has a conflict of interest, the City
Attorney will be responsible for keeping the City informed of any relevant changes
in the law that could affect the program. The City Attorney will review all contracts,
official documents, land transactions, and other official actions related to
the economic development program to ensure compliance with existing law. It is
incumbent upon those involved in the application of this Plan to seek advice and
input from the City Attorney in regard to proposed projects, conflicts of interest,
transactions and all matters related to the use of the Plan.
Final decisions on acquisition and sales of any land will be made by the City
Council. The proceeds from the future sale of such land or reimbursement of any
awarded funds would be returned to the City’s Economic Development Fund for
additional land purchase or for reuse for any activities eligible in the economic
development program only.
SECTION 2-1202 MEMBERS; VACANCIES; MEETINGS
There is created, in and for the City, a citizen advisory review committee
as authorized by the Local Option Municipal Economic Development Act.
The citizen advisory review committee shall be composed of five members,
two (2) of whom shall have experience in the financial services
and/or accounting field and three (3) of whom shall come from the community
at large. No member of the committee shall be an elected or appointed
city official, an employee of the City, or an official or employee of
any qualifying business receiving financial assistance under the Economic
Development Program or of any financial institution participating directly in
such Economic Development program. The members of the citizen advisory
review committee shall be appointed by the mayor, with the approval
of the City Council. Vacancies occurring in the membership of the citizen
advisory review committee, other than by reason of the expiration of
terms, shall be filled by the Mayor by and with the approval of the Council.
Any member of the committee may be removed from office by the Mayor,
by and with the approval of the Council. The members of the citizen advisory
review committee shall serve five-year terms. The members of the
citizen advisory review committee shall elect its chairperson from its
members and shall create and fill such other offices as it may determine
necessary. The term of the chairperson shall be one year, with eligibility
for reelection. The citizens advisory review committee shall meet at least
two times per year to review the functioning and progress of the Economic
Development Program of the City and to advise the City Council with regard
to the program. Special meetings of the committee shall be held
whenever called by the mayor or the chairperson of the committee. The
committee shall report to the City Council in a public hearing called for that
purpose, held at least once in every six-month period, regarding its findings
and suggestions.
SECTION 2-1203 DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
All trade secrets, academic and scientific research work which is in progress and
unpublished or other proprietary or commercial information of a qualifying business
participating in the Economic Development Program of the City which, if released,
would give advantage to business competitors and serve no public purpose
shall be confidential. The members of the Application Review Committee
are authorized to have access to such confidential information. The mayor and
City Council shall designate by resolution other persons who are authorized to
have access to such confidential business information. Any person who knowingly
releases such confidential information other than to persons who are authorized
to have access to such information in accordance with the provisions of
this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject
to a maximum imprisonment of three months in the county jail or a five of
$500.00 or both.
SECTION 2-1204: MAYOR; DUTIES
The mayor shall be responsible for the administration of the Economic Development
Program of the City, shall be an ex-officio member of the committee, and
shall be responsible for assisting the committee and providing it with necessary
information and advice on the Economic Development Program.
ARTICLE XIII - PENAL PROVISION
SECTION 2-1301: VIOLATION; PENALTY
Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement of
any of the provisions of this chapter, set forth at full length herein or incorporated
by reference, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500.00 for each offense.
A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours
of such failure to comply.
Violations of this chapter which are listed in the City’s fine/waiver schedule
may be disposed of pursuant to a waiver of appearance, a plea of “guilty”,
and the payment of court costs and the corresponding fine for such violation
listed in the City’s fine/waiver schedule.
UPDATED:
12/21/2017 ORDINANCE NO. 1930

ARTICLE XIV – BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
SECTION 2-1401 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT; CREATED
The board shall consist of five regular members plus one additional member designated
as an alternate who shall attend and serve only when one of the regular
members is unable to attend for any reason. Appointments shall be made by the
Mayor with the consent of a majority of the City Council.
SECTION 2-1402 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT; QUALIFICATION OF
MEMBERS
One member of the Board shall be appointed from the members of the Planning
Commission, one member of the Board shall be appointed who resides in the extraterritorial
zoning jurisdiction of the City, and the remaining members of the
Board shall be appointed from residents of the City.
SECTION 2-1403 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT; TERM OF OFFICE AND
REMOVAL
The term of office of members of the Board shall be three years and until their
successors are appointed and qualified, unless sooner removed. The term of the
member appointed from the Planning Commission shall terminate upon the loss
of membership on the Planning Commission. All members, upon written charges
and after a public hearing before the City Council, may be removed by the Mayor
with the consent of the City Council, for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance
in office, or other good and sufficient cause.
SECTION 2-1404 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT; APPOINTMENT OF
MEMBERS
Except for the appointment of members to the first Board, terms shall expire and
appointments shall be made at the first meeting of the City Council in December.
The members of the first Board will serve as follows: the member appointed from
the Planning Commission shall serve until the first meeting of the City Council in
December 2004, after which successors shall serve three year terms; two members
who are residents of the City shall serve until the first meeting of the City
Council in December 2005, after which successors shall serve three year terms;
and one member who is a resident of the City and the member who is a resident
of the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction of the City shall serve until the first meeting
of the City Council in December 2006, after which successors shall serve
three year terms. Upon the expiration of an appointment, new members may be
appointed or existing members may be reappointed. Vacancies prior to the expiration
of a term shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term.
SECTION 2-1405 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT; OATH; COMPENSATION
Before entering upon the duties of the Board, each member shall take an oath of
office, to be filed with the City Clerk, to faithfully perform the duties of office and
not in any manner be actuated or influenced by personal or political motivation.
The members of the board shall serve without compensation.
SECTION 2-1406 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT; ORGANIZATION AND
OFFICERS
At the first meeting in December of each year, the Board shall organize by selecting
from their number a Chair and Secretary, except no member shall serve as
both Chair and Secretary. The Secretary to keep full and correct records of all
meetings showing the vote of each member on each question, or if absent or failing
to vote indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and
other official actions, all of which shall be public record and filed with the City
Clerk.
SECTION 2-1407 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT; MEETINGS
Board shall meet at the call of the chair and at such other times as the Board
may determine. The Chair, or in the Chair’s absence the acting Chair, may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. A majority of the Board
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and a majority vote of
the total membership shall be required to pass any motion or resolution.
SECTION 2-1408 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT; DUTIES
The Board shall have the following duties. In carrying out these duties, as they
relate to reversing any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such
administrative official, or to deciding in favor of the applicant on any matter upon
which it is required to pass under any such regulation or to affect any variation in
such regulation, the concurring vote of four members of the Board is required.
1. To adopt rules in accordance with any provisions of any ordinance adopted
pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 19-901 to 19-914.
2. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official or
agency based or made in the enforcement of any zoning regulation or any regulation
relating to the location or soundness of structures.
3. To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of any zoning regulations,
requests for an interpretation of any map, or for decisions upon other special
questions upon which the Board is authorized by any such regulation to
pass.
4. To grant a variance to the zoning regulations where by reason of exceptional
narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of
the enactment of the zoning regulations, or by reason of exceptional topographic
conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such
piece of property, the strict application of any enacted regulation would result in
peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardships
upon the owner of such property. Such variance from such strict application
so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship may be granted if it will not result
in substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the
intent and purpose of any ordinance or resolution.
Provided, however, that no such variance shall be authorized by the Board unless
it finds that (a) the strict application of the zoning regulation would produce
undue hardship; (b) the hardship is not shared generally by other properties in
the same zoning district in the same vicinity; (c) the authorization of such variance
will not be a substantial detriment to adjacent property and the character of
the district will not be changed by granting a variance; and (d) the granting of
such variance is based upon reason of demonstrable and exceptional hardship
as distinguished from variations for purposes of convenience, profit or caprice.
Provided, further, that no variance shall be authorized unless the Board finds that
the condition or situation of the property concerned or the intended use of the
property is not so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable
the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to the
zoning regulations. In exercising these powers the Board may, in conformity with
state law, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement,
decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that extent
shall have all powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
(5) To carry out any other duty prescribed by state statute.
CHAPTER III MISDEMEANORS
ARTICLE I – MISDEMEANORS
3-101 RESISTING OR FAILING TO ASSIST OFFICER
3-102 IMPERSONATING OFFICER PROHIBITED
3-103 TRESPASSING
3-104 INJURY TO TREES
3-105 TRASH
3-106 DRINKING IN PUBLIC
3-107 MALICIOUS MISCHIEF
3-108 DISTURBING AN ASSEMBLY (Repealed by Ordinance
No. 1719 – 09/06/05)
3-109 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS
3-110 CONCEALED WEAPONS
3-111 SLINGSHOTS, AIR GUNS, BB GUNS
3-112 EXCESSIVE NOISE CONTROL (Repealed by Ordinance
No. 1719 – 09/06/2005)
3-113 DISTURBING THE PEACE
3-114 DISORDERLY CONDUCT
3-115 WINDOW PEEPING
3-116 STALKING
3-117 OPERATING GAMBLING DEVICES OR LOTTERY;
PROHIBITED
3-118 GAMBLING PROHIBITED
3-119 PANDERING, PROSTITUTION, AND ILLICIT SEXUAL
INTERCOURSE; PROHIBITED
3-120 HOUSE OF PROSTITUTION; PROHIBITED
3-121 INDECENT EXPOSURE OF PERSON; PUBLIC
URINATION; INDECENT BOOK, PICTURE, PLAY, DESIGN
3-122 LITTERING
3-123 REMOVING DIRT
3-124 PROHIBITED FENCES
3-125 APPLIANCES IN YARD
3-126 OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC WAYS
3-127 OBSTRUCTING WATER FLOW
3-128 TOBACCO SALE PROHIBITED
3-129 POSSESSION OF TOBACCO BY MINORS
3-130 DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY
3-131 PARADE; DISTRIBUTION OF MATERIAL
3-132 LOUD MUSIC, RECORDINGS, RADIOS AND SIMILAR
DEVICES; EXCEPTIONS (Repealed by Ord No. 1719 –
09/06/2005)
3-133 ANIMAL TRAPS
3-134 USING TRAILERS FOR STORAGE PURPOSES
3-135 GRAFFITI PROHIBITED; ABATEMENT
3-136 FAILING TO APPEAR
ARTICLE II – CURFEW
3-201 CURFEW HOURS
3-202 CURFEW HOURS EXTENDED
3-203 VIOLATION; PARENTAL LIABILITY
3-204 ENFORCEMENT; POLICE AUTHORIZATION
3-205 PENALTIES
ARTICLE III – DOGS AND CATS
3-301 OWNER DEFINED
3-302 LICENSE
3-303 LICENSE TAGS
3-304 WRONGFUL LICENSING
3-305 REMOVAL OF TAGS
3-306 DOG RUNNING AT LARGE
3-306.1 CAT RUNNING AT LARGE
3-307 DOGS UNCOLLARED
3-308 RABIES VACCINATION
3-309 RABIES SUSPECTED; IMPOUNDMENT
3-310 RABID ANIMALS; CAPTURE IMPOSSIBLE
3-311 RABID ANIMALS; PROCLAMATION
3-312 INTERFERENCE WITH ANIMAL CONTROL/HUMANE
OFFICER
3-313 KILLING AND POISONING
3-314 BARKING AND OFFENSIVE
3-315 FIGHTING
3-316 LIABILITY OF OWNER
3-317 STRAYS
3-318 IMPOUNDING
3-319 DANGEROUS DOGS; DEFINITIONS
3-320 DANGEROUS DOGS; RESTRAINED
3-321 DANGEROUS DOGS; CONFINED
3-322 DANGEROUS DOGS; FAILURE TO COMPLY
3-323 DANGEROUS DOGS; ACTIONS IN DEFENSE
3-324 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS
ARTICLE IV – KENNELS
3-401 DEFINITIONS
3-402 LICENSING REQUIRED
3-403 REGULATIONS
3-404 VIOLATION OF LICENSING PROVISIONS
ARTICLE V – ANIMALS GENERALLY
3-501 ANIMALS BANNED FROM CITY
3-502 CRUELTY; DEFINITIONS
3-503 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
3-504 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS; LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER;
POWERS, IMMUNITY
3-505 ENCLOSURES
3-506 RUNNING AT LARGE
3-507 FOWL; RUNNING AT LARGE
3-508 WILD ANIMALS
3-509 PITTING; DEFINITIONS
3-510 PITTING; PROHIBITED
3-511 PITTING; SPECTATORS PROHIBITED
3-512 APIARIES; KEEPING OF BEEHIVES OR BOXES; RULES
AND REGULATIONS
3-513 OWNERS; LIABILITIES, DUTIES
ARTICLE VI – NUISANCES
3-601 GENERALLY DEFINED
3-602 SPECIFICALLY DEFINED
3-603 ABATEMENT
3-604 FAILURE TO CORRECT
3-605 COST OF REMOVAL
3-606 JURISDICTION
3-607 ADJOINING LANDOWNERS; INTERVENTION BEFORE
TRIAL
3-608 AIR POLLUTION; PROHIBITED
3-609 WATER POLLUTION; PROHIBITED
3-610 RODENT AND INSECT CONTROL; DEFINITIONS
3-611 RODENTS AND INSECTS; EXTERMINATION
3-612 RODENTS AND INSECTS; OCCUPANT
3-613 RODENTS AND INSECTS; OWNER
3-614 RODENTS AND INSECTS; RATPROOFING
3-615 RODENTS AND INSECTS; STANDARDS
ARTICLE VII – PENAL PROVISION
3-701 VIOLATION; PENALTY
3-702 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE
ARTICLE VIII - SEX OFFENDERS
3-801 FINDINGS AND INTENT
3-802 DEFINITIONS
3-803 PRESENCE WITHIN SCHOOL ZONE BY A SEXUAL
PREDATOR PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS
3-804 APPROACHING, CONTACTING, OR COMMUNICATING
WITH A CHILD WITHIN CERTAIN PLACES BY SEXUAL
PREDATORS PROHIBITED
3-805 RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS; EXCEPTIONS
3-806 DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION
3-807 SEVERABILITY
3-808 VIOLATION; PENALTY (Enacted by Ordinance No. 1731-
07/17/2006)
ARTICLE IX – NOISE
3-901 POLICY
3-902 INDUSTRIAL MACHINERY, MUFFLERS, FANS AND
ENGINES
3-903 SOUND REPRODUCTION DEVICES
3-904 MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE CONTROL
3-905 STANDARDS
3-906 SOUND LEVEL METERS
3-907 MEASUREMENT STANDARDS
3-908 USE OF NOISE MEASUREMENT AS EVIDENCE OF
VEHICLE NOISE
3-909 DISTURBING AN ASSEMBLY
3-910 EXEMPTIONS
3-911 GLOSSARY OF TERMS
3-912 PENALTIES (Enacted by Ordinance No. 1732 –
08/07/2006)
CHAPTER III MISDEMEANORS
ARTICLE I - MISDEMEANORS
SECTION 3-101: RESISTING OR FAILING TO ASSIST OFFICER
It shall be unlawful for any person in this city to hinder, obstruct or resist any city
policeman in making any arrest or performing any duty of his/her office, or to
refuse or neglect to assist any such officer when called upon by him/her in
making of any arrest or the conveying of a prisoner to jail. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat.
§28-903, 28-904)
SECTION 3-102: IMPERSONATING OFFICER PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any person in said city, other than a regular policeman or
other authorized officer or employee of the city, to wear a badge similar to or
resembling the badges prescribed for or furnished the police force or any other
officer or employee of the city, or to willfully impersonate, or endeavor to
impersonate, any such policeman, officer or employee or seek to exercise
authority as such. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-610)
SECTION 3-103: TRESPASSING
It shall be unlawful for any person to, when knowing that he/she is not licensed or
privileged to do so, enter or remain upon any property within the City, whether
privately or publicly owned, when:
1. notice against trespass or limitation of entry is given by actual communication
to such person, or
2. by posting in a manner likely to come to his/her attention, or
3. fencing or other enclosures manifestly designed to exclude intruders, or
4. after the owner or person in charge thereof shall direct such person to leave
such premises, in the absence of a license or privilege to remain upon such
premises, or
5. to enter upon an improved lot or grounds occupied for residence purposes
and to loiter about the same without the consent of the owner or occupant.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. 28-520, 28-521)
SECTION 3-104: INJURY TO TREES
It shall be unlawful for any person to purposely or carelessly, and without lawful
authority, cut down, carry away, injure, break down or destroy any fruit,
ornamental, shade or other tree or trees standing or growing on any land
belonging to another person or on any public land in the corporate limits. Any
public service company desiring to trim or cut down any tree, except on property
owned and controlled by them, shall make an application to the City Council to
do so, and the written permit of the City Council in accordance with their decision
to allow such an action shall constitute the only lawful authority on the part of the
company to do so.
SECTION 3-105: TRASH
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously or negligently place or
throw upon the premise of another any filth, garbage, leaves, papers or other
matter to the annoyance of the owner or occupant thereon. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat.
§28-523)
SECTION 3-106: DRINKING IN PUBLIC
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages in the public
streets, alleys, roads, highways, or upon any property owned by the City or other
governmental subdivision thereof, or inside vehicles while upon the public
streets, alleys, roads, or highways, in theatres, dance halls, or any other place
open to the public; provided, the provisions of this section shall not apply to liquor
establishments licensed by the State of Nebraska. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-
186)
SECTION 3-107: MALICIOUS MISCHIEF
It shall be deemed a violation of this section for any person to willfully destroy,
mutilate, deface, injure or remove any tomb, monument, gravestone, structure or
thing of value which is located upon any government property, cemetery or
property of historic value. Any such offender shall also be liable, in an action for
trespass in the name of the beneficial holder of said property, for all damages
which arise from the commission of such unlawful act. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-
519)
SECTION 3-108: REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 1719 – 09/06/2005 – SEE
3-901 THROUGH 3-912
SECTION 3-109: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS
It shall be unlawful for any person, except an officer of the law in the discharge of
his/her official duty, to fire or discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm within the
City; provided, nothing herein shall be construed to apply to officially sanctioned
public celebrations if the persons so discharging firearms have written permission
from the City Council. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §17-556)
SECTION 3-110 CONCEALED WEAPONS
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to carry about their person any
handgun, knife, billy club, slingshot, metal knuckles or other deadly weapon of
any kind. Nothing herein shall be construed to apply to law enforcement
personnel. On or after May 15, 2008, any person possession a lawful permit
while in compliance with the Nebraska Concealed Handgun Permit Act (RRS
Neb. §§ 69-2427 through -2447) shall be permitted to carry such a concealed
handgun in the City of Plattsmouth except in an area prohibited by signs as
outlined by State Law. Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 69-2427 through -2447 and 69-
2403 (3).
SECTION 3-111: SLINGSHOTS, AIR GUNS, BB GUNS
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a slingshot, air gun, BB gun or the
like loaded with rock or other dangerous missiles at any time or under any
circumstances within the City. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-227)
SECTION 3-112: REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 1719 – 09/06/2005 – SEE
3-901 THROUGH 3-912
SECTION 3-113: DISTURBING THE PEACE
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to assemble or gather within the
City with the intent to do an unlawful or disorderly act by force or violence against
the City or residents therein, or who shall disturb the public peace, quiet, security,
repose or sense of morality. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-1322)
SECTION 3-114: DISORDERLY CONDUCT
Any person who shall knowingly start a fight, fight, commit assault or battery,
make unnecessary noise, or otherwise conduct themselves in such a way as to
breach the peace shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat. §16-227, 16-228)
SECTION 3-115: WINDOW PEEPING
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or stealthily go upon the
premises of another in said city and look or peep into any window, door or other
opening in any building located thereon which is occupied as a place of abode, or
to go upon the premises of another for the purpose of looking or peeping into any
window, door or other opening in any building thereon which is occupied as a
place of abode. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any electronic device
to spy upon or invade the privacy of any resident of the City unless the same is
authorized by a court of law.
SECTION 3-116: STALKING
Any person who willfully and maliciously harasses another person with the intent
to terrify, threaten or intimidate commits the offense of stalking. For purposes of
this section, “harass” shall mean to engage in a knowing and willful course of
conduct directed at a specific person which seriously terrifies, threatens, or
intimidates the person and which serves no legitimate purpose, and “course of
conduct” shall mean a pattern of conduct composed of a series of acts of
following, detaining, restraining the personal liberty of or stalking the person or
repetitiously telephoning the person.
SECTION 3-117: OPERATING GAMBLING DEVICES OR LOTTERY;
PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to operate or permit to be
operated in this city any lottery, game of chance or gambling device of any kind
unless sanctioned by the City and operated pursuant to Nebraska law. (Ref.
Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-1101 through 28-1104)
SECTION 3-118: GAMBLING PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in any lottery or game of chance,
except bingo, in this city unless sanctioned by the City and authorized and
licensed by state law. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-1101 through 28-1104)
SECTION 3-119: PANDERING, PROSTITUTION, AND ILLICIT SEXUAL
INTERCOURSE; PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or commit any act of pandering,
prostitution or illicit sexual intercourse within said city. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-
801)
SECTION 3-120: HOUSE OF PROSTITUTION; PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, operate or maintain or to be an inmate
of or visit a house of prostitution or a disorderly house within this city. A house of
prostitution shall be construed to mean a house or other place which is kept,
used or operated as a place for hire for prostitution purposes. A disorderly house
shall be construed to mean any place kept in such a manner as to disturb, annoy
or scandalize the public generally or persons within the particular neighborhood,
or any place used as a public resort by drunkards, prostitute or other idle or
vicious persons, or any place of public resort where illegal practices are
habitually carried on to the corruption of public morals. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat.
§28-801 through 28-804)
SECTION 3-121: INDECENT EXPOSURE OF PERSON; PUBLIC URINATION;
INDECENT BOOK, PICTURE, PLAY, DESIGN
It shall be unlawful for any person within this city to make an indecent exposure
of his/her person; to urinate or defecate in public view; to commit any indecent or
lewd act; or to sell or offer for sale, or to dispense of in any manner any obscene,
lewd or indecent book, picture or other publication or thing; to exhibit or perform
any indecent, immoral, lewd or obscene play or other representation; or in any
public place to write, draw, or make any profane, obscene, indecent or lewd
work, sentence, figure or design.
SECTION 3-122: LITTERING
1. Any person who deposits, throws, discards, or otherwise disposes of any litter
on any public or private property or in any waters commits the offense of littering
unless:
(a) Such property is an area designated by law for the disposal of such
material and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to so
use such property; or
(b) The litter is placed in a receptacle or container installed on such property
for such purpose.
2. The word litter as used in this section shall mean all waste material
susceptible of being dropped, deposited, discarded or otherwise disposed of by
any person upon any property in the state but does not include wastes of primary
processes of farming or manufacturing. Waste material as used in this section
shall mean any material appearing in a place or in a context not associated with
that material's function or origin.
3. Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor
vehicle or watercraft in violation of this section, the operator of such motor
vehicle or watercraft commits the offense of littering. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-
523)
SECTION 3-123: REMOVING DIRT
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to remove, disturb or take away
from any street, alley or public grounds any dirt, earth, stones or other materials
forming a part of such street, alley or public grounds without first having obtained
written permission to do so from the City Council.
SECTION 3-124: PROHIBITED FENCES
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, or cause to be erected, and maintain
any barbed wire or electric fence within the corporate limits, where such fence
abuts a public sidewalk, street or alley. Upon application to and permit from the
City Council, barbed wire fences may be erected or allowed to remain if such
fences are built at least three feet inside the lot line, so as not to endanger the
public use of any street or sidewalk.
SECTION 3-125: APPLIANCES IN YARD
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any household appliance to be stored
in the open on private or public property. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 18-1720)
SECTION 3-126: OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC WAYS
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, maintain or suffer to remain on any
street or public sidewalk a stand, wagon, display or other obstruction
inconvenient to, or inconsistent with, the public use of the same.
SECTION 3-127: OBSTRUCTING WATER FLOW
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or obstruct the passage of water in a
street gutter, culvert, water pipe or hydrant.
SECTION 3-128: TOBACCO SALE PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or attempt to sell to any person under
the age of 18 years any tobacco, cigarettes or cigars of any kind. Upon
conviction, the penalty for said offenses shall be a fine of not less than $20.00
nor more than $50.00.
SECTION 3-129: PURCHASING, USING OR POSSESSING TOBACCO
PRODUCTS BY MINORS
(1) Tobacco products shall include any substance containing tobacco leaf,
including without limitation; cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco snuff,
chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco/snuff, or any finely cut, ground or
powdered tobacco leaf intended for placement in the human body.
(2) Except when required in the performance of a person's duty as an
employee, under the supervision of a parent or legal guardian in the
privacy of the minor’s own home, or under the supervision of law
enforcement for the purpose of ensuring and enforcing compliance with
this ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18
years to smoke, purchase, or attempt to acquire tobacco within the City
of Plattsmouth.
(3) Violations of this section shall be punished by a monetary fine of not
more than $500.00 or the performance of 20 hours of community service
with compliance shown by filing with the court certification signed by a
representative of the organization for whom the community service was
performed. (Amended by Ordinance No. 1696 – October 20, 2003)
SECTION 3-130: DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY
It shall be unlawful for any person, wantonly or maliciously, in any manner to
molest, injure or destroy any property of another in this city.
SECTION 3-131: PARADE; DISTRIBUTION OF MATERIAL
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any activity which should induce an
individual to enter the parade route, or to distribute material, candy, etc. from any
parade entry, unless distributed by an individual walking and the material, candy,
etc. is handed directly to observers or is tossed beyond the street and curb.
SECTION 3-132: REPEALED 8-2-2006 ORDINANCE NO. 1732
SECTION 3-133: ANIMAL TRAPS
The use of any type of cyanide pellet traps or any similar type of trap containing a
chemical noxious to man is hereby prohibited within the corporate limits of the
City, unless the use of such chemical traps is specifically deemed necessary by
the Board of Health, the humane officer or the city police in and for the control of
communicable disease.
No person shall set up or allow to be set up on his/her property steel jaw traps,
spring traps with "teeth" or perforated edges on the holding mechanism, or any
type of trap with a holding mechanism designed in such a fashion as to
reasonably insure the cutting, slicing, tearing or otherwise traumatizing of the
entrapped prey, for the purpose of ensnaring domestic or wild animals within the
city limits, unless the use of such traps is specifically deemed necessary by the
Board of Health, the humane officer or the city police in and for the control of
communicable disease.
This section is not to be construed to include those traps designed to kill common
rodents, i.e., rats, mice, gophers and groundhogs; provided, the owner is
responsible for ensuring that any of the above said "rodent" traps are not placed
or used on or about his/her property in such manner as to trap or injure any
persons, domesticated animals or other wild animals.
SECTION 3-134: USING TRAILERS FOR STORAGE PURPOSES
No trailers manufactured primarily for the conveyance of goods and property
shall be utilized for storage purposes in any residential zoning district of the city.
SECTION 3-135 GRAFFITI PROHIBITED; ABATEMENT
1. STATE LAW: Graffiti and other inscribed materials on walls and structures of
public and private property is a blighting factor which depreciates the value of the
property that was the target of vandalism, and it also depreciates the value of
adjacent and surrounding properties. Therefore, graffiti and other inscribed
materials negatively impact the entire community. The State of Nebraska has
authorized cities to define, regulate, suppress and prevent nuisances and to
declare what constitutes a nuisance, and to abate and cause the removal of the
same. The display, and allowed display, of graffiti constitutes a nuisance. To
promote the abatement and removal of this nuisance, the City Council makes it
unlawful to display or to allow to be displayed graffiti and other inscribed
materials on walls, structures, and the like, and the City Council mandates that
the owners of private property undertake measures necessary to abate and
remove graffiti and other inscribed materials from walls, structures, and the like
within seven (7) days if seasonal temperatures permit.
2. GRAFFITI; NUISANCE: The City Council finds and determines that graffiti is
a nuisance and that unless it and other inscribed material is abated and removed
from public and private properties, it tends to remain, and other properties are
then the target of graffiti which will result in entire neighborhoods and
communities depreciating in value and becoming less desirable places to be and
live. The City Council therefore determines that it is appropriate to develop
procedures to implement the laws of the State of Nebraska, as amended, by
providing a procedure to remove graffiti and other inscribed material from both
public and private property under the following circumstances. The City Council
declares as a matter of legislative determination that:
a. Increasing incidences of the defacement of public and private
property by graffiti upon walls, rocks, bridges, buildings, fences,
gates, other structures, trees, and other real and personal property
within the corporate boundaries of the City constitutes a blight on
this community; and, in the interests of health, safety and the
general welfare of the residents and taxpayers of the City,
immediate steps must be taken to remove this blight.
b. When appropriate, courts should require those who commit acts
of defacement of public or private property with graffiti should be
ordered to restore the property so defaced, damaged or destroyed.
c. Obtaining convictions for applying graffiti is difficult because the
offenses are committed quickly and secretly, with witnesses very
seldom present.
d. The public should be encouraged to collaborate in the
elimination of graffiti by reporting to proper authorities the incidence
of the application of graffiti which they have observed.
3. DEFINITIONS: The terms of graffiti and graffiti abatement procedure, when
used in this article, have the following meanings:
a. Graffiti means the defacing, damaging or destroying by the
spraying of paint or marking of ink, chalk, dye or other similar
substances on public and private buildings, structures and places.
b. Graffiti abatement procedure means an abatement procedure
which identifies graffiti to the property owner, issues notice to the
property owner, allows a property owner to grant permission to the
City to abate the graffiti at no expense to the owner or to elect to
abate the graffiti at the owner’s expense, or upon failure to abate at
the owner’s expense within seven (7) calendar days of notification,
the City subsequently abates the graffiti in the absence of the
owner’s response, and the property owner is responsible for the
cost of the City’s expense for the abatement.
c. Private contractor means any person with whom the City shall
have contracted to remove graffiti.
d. City forces mean City employees and equipment available to
abate graffiti.
4. ACTS PROHIBITED: It shall be unlawful for any person to write, paint or
draw upon any wall, rock, bridge, building, fence, gate, other structure, tree, or
other real or personal property, either publicly or privately owned, any drawing,
inscription, figure or mark of the type which is commonly known and referred to
as “graffiti” within the City. This ordinance shall not apply to any other nuisance
which is governed by §§4-501 through -650.
5. PENALTY SECTION: Any person convicted of violating 6-358(4) shall be
punished by a fine up to $100.00. In addition, the court may, in imposing
sentencing, order the defendant to restore the property defaced, damaged or
destroyed to its original condition.
6. NOTICE TO REMOVE GRAFFITI: Whenever a property owner, citizen or
City official determines that graffiti exists on any public or private building,
structure or place which is visible to any person utilizing any public right of way,
that person shall notify the Plattsmouth Police Department. If seasonal
temperatures permit painting or abating graffiti on exterior surfaces, the City is
authorized to obtain a signed “Notification, Consent and Release of Liability
Form” or cause a notice to be issued to abate the nuisance and declaring the
City’s intent to remove the graffiti within seven (7) days, and cause the graffiti to
be abated by City forces or private contract at no expense to the owner, and the
City or its private contractor is expressly authorized to enter the premises for that
purpose, and to state that the property owner shall have seven (7) calendar days
after the date of the notice to remove the graffiti by authorizing the City or its
contractor to do so or to personally remove the graffiti, and to notify the owner
that if the owner does not take any action within seven (7) days, the City will
abate the nuisance at the owner’s expense.
The notice to abate graffiti pursuant to this section shall be in writing and served
on the owners of the affected premises as such owners’ names and addresses
appear on the last property-tax assessments rolls of the county. If there is no
known address for the owner, the notice shall be sent in care of the property
address. The notice required by this section may be served in any one of the
following manners:
a. By personal service on the owners, occupants or persons in
charge or control of the property.
b. By registered for certified mail addressed to the owners at the
owners’ last known address. If this address is unknown, the notice
will be sent to the property address.
The City shall take all reasonable efforts to minimize damage from the City’s
entry onto the property to abate the graffiti. Any paint or other abatement
methods used to obliterate the graffiti, shall be as close as practicable to the
background colors. If removal of the graffiti is provided by the City, any painting
or repair will not cover any more extensive of an area than where the graffiti or
other inscribed material is located.
7. PRIVATE PROPERTY NOTIFICATION; CONSENT AND RELEASE FROM
LIABILITY FORMS: When the City becomes aware of a location with graffiti,
immediate administrative steps should be taken to identify the legal owner. A
City representative will make every effort to contact the owner immediately,
including a visit to the structure or location where a notice may be posted, in
addition to other notification methods. For the purpose of the graffiti abatement
notification, time lines will start the day the notice to abate is formally issued
pursuant to this ordinance, or the date the Notification, Consent and Release
from Liability Form is signed. A written Notification, Consent and Release from
Liability Form may be signed by the property owner and abatement can proceed
immediately, but if the owner does not sign the Form, the City must wait seven
(7) days to abate the graffiti and charge the cost of abatement to the owner.
The Notification, Consent and Release from Liability Forms shall identify the legal
owner, the property address and specific location of the graffiti proposed to be
abated. The Form shall specify the method of abatement (i.e., over-paint;
sanding; sandblasting; or other, with a general description). The Form shall offer
the property owner the choice to consent to abatement by City forces or private
contractor and a release from liability for the City to take immediate steps to
abate the graffiti (seasonal temperatures permitting) at no cost to the owner, or to
decline in the City’s offer and to abate the graffiti personally within seven (7)
calendar days at the owners’ personal expense. If the owner accepts
responsibility for removing the graffiti, but fails to do so within seven (7) calendar
days after the date of notification or service pursuant to this section, the City is
expressly authorized to enter the property and abate the graffiti by the method
proposed in the initial offer from the City to remove the graffiti. When the owner
declines the City’s offer to abate the graffiti at the City’s expense and
subsequently fails to comply within seven (7) days, or fails to acknowledge
receipt of notification within seven (7) days, the cost of abatement shall be the
owner’s expense. If there is no acknowledgment of the notice of graffiti within
seven (7) days, the City shall be authorized to enter the property for the purpose
of graffiti abatement and to charge the cost of abatement to the owner. Any and
all costs incurred by the City in the abatement of the graffiti nuisance under this
section which are chargeable to the owner shall constitute a lien or special
assessment against the property.
8. APPEAL BY OWNER: Within seven (7) days of notification of graffiti, as
defined in this section, or within seven (7) days from the mailing of personal
service of the notice, the owner, or the person occupying or controlling the
premises affected may appeal to the County Court of Cass County, Nebraska.
9. CITY’S ABATEMENT OF GRAFFITI BY AUTHORIZATION: Once a written
Notification, Consent and Release from Liability Form is signed by the property
owner, or the seven (7) calendar days after the owner’s notification has been
served and not acted upon, the abatement by City forces or privately contracted
forces can commence immediately. The City shall take all reasonable efforts to
minimize damage from the City’s entry onto the property to abate the graffiti
nuisance, and any materials used to abate the graffiti nuisance shall match, to
the extent practicable, the existing material.
SECTION 3-136: FAILING TO APPEAR
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to appear in court, or otherwise
comply with the command of a citation to appear in court, unless such
appearance date provided on the citation has been continued by the court
or by the city.
ARTICLE II - CURFEW
SECTION 3-201: CURFEW HOURS
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 17 years to loiter, idle,
wander, stroll, play or be in or upon the public streets, public places and public
buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant buildings, vacant lots
or otherwise operate any bicycle or other vehicle, in, upon, over or through the
streets of other public places of the city on Sunday through Thursday between
the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 5:00 A.M. of the following day, and on Friday and
Saturday between 12:00 midnight to 5:00 A.M. of the following day, unless such
person is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult person having the
legal case and custody of said minor person or unless the minor person is upon
an emergency errand or legitimate business, directed by his/her parents,
guardian or legal custodian, except as hereinafter provided.
SECTION 3-202: CURFEW HOURS EXTENDED
Nothing herein contained shall prohibit said minor persons from attending special
school functions or adult supervised entertainment conducted by any school,
church or fraternal organization, which continue beyond the curfew hours as set
out in Section 3-201 above. In all such cases the hours herein prohibited shall
be extended for those minors attending said special social function, employment
or entertainment one hour after the closing of said special function.
SECTION 3-203: VIOLATION; PARENTAL LIABILITY
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person, having the care
and custody of minors under the age of 17 years to allow or permit said minor
person to do any of the acts or things prohibited by Section 3-201 or 3-202.
SECTION 3-204: ENFORCEMENT; POLICE AUTHORIZATION
Every member of the police force, while on duty, shall be authorized to detain
any such minor willfully violating the provisions of this ordinance, and upon
apprehension of said minor shall forthwith notify by telephone or other
appropriate means the parents or legal guardians or person in custody of said
minor child.
SECTION 3-205 PENALTIES
Violations of the provisions of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor. A first
violation is punishable by a fine of up to $50.00. A second violation is punishable
by a fine of up to $125.00. A third and any subsequent violation is punishable by
a fine of up to $250.00 and shall constitute a violation of Section 3-203 and the
parents of the child shall be held liable.

ARTICLE III - DOGS AND CATS
SECTION 3-301: OWNER DEFINED
Any person who shall harbor or permit any dog or cat to be for ten days or more
in or about his or her house, store or enclosure, or to remain to be fed, shall be
deemed the owner and possessor of such dog or cat and shall be deemed to be
liable for all penalties herein prescribed. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §54-606, 71-4401)
SECTION 3-302 LICENSE
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog or cat over the age of six
months within the City shall within 30 days after acquisition of the said dog or cat
acquire a license for such dog or cat annually by or before the 15th day of March
of each year. The said tax shall be delinquent from and after March 15th;
provided, the possessor of any dog or cat brought into or harbored within the
corporate limits subsequent to January 1st of any year shall be liable for the
payment of the tax levied herein and such tax shall be delinquent if not paid
within ten days thereafter. Licenses shall be issued by the city clerk or his/her
designee upon the payment of the license fee. Said license shall not be
transferable and no refund will be allowed in case of death, sale or other
disposition of the licensed dog or cat. The owner shall state at the time the
application is made and upon printed forms provided for such purpose, his/her
name and address and the name, breed, color and sex of each dog or cat owned
and kept by him/her. A certificate that the dog or cat has had a rabies shot,
effective for the ensuing year of the license, shall be presented when the license
is applied for and no license or tag shall be issued until the certificate is shown.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-206, 54-603, 71-4412)
SECTION 3-303 LICENSE TAGS
Upon the payment of the license fee, the city clerk or his/her designee shall issue
to the owner of a dog or cat a metallic tag for each dog or cat so licensed. The
metallic tags shall be properly attached to the collar or harness of all dogs or cats
so licensed and shall entitle the owner to keep or harbor the said dog or cat until
the 14th day of March following such licensing. In the event that a license tag is
lost and upon satisfactory evidence that the original plate or tag was issued in
accordance with the provisions herein, the city clerk shall issue a duplicate or
new tag for the balance of the year for which the license tax has been paid and
shall charge and collect a fee set by resolution of the City Council for each
duplicate or new tag so issued. All license fees and collections shall be
immediately credited to the General Fund. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-206, 54-
603)
SECTION 3-304: WRONGFUL LICENSING
It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or harborer of any dog or cat to permit
or allow such dog or cat to wear any license, metallic tag or other city
identification than that issued by the city clerk for dogs or cats, nor shall the
owner, keeper or harborer wrongfully and knowingly license an unspayed female
dog or cat with a license prescribed for a male or spayed female dog or cat. (Ref.
Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-206, 54-603)
SECTION 3-305: REMOVAL OF TAGS
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to be removed, the collar,
harness or metallic tag from any licensed dog or cat without the consent of the
owner, keeper or possessor thereof. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-206)
SECTION 3-306: RUNNING AT LARGE
Except as allowed in City dog parks created and approved by the Mayor
and City Council, it shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to allow
such dog to run at large at any time within the corporate limits of the City.
It shall be the duty of the city police and animal control officer to cause any
dog found to be running at large within the City to be taken up and
impounded. "Running at Large" shall mean any dog found off the premise
of the owner, except at a City dog park created and approved by the
Mayor and City Council, and not under control of the owner or a
responsible person, either by leash, cord, chain, wire, rope, cage or other
suitable means of physical restraint.
SECTION 3-306.1: CAT RUNNING AT LARGE
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any cat to allow such cat to run at
large at any time within the corporate limits of the City. It shall be the duty
of the city police to cause any cat found to be running at large within the
City to be taken up and impounded. "Running at Large" shall mean any
cat found off the premise of the owner, and not under control of the owner
or a responsible person, either by leash, cord, chain, wire, rope, cage or
other suitable means of physical restraint.
SECTION 3-307: DOG UNCOLLARED
It shall be the duty of every owner or owners of any dog or dogs to securely place
upon the neck of such dog or dogs a good and sufficient collar with a metallic
plate thereon, which plate shall plainly have the name of the owner inscribed, or
other adequate means to identify the owner thereof. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §54-
605)
SECTION 3-308: RABIES VACCINATION
Every cat or dog three months of age and older shall be vaccinated against
rabies pursuant to Nebraska law. Kittens and puppies shall be vaccinated within
30 days after having reached three months of age. Unvaccinated cats and dogs
acquired or moved into the City must be vaccinated within 30 days after
purchase or arrival, unless under three months of age as specified above. The
provisions of this ordinance with respect to vaccination shall not apply to any cats
or dogs owned by a person temporarily residing within this city for less than 30
days, any cat or dog brought into this city for show purposes, or any dog brought
into this city for hunting purposes for a period of less than 30 days; such cats and
dogs shall be kept under the strict supervision of the owner. It shall be unlawful
to bring any animal into the City which does not comply with the animal health
laws and import regulations of the State of Nebraska which are applicable to
animals. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §71-4402)
SECTION 3-309: RABIES SUSPECTED; IMPOUNDMENT
Any dog, cat or other animal suspected of being afflicted with rabies, or any cat
or dog not vaccinated in accordance with the provisions set forth above which
has bitten any person or has caused an abrasion of the skin of any person, or
any cat or dog vaccinated in accordance with this article, or any other animal
which has bitten any person shall be seized by a police officer or humane officer
of this city and shall be impounded under the supervision of a licensed
veterinarian or public health authority for not less than ten days. If testing is
required by the licensed veterinarian the cost of the same shall be paid by the
owner of the animal tested. If, upon examination and testing by a veterinarian,
the cat, dog or other animal has no clinical signs of rabies at the end of such
impoundment, it shall be released to the owner upon said owner paying the costs
of said impoundment, or, in the case of a stray, shall be disposed of in whatever
manner deemed best by the city animal control officer. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat.
§71-4406)
SECTION 3-310: RABID ANIMALS; CAPTURE IMPOSSIBLE
The animal control officer or police officer shall have the authority to kill any
domestic animals with the characteristics of rabies which make capture
impossible because of the danger involved. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-206)
SECTION 3-311: RABID ANIMALS; PROCLAMATION
It shall be the duty of the City Council or mayor whenever, in their opinion, the
danger to the public safety from rabid dogs or cats is great or imminent, to issue
a proclamation ordering all persons owning, keeping or harboring any dog or cat
to muzzle the same, or to confine it for a period of not less than 30 days or more
than ninety days from the date of such proclamation, or until such danger is past.
The dogs or cats may be harbored by any good and sufficient means in a house,
garage or yard on the premises wherein the said owner may reside. Upon
issuance of the proclamation it shall be the duty of all persons owning, keeping or
harboring any dog or cat to confine the same as herein provided.
SECTION 3-312 INTERFERENCE WITH ANIMAL CONTROL/HUMANE
OFFICER
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, delay, or interfere with any city
animal control/humane officer who is performing any duty enjoined upon him/her
by the provisions of this article, or to break open, or in any manner directly or
indirectly aid, counsel, or advise the breaking open of the animal shelter, any
ambulance wagon, or other vehicle used for the collecting or conveying of dogs
or cats to the shelter. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-906)
SECTION 3-313: KILLING AND POISONING
It shall be unlawful to kill, or to administer, or cause to be administered, poison of
any sort to a dog or cat, or in any manner to injure, maim or destroy, or in any
manner attempt to injure, maim or destroy any dog or cat that is the property of
another person, or to place any poison, or poisoned food where the same is
accessible to a dog or cat; provided that this section shall not apply to city
policemen or the humane officer acting within their power and duty.
SECTION 3-314: BARKING AND OFFENSIVE
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor any dog which by loud,
continued or frequent barking, howling or yelping shall annoy or disturb any
neighborhood or person, or which habitually barks at or chases pedestrians,
drivers or owners of horses or vehicles while they are on any public sidewalks,
streets or alleys in the City. Upon the written complaint of any affected person
that any dog owned by the person named in the complaint is an annoyance or
disturbance or otherwise violates the provisions of this section, the city police
shall investigate the complaint and, if in their opinion the situation warrants, shall
notify the owner to silence and restrain such dog. The provisions of this section
shall not be construed to apply to the city animal shelter. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat.
§16-206)
SECTION 3-315: FIGHTING
It shall be unlawful for any person, by agreement or otherwise, to set dogs to
fighting, or by any gesture or word to encourage the same to fight. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat. §16-206)
SECTION 3-316: LIABILITY OF OWNER
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow a dog owned, kept or harbored by
him/her, or under his/her charge or control, to injure or destroy any real or
personal property of any description belonging to another person. The owner or
possessor of any such dog, in addition to the usual judgment upon conviction,
may be made to be liable to the persons so injured in an amount equal to the
value of the damage so sustained. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §54-601, 54-602)
SECTION 3-317: STRAYS
No person shall allow any stray cat or dog to habitually remain or to be lodged or
fed within his/her house, store, yard, enclosure or place, but shall turn such dog
or cat over to the humane officer or police officer for observation for a period of
72 hours, after which time it shall be handled the same as an impounded dog or
cat.
SECTION 3-318: IMPOUNDING
It shall be the duty of the humane officer or city police to capture, secure and
remove in a humane manner to the city animal shelter, licensed kennel or
veterinary clinic any dog, cat or other animal violating any of the provisions of this
chapter. The animal so impounded shall be treated in a humane manner and
shall be provided with a sufficient supply of food and fresh water each day. Each
impounded animal shall be kept and maintained at the pound for a period of not
less than three days after public notice has been given unless reclaimed earlier
by the owner. Notice of impoundment of all animals, including any significant
marks or identifications, shall be posted at the office of the chief of police within
48 hours after impoundment as public notification of such impoundment. Any
animal may be reclaimed by its owner during the period of impoundment by
payment of a general impoundment fee and daily board fee as set by resolution
of the City Council and on file in the office of the city clerk and by providing proof
of or complying with the licensing and rabies vaccination requirements prior to
release. If the animal is not claimed at the end of required waiting period after
public notice has been given, the city police may dispose of the animal in
accordance with the applicable rules and regulations pertaining to the same;
provided, that if, in the judgment of the humane officer, a suitable home can be
found for any such animal within the City, the said animal shall be turned over to
that person and the new owner shall then be required to pay all fees and meet all
licensing and vaccinating requirements provided in this article. The City shall
acquire legal title to any unlicensed dog or cat impounded in the animal shelter
for a period longer than the required waiting period after giving notice. All
animals shall be destroyed and buried in the summary and humane manner as
prescribed by the Board of Health unless a suitable home can be found for such
dog or cat. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 71-4408)
SECTION 3-319: DANGEROUS DOGS; DEFINITIONS
"Animal Control Authority” shall mean the entity authorized to enforce the animal
control laws of the City.
"Animal Control Officer” shall mean any individual employed, appointed or
authorized by an animal control authority for the purpose of aiding in the
enforcement of this act or any other law or ordinance relating to the licensing of
animals, control of animals, or seizure and impoundment of animals and shall
include any state or local law enforcement or other employee whose duties in
whole or in part include assignments that involve the seizure and impoundment
of any animal.
"Dangerous dog” shall mean any dog that, according to the records of an animal
control authority:
a. has killed or inflicted severe injury on a human being or public or private
property;
b. has killed a domestic animal without provocation while the dog was off the
owner's property; or
c. has been previously determined to be a potentially dangerous dog by an
animal control authority and the owner has received notice of such determination
and such dog again aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of
humans or domestic animals. A dog shall not be defined as a dangerous dog if
the threat, any injury that is not a severe injury, or the damage was sustained by
a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass as defined in Section
20-203, 28-520, or 28-521 or any other tort upon the property of the owner of the
dog; who was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog; who has, in the past,
been observed or reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the dog; or
who was committing or attempting to commit a crime;
"Domestic Animal” shall mean a cat, a dog or livestock;
"Owner” shall mean any person, firm, corporation, organization, political
subdivision, or department possessing, harboring, keeping or having control or
custody of a dog;
"Potentially Dangerous Dog” shall mean:
a. any dog that when unprovoked;
(i) inflicts a nonsevere injury on a human or injures a domestic animal
either on public or private property, or;
(ii) chases or approaches a person upon streets, sidewalks or any
public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or;
b. any specific dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
when unprovoked, to cause injury, or to threaten the safety of humans or
domestic animals; and
"Severe Injury” shall mean any physical injury that results in disfiguring
lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or one or more broken
bones or that creates a potential danger to the life or health of the victim.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §54-617)
SECTION 3-320: DANGEROUS DOGS; RESTRAINED
No owner of a dangerous dog shall permit the dog to go beyond the property of
the owner unless the dog is restrained securely by a chain or leash. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat. §54-618)
SECTION 3-321: DANGEROUS DOGS; CONFINED
While unattended on the owner's property, a dangerous dog shall be securely
confined, in a humane manner, indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen
or structure suitably designed to prevent the entry of young children and to
prevent the dog from escaping. The pen or structure shall have secure sides
and a secure top. If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the
sides shall be embedded into the ground. The pen or structure shall also protect
the dog from the elements. The owner of a dangerous dog shall post a warning
sign on the property where the dog is kept that is clearly visible and that informs
persons that a dangerous dog is on the property. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 54-619)
SECTION 3-322: DANGEROUS DOGS; FAILURE TO COMPLY
Any dangerous dog may be immediately confiscated by an animal control officer
if the owner is in violation of this article. The owner shall be responsible for the
reasonable costs incurred by the animal control authority for the care of a
dangerous dog confiscated by an animal control officer or for the destruction of
any dangerous dog if the action by the animal control authority is pursuant to law
and if the owner violated this article.
In addition to any other penalty, a court may order the animal control authority to
dispose of a dangerous dog in an expeditious and humane manner. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat. §54-620)
SECTION 3-323: DANGEROUS DOGS; ACTIONS IN DEFENSE
A person may use whatever means is necessary and not otherwise prohibited to
act in defense of self or others from any vicious animal only when there is
immediate danger from the animal. No person shall be held accountable for any
inhumane treatment of an animal when the actions are solely in defense of self or
others from injury.
SECTION 3-324: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS
Nothing in this article shall be construed to restrict or prohibit any governing body
of the municipality from establishing and enforcing laws or ordinances at least as
stringent as the provisions of this article. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §54-624)

ARTICLE IV - KENNELS
SECTION 3-401 DEFINITIONS
As used in this article unless the context otherwise indicates:
The term "kennel" shall be construed to include any establishment which
provides boarding and care services for dogs, cats and similar small mammals or
bipedal birds, or any premises on which three or more animals included in this
definition over four months of age are kept and maintained.
Multi-unit dwellings or apartments where a certificate of satisfactory construction
has been issued and where such dwelling is zoned for such, is for the purpose of
this article, consider one place per family-unit dwelling.
Owner shall mean the holder of the state kennel license.
SECTION 3-402 LICENSING REQUIRED
It shall be unlawful to operate a kennel, as defined above, anywhere in the City
or the two mile zoning jurisdiction of the City without first securing a kennel
license from the city clerk or his/her designee. At the time of application for such
kennel license, the owner shall state on forms provided for such purpose the
owner's name and address and the breed, sex and number of animals, and
number of animals for breeding. Such application shall also have attached
thereto a license for a kennel issued pursuant to the Commercial Dog and Cat
Operator Inspection Act of the State of Nebraska and the consent of all property
owners or occupants of land or lots adjoining the land upon which the proposed
kennel is to be located. Said permit and license shall be on a one-year
license/permit, upon payment of the fee, from date of issuance and can be
revoked for violation of said standards and regulations after due notice and
hearing to said kennel owner or operator. The licensing year for a kennel shall
be from the date of issuance.
The owner shall also be liable to comply with any ordinance which requires the
licensing of each dog or cat in said kennel and any ordinance requiring all dogs
or cats to wear tags. It is specifically provided that each dog or cat in said kennel
over the age of three months shall have a certificate or other substantial proof
evidencing that each dog or cat in said kennel is currently vaccinated for rabies,
said certificate or other substantial proof to be available for inspection by the
officers of the Plattsmouth Police Department upon request. The proof of the
vaccination will also be required to be presented to the city clerk or his/her
designee at the time of application for a kennel license. The owner shall also be
liable to comply with all city ordinances pertaining to dogs or cats. Any owner
that violates any of the regulations and ordinances shall have their kennel license
revoked.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-206, 16-240)
SECTION 3-403: REGULATIONS
1. Structure; Construction. Housing facilities for animals must be outside
dwellings designed and constructed so that they are structurally sound. They
must be kept in good repair, and they must protect the dogs or cats from injury,
contain the animals securely, and restrict other animals from entering. The
housing shall provide sufficient shade to shelter all the animals housed in the
primary enclosure at one time. The housing shall provide shelter and protection
from extreme temperatures and weather conditions that may be uncomfortable or
hazardous to all the animals. The housing shall also provide sufficient space to
allow each animal to turn about freely, to stand, sit and lie in a comfortable,
normal position, and to walk in a normal manner.
2. Condition and Site. Every place used as a kennel shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition. Housing facilities and areas used for storing animal food or
bedding must be free of any accumulation of trash, waste material, junk, weeds
and other discarded materials. Animal areas inside of housing facilities must be
kept neat and free of clutter, including equipment, furniture, and stored material,
but may contain materials actually used and necessary for cleaning the area. All
animals shall be humanely treated and any animal having any disease shall be
properly isolated and treated.
SECTION 3-404: VIOLATION OF LICENSING PROVISIONS
In the event it is determined that the kennel is in violation of any provision relating
to kennel licenses, the City shall give the license holder written notice setting
forth the violations and ten days in which to correct said violation. In the event
said violation is not corrected in said ten days, a hearing will be held by the
Plattsmouth City Council to determine if the kennel license should be revoked.
Notice of said hearing shall be given to the license holder in writing at least five
days prior to the hearing. Written notices required herein shall be delivered
personally or by regular United States mail, postage prepaid, duly addressed to
the address as shown on the application for kennel license.
The City may issue citations for kennel license violations without first holding any
hearing as set forth above. In the event the holder of the license is convicted in
court of any violation, the licensee shall cease operation of a kennel and shall
immediately reduce the number of animals to less than three.
ARTICLE V - ANIMALS GENERALLY
SECTION 3-501: ANIMALS BANNED FROM CITY
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain within the corporate limits
any horse, mule, sheep, cow, goat or swine, including Chinese pot-bellied pigs,
except as allowed by the zoning ordinances. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-240)
SECTION 3-502: CRUELTY; DEFINITIONS
"Abandon" shall mean to leave any animal for any length of time without making
effective provision for its food, water, or other care as is reasonably necessary for
the animal's health.
"Animal" shall mean any vertebrate member of the animal kingdom except man.
The term shall not include an uncaptured wild animal.
"Cruelly mistreat" shall mean to knowingly and intentionally kill, maim, disfigure,
torture, beat, mutilate, burn, scald or otherwise set upon any animal.
"Cruelly neglect" shall mean to fail to provide any animal in one's care, whether
as owner or custodian, with food, water or other care as is reasonably necessary
for the animal's health.
"Humane killing" shall mean the destruction of an animal by a method which
causes the animal a minimum of pain and suffering.
"Law enforcement officer" shall mean any member of the Nebraska State Patrol,
county or deputy sheriff, any member of the city police force, or any other public
official authorized by the City to enforce state or local animal control laws, rules,
regulations and/or ordinances.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-1008)
SECTION 3-503: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
A person commits cruelty to animals if, except as otherwise authorized by law,
he/she intentionally or recklessly:
1. Subjects any animal to cruel mistreatment; or
2. Subjects any animal in his/her custody to cruel neglect; or
3. Abandons any animal; or
4. Kills or injures any animal belonging to another.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-1009)
SECTION 3-504 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS; LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER;
POWERS, IMMUNITY
1. Any law enforcement officer who has reason to believe that an animal has
been abandoned or is being cruelly neglected or cruelly mistreated may seek a
warrant authorizing entry upon private property to inspect, care for, or impound
the animal.
2. Any law enforcement officer who has reason to believe that an animal has
been abandoned or is being cruelly neglected or cruelly mistreated may issue a
citation to the owner as prescribed by law.
3. Any law enforcement officer acting under this section shall not be liable for
damage to property if such damage is not the result of the officer's negligence.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-1012)
SECTION 3-505 ENCLOSURES
All pens, cages, sheds, yards or any other area or enclosure for the confinement
of animals and fowls not specifically barred within the corporate limits shall be
kept in a clean and orderly manner so as not to become a menace or nuisance to
the neighborhood in which the said enclosure is located.
SECTION 3-506: RUNNING AT LARGE
It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or harborer of any animal, or any
person having the charge, custody or control thereof, to permit such animal to be
ridden, driven or run at large upon any of the public ways or property, or to be
tethered or staked out in such a manner so as to allow such animal to reach or
pass into a public way or to be upon the property of another within the corporate
limits of the City; provided that such prohibition shall not apply to horses being
ridden on the public ways as long as the person riding such horse shall have
reached the age of 12 years or shall be accompanied by a person having
reached the age of 21 years, and such horse shall be ridden by such person
during the hours between sunrise and sunset. Such permitted use of the public
ways by horses shall include the operation of a horse-drawn vehicle subject to
the time and age limits herein expressed. The person in charge of the horse
being ridden or driven upon public streets, or person having control thereof, shall
comply with all traffic regulations in effect concerning the use of city streets, and
shall at all times ride or drive said animal single file next to the curb on the
traveled portion of the street in the permitted direction of traffic. (Ref. Neb. Rev.
Stat. §16-235)
SECTION 3-507: FOWL; RUNNING AT LARGE
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow poultry, chickens, turkeys, geese or
any other fowls to run at large within the corporate limits, except in enclosed
places on private property. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-235)
SECTION 3-508: WILD ANIMALS
No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his/her property any wild animals
except such animals kept for exhibition purposes by circuses and educational
institutions.
SECTION 3-509: PITTING; DEFINITIONS
"Bearbaiting" shall mean the pitting of any animal against a bear.
"Cockfighting" shall mean the pitting of a fowl against another fowl.
"Dogfighting" shall mean the pitting of a dog against another dog.
"Pitting" shall mean bringing animals together in combat.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-1004)
SECTION 3-510: PITTING; PROHIBITED
No person shall knowingly promote, engage in, or be employed at dogfighting,
cockfighting, bearbaiting, or pitting an animal against another. Nor shall any
person knowingly receive money for the admission of another person to a place
kept for such purpose. Nor shall any person knowingly own, use, train, sell or
possess an animal for the purpose of animal pitting. Nor shall any person
knowingly permit any act as described in this section to occur on any premises
owned or controlled by him/her. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-1005)
SECTION 3-511: PITTING; SPECTATORS PROHIBITED
No person shall knowingly and willingly be present at and witness as a spectator
dogfighting, cockfighting, bearbaiting, or the pitting of an animal against another.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-1005)
SECTION 3-512 APIARIES; KEEPING OF BEEHIVES OR BOXES; RULES
AND REGULATIONS
Beekeeping is allowed within the city limits; provided, such apiaries shall be
subject to all applicable state statutes and regulations; and provided further such
apiaries shall be subject to the following additional regulations:
1. Location of Hives: No hives or boxes where bees are kept shall be
established or maintained within 50 feet of any dwelling or within 15 feet of any
lot line, sidewalk, alley or other public way; provided, however, the bees may be
kept within 15 feet of a lot line, sidewalk, alley or other public way if a barrier is
constructed which is at least six feet in height and is placed between the hives or
boxes and the lot line, sidewalk, alley or other public way to impair the flight of
the bees.
2. Minimum Area Required: No hives or boxes shall be established or
maintained where the bee population kept would be in excess of, based on the
size of the lot, one hive or box per 1,500 square feet.
3. Standards for Management: Any person keeping bees shall: (a) minimize
swarming of bees; (b) provide an adequate source of water located on the
premises; (c) provide an adequate number of hives or boxes; (d) maintain and
manage the boxes or hives to avoid creating a nuisance; and (e) be registered
with the State of Nebraska.
4. Violations, Citations: Whenever a city police officer or animal control officer
observes any violation of this section or has probable cause to believe that a
violation has occurred, the officer shall issue an animal control citation to the
owner of the hives or boxes and to the owner or occupant of the dwelling, if the
owner or occupant is not also the owner of the hives or boxes. Upon conviction,
the defendant shall be subject to a fine in a sum not more than that permitted by
Nebraska law for violation of a municipal ordinance.
SECTION 3-513: OWNERS; LIABILITIES, DUTIES
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any animal owned, kept or
harborer by him/her or under his/her charge or control, to injure or destroy
any real or personal property of any description belonging to another person.
The owner or possessor of any such animal, in addition to the usual judgment
upon conviction, may be made to be liable to the person so injured in an
amount equal to the value of the damage so sustained.
2. The owner of any animal is responsible for removing all excreta deposited on
public walks, recreation areas or private property, other than the owner's
property, by the owner's animal, or deposited as a result of the owner
cleaning the animal's cage, pen or other animal facility.
3. The owner of every animal is responsible for removing all trash or garbage
scattered or removed from its rightful place by the owner's animal, including
trash or garbage belonging to the owner.
4. It shall be the duty of the owner of any dog, cat or other animal which has
bitten or attacked a person, or any other person having knowledge of such
bite or attack, including physicians, nurses and veterinarians, to report such
act to the humane officer or city police officer.
5. It shall be the duty of the owner of any animal, and the duty of physicians and
veterinarians, to report to the humane officer or city police officer the
existence of any animal known or suspected to be suffering from rabies.
6. No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any animal or fowl which shall be
loud and unusual noises disturb and destroy the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood.

ARTICLE VI – NUISANCES
SECTION 3-601: GENERALLY DEFINED
A nuisance consists in doing any unlawful act, or omitting to perform a duty, or
suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act, omission,
condition or thing either:
1. Injures or endangers the comfort, repose health, or safety of others,
2. Offends decency,
3. Is offensive to the senses,
4. Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, tends to obstruct or renders
dangerous for passage any stream, public park, parkway, square, street or
highway in the City.
5. In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of property, or
6. Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property,
or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-240, 18-1720)
SECTION 3-602: SPECIFICALLY DEFINED
The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting of any of the
following specific acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
declared to be nuisances:
1. Any odorous, putrid, unsound or unwholesome grain, meat, hides, skins,
feathers, vegetable matter, or the whole or any part of any dead animal, fish or
fowl.
2. Privies, vaults, cesspools, dumps, pits or like places which are not
securely protected from flies or rats, or which are foul or malodorous.
3. Filthy, littered or trash-covered cellars, houseyards, barn-yards, stableyards,
factory-yards, mill yards, vacant areas in rear of stores, granaries, vacant
lots, houses, buildings or premises.
4. Animal manure in any quantity, which is not securely protected from flies
and the elements, or which, is kept or handled in violation of any ordinance of the
City.
5. Liquid household waste, human excreta, garbage, butcher's trimmings and
offal, parts of fish or any waste vegetable or animal matter in any quantity;
provided, nothing herein contained shall prevent the temporary retention of waste
in receptacles in a manner provided by the health officer of the City, nor the
dumping of nonputrifying waste in a place and manner approved by the health
officer.
6. Tin cans, bottles, glass, cans, ashes, small pieces of scrap iron, wire
metal articles, bric-a-brac, broken stone or cement, broken crockery, broken
glass, broken plaster, and all trash or abandoned material, unless the same be
kept in covered bins or galvanized iron receptacles.
7. Trash, litter, rags, accumulations of barrels, boxes, crates, packing crates,
mattresses, bedding, packing material, lumber not neatly piled, scrap iron, tin or
other metal not neatly piled, old automobiles or parts thereof, or any other waste
materials when any of said articles or materials create a condition in which flies
or rats may breed or multiply, or which may be a fire danger or which are so
unsightly as to depreciate property values in the vicinity thereof.
8. Any unsightly building, billboard, or other structure, or any old, abandoned
or partially destroyed building or structure or any building or structure
commenced and left unfinished, which said buildings, billboards or other
structures are either a fire hazard, a menace to the public health or safety, or are
so unsightly as to depreciate the value of property in the vicinity thereof.
9. All places used or maintained as junkyards or dumping grounds, or for the
wrecking and dissembling of automobiles, trucks, tractors or machinery of any
kind, or for the storing or leaving of wornout, wrecked or abandoned automobiles,
trucks, tractors or machinery of any kind, or of any of the parts thereof, or for the
storing or leaving of any machinery or equipment used by contractors or builders
or by other persons, which said places are kept or maintained so as to essentially
interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by others, or which are
so unsightly as to tend to depreciate property values in the vicinity thereof.
10. Stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of ground.
11. Stockyards, granaries, mills, pig pens, cattle pens, chicken pens or any
other place, building or enclosure in which animals or fowl of any kind are
confined or on which are stored tankage or any other animal or vegetable matter,
or on which any animal or vegetable matter, including grain, is being processed,
when said places in which said animals are confined, or said premises on which
said vegetable or animal matter is located, are maintained and kept in such a
manner that foul and noxious odors are permitted to emanate therefrom, to the
annoyance of inhabitants of the City, or are maintained and kept in such a
manner as to be injurious to the public health.
12. Maintenance of weeds, grasses or worthless vegetation of 12 inches or more
in height. Weeds shall include, but not be limited to, bindweed (convolvulus
arvensis), puncture vine (tribulus terrestris), leafy spurge (euphorbia esula),
Canada thistle (cirsium arvense), perennial peppergrass (lepidium draba),
Russian knapweed (centaurea picris), Johnson grass (sorghum halepense),
nodding or musk thistle, quack grass (agropyron repens), perennial sow thistle
(sonchus arvensis), horse nettle (solanum carolinense), bull thistle (cirsium
lanceoltaum), buckthorn (rhamnus sp.) (tourn), hemp plant (canabis sativa), and
ragweed (ambrosiaceae).
13. All other things specifically designated as nuisances elsewhere in this Code.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-230, 18-1720)
SECTION 3-603: ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
A. It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of real estate in the City
to keep that real estate free of public nuisances.
B. The building inspector, the police chief, and their designees are each
declared to be authorized officials to abate nuisances pursuant to this
Section. The City Administrator and such other appointed officers of the
City as the City Administrator may from time to time designate are
declared to be the hearing officers to hear appeals pursuant to this
Section.
C. Upon determination by an authorized official that a nuisance exists on
real estate, the authorized official shall give a notice to abate and remove
the nuisance. The notice shall be given to the owner or owner’s agent by
personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, sent to the
last known address of such owner or owner’s agent as reflected in the
records of the Cass County assessor. If notice by personal service or
certified mail is unsuccessful, notice shall be given by publication once in
a newspaper of general circulation in the City and by posting a copy of the
notice on the real estate upon which the nuisance is located. The notice
shall describe the condition as found by the authorized official and shall
state that the condition has been declared a public nuisance. The notice
shall set forth a date by which the nuisance shall be abated, and the date
shall be such time as is reasonable in the judgment of the authorized
official to abate the nuisance, provided that, unless an emergency exists,
such time shall not be less than 30 days.
D. No later than 30 days after such notice, or such shorter period as the
City may specify in the event of an emergency, the owner or occupant
may appeal the authorized official’s nuisance determination and order of
abatement by filing with the City Clerk a written request for a hearing and
the applicable fee set forth in the City’s fee ordinance. The hearing officer
shall fix the date and time for the hearing, which shall be not less than 7
nor more than 14 days after the appeal is filed, and deliver notice of the
hearing by first-class mail to the address for notice specified by the owner
or occupant in writing to the City Clerk or, if no address is so specified, to
the last known address for the owner or owner’s agent reflected in the
records of the Cass County Assessor. Upon the date and time fixed for
the hearing, the authorized official shall present to the hearing officer
evidence of the condition constituting the nuisance, and the hearing
officer shall hear objections, evidence, and argument presented by the
owner or occupant. The hearing officer shall render a decision on the
appeal within five business days after the hearing. If, after consideration
of all the evidence, the hearing officer finds that the condition is a public
nuisance, the hearing officer shall, by written order, direct the owner or
occupant to remedy the public nuisance and shall specify a date by which
the nuisance must be abated or removed. A copy of the order shall be
sent by first-class mail to the address for notice specified by the owner or
occupant in writing to the City Clerk or, if no address is so specified,
posted at the real estate and sent by first-class mail to the last known
address for the owner or owner’s agent as reflected in the records of the
Cass County assessor. If the nuisance is not abated by the date set forth
in the order, the hearing officer may proceed to cause the work done to
abate the nuisance. Any notice sent pursuant to this paragraph by firstclass
mail shall be conspicuously marked as to its importance.
E. If the owner or occupant of the real estate does not request a hearing
within 30 days of the notice, or within such shorter period as the City may
specify in cases of emergency, and fails to comply with the order to abate
and remove the nuisance within the time specified by the authorized
official, the City may proceed to cause the work done to abate the
nuisance.
F. The costs and expenses incurred by the City to abate a nuisance
pursuant to this Section shall be paid by the owner. If such costs and
expenses remain unpaid for two months after the work is done, the City
may either (1) levy and assess the costs and expenses of the work as
described in Paragraph G below or (2) recover in a civil action the costs
and expenses of the work.
G. The City Council may, at a regular council meeting, by resolution,
assess the costs and expenses incurred by the City to abate a nuisance
pursuant to this Section against the real estate on which the nuisance
existed; provided, that notice of the time of such meeting of the City
Council for making such assessment and for the purpose of such meeting
shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City
at least 10 days before said meeting is held, and shall be sent by firstclass
mail to the last known address of such owner or owner’s
representative of the real estate, as reflected in the records of the Cass
County assessor, at least 10 days before such meeting is held. Any such
notice sent by first-class mail shall be conspicuously marked as to its
importance. The City Council’s resolution may specify the date on which
the assessment shall be delinquent if unpaid and the rate at which interest
shall accrue during such delinquency. Upon assessment by the City
Council, the City Clerk shall certify the levy of the special assessment to
the Cass County Clerk and Cass County Treasurer for collection as
provided by law.
SECTION 3-603.01: SUMMARY ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
A. The building inspector, the police chief, and their designees are each
declared to be authorized officials to abate nuisances pursuant to this
Summary Abatement Procedure. The City Administrator and such other
appointed officers of the City as the City Administrator may from time to
time designate are declared to be the hearing officers to hear appeals
pursuant to this Section.
B. As an alternative to the Abatement Procedure in Section 3-603, the
Summary Abatement Procedure described in this Section may be used to
abate the nuisances defined in paragraphs 6, 7, or 12 of Section 3-602
and in Section 3-605.
C. Upon determination by an authorized official that a nuisance as
defined in paragraph 6, 7, or 12 of Section 3-602 or in Section 3-605
exists upon real estate, the authorized official shall give notice to abate
and remove the nuisance. The notice shall be given (1) to the owner or
owner’s agent by certified or first class mail sent to the last known
address of such owner or owner’s agent as reflected in the records of the
Cass County assessor and (2) to the occupant, if any, by personal
service, by posting at the real estate, or by certified or first-class mail to
the mailing address for the real estate, as may be practicable under the
circumstances. Any such notice sent by first-class mail shall be
conspicuously marked as to its importance. Posting or mailing of the
notice shall be deemed proper service of the notice for purposes of this
Section. The notice shall describe the condition constituting the nuisance
and shall state that, within five days of receipt of the notice, the owner or
occupant may appeal the authorized official’s nuisance determination and
order of abatement by filing with the City Clerk a written request for a
hearing. If, within five days of such notice, the owner or occupant does
not request a hearing or fails to comply with the order to abate and
remove the nuisance, the City may have the work done to abate the
nuisance.
D. Within five days of such notice, the owner or occupant may appeal the
authorized official’s nuisance determination and order of abatement by
filing with the City Clerk a written request for a hearing and the applicable
fee set forth in the City’s fee ordinance. The hearing officer shall conduct
a hearing within fourteen days after filing of the appeal, and the hearing
officer shall render a decision on the appeal within five business days
after the conclusion of the hearing. If the appeal fails, the hearing official
shall cause notice of his or her decision to be posted on the real estate.
The owner or occupant shall have 24 hours after such notice is posted to
abate the nuisance, and the City may thereafter have the work done to
abate the nuisance.
E. The costs and expenses incurred by the City to abate a nuisance
pursuant to this Section shall be paid by the owner. If such costs and
expenses remain unpaid for two months after the work is done, the City
may either (1) levy and assess the costs and expenses of the work as set
forth in paragraph F below or (2) recover in a civil action the costs and
expenses of the work.
F. The City Council may, at a regular council meeting, by resolution,
assess the costs and expenses incurred by the City to abate a nuisance
pursuant to this Section, against the real estate on which the nuisance
existed; provided, that notice of the time of such meeting of the City
Council for making such assessment and for the purpose of such meeting
shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City
at least 10 days before said meeting is held, and shall be sent by firstclass
mail to the last known address of the owner or owner’s
representative of the real estate, as reflected in the records of the Cass
County assessor, at least 10 days before such meeting is held. Any such
notice sent by first-class mail shall be conspicuously marked as to its
importance. The City Council’s resolution may specify the date on which
the assessment shall be delinquent if unpaid and the rate at which interest
shall accrue during such delinquency. Upon assessment by the City
Council, the City Clerk shall certify the levy of the special assessment to
the Cass County Clerk and Cass County Treasurer for collection as
provided by law.
G. With respect to nuisances as defined in paragraph 12 of Section 3-
602, if the City causes the abatement of a nuisance on any real estate
pursuant to this Section, the City may proceed to abate any additional
such nuisances occurring on the same real estate within the same
calendar year, without affording any further notice to the owner or
occupant other than posting at the real estate an order to abate the
nuisance within five days. In the event the nuisance is not abated within
such five-day period and neither the owner nor occupant has requested a
hearing, the City may cause the nuisance to be abated and levy the cost
and expense thereof as a special assessment pursuant to this Section.
SECTION 3-604: FAILURE TO CORRECT
In the event that the owner or occupant of said premises fails to correct and
eliminate said nuisance pursuant to the notice delivered by the city police, he/she
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day's violation after the expiration of the
five days notice shall be a separate offense.
SECTION 3-605: DEAD AND DISEASED TREES
It is hereby declared a nuisance for any property owner to permit, allow, or
maintain any dead or diseased trees within the right-of-way of streets within the
corporate limits of the City.
SECTION 3-606: JURISDICTION
The mayor and police chief of the City are directed to enforce this municipal code
against all nuisances. The jurisdiction of the mayor, police chief, and court shall
extend to, and the territorial application of this article shall include, all territory
within the corporate limits of the City to include all city owned property. (Ref.
Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-1720)
SECTION 3-607: ADJOINING LANDOWNERS; INTERVENTION BEFORE
TRIAL
In cases of appeal from an action of the City Council condemning real property
as a nuisance or as dangerous under the police powers of the City, the owners
of the adjoining property may intervene in the action at any time before trial.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-710)
SECTION 3-608: AIR POLLUTION; PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit the emission of
smoke from any source that is injurious or offensive to the residents of the City.
Air shall be considered to be polluted when the discharge into the open air of
dust, fumes, gases, mist, odors, smoke or any combination thereof is of such
character and in a quantity which to any group of persons interferes with their
health, repose or safety, or causes severe annoyance or discomfort or is
offensive and objectionable to normal persons and causes injury to real and
personal property of any kind. The standards for air pollution established or
adopted by the State of Nebraska shall be presumptive evidence as to when the
air is deemed to be polluted under this section. It is hereby unlawful for any such
person, firm or corporation to permit or cause the escape of the aforesaid
nuisances and the escape of the said dust, fumes, gases, mists, odors, and
smoke is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be summarily abated upon
written notice by police chief of the City of Plattsmouth to the violator. Such
abatement may be in addition to the penalty for air pollution in the City. (Ref.
Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-1720, 28-1321)
SECTION 3-609: WATER POLLUTION; PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to obstruct or impede
without legal authority any river or collection of water, or to corrupt and render
unwholesome or impure any watercourse, stream or other water. The standards
for water quality established or adopted by the State of Nebraska shall be
presumptive evidence as to when the water is deemed to be polluted under this
section. Such a corruption of the water in or about the City shall constitute a
nuisance and shall be summarily abated upon written notice to the violator by the
Board of Health. The said abatement may be in addition to the penalty for water
pollution. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-1720, 28-1321)
SECTION 3-610: RODENT AND INSECT CONTROL; DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of Sections 3-610 through 3-615, the following definitions shall
apply:
"Business buildings" shall mean any structure, whether public or private, that is
adapted for occupancy for the transaction of business, for rendering of
professional service, for amusement, for display, sale or storage of goods, wares
or merchandise, or for the performance of tenement houses, rooming houses,
office buildings, public elevators, abattoirs, warehouses, workshops, factories,
and all outhouses, sheds, barns and other structures on premises used for
business purposes.
"Health officer" shall mean any duly authorized representative, and if no person
is appointed by the mayor with the approval of the City Council, the chief of
police shall be the health officer.
"Insect" shall mean any of the numerous small invertebrate animals generally
having the body more or less obviously segmented, for the most part belonging
to the class insecta, comprising six-legged, usually winged forms (for example,
beetles, bugs, bees, flies) and other allied classes of arthropods whose members
are wingless and usually have more than six legs (for example, spiders, mites,
ticks, centipedes and wood lice).
"Occupant" shall mean the individual, partnership or corporation that uses or
occupies any business building or part thereof, whether the actual owner or
tenant. In the case of vacant business buildings or vacant portion thereof, the
owner, agent or custodian shall have the responsibility as occupant.
"Owner" shall mean the actual owner, agent or custodian of the business
building, whether individual, partnership or corporation. The lessee shall be
construed as the "owner" for the purpose of this section when business building
agreements hold the lessee responsible for maintenance and repairs.
"Rat eradication" shall mean the elimination or extermination of rats within
buildings by any or all of the accepted measures such as: poisoning, fumigation,
trapping or clubbing.
"Rat harborage" shall mean any condition which provides shelter or protection for
rats, thus favoring their multiplication and continued existence in, under or
outside of any structures.
"Ratproofing" applies to a form of construction to prevent the ingress of rats into
business buildings from the exterior, or from one business building or
establishment to another. It consists essentially of treatment with material
impervious to rat gnawing, all actual or potential openings in exterior walls,
ground or first floors, basements, roofs and foundations that may be reached by
rats from the ground by climbing or by burrowing.
"Rodent" shall mean the class of animals belonging or pertaining to the rodentia,
the order of gnawing or nibbling mammals that includes, but is not limited to,
mice, rats, squirrels and beavers.
SECTION 3-611: RODENTS AND INSECTS; EXTERMINATION
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee or occupant of any dwelling or building to
be responsible for the active and continued extermination of any insects, rodents
or other pests therein or on the premise. In the event that the owner, lessee or
occupant of any said dwelling or building neglects, fails or otherwise refuses to
control and actively exterminate the insects, rodents and other pests in and about
his/her premise, the Board of Health shall issue notice for him/her to do so. If the
said owner, lessee or occupant has not made a good faith effort to exterminate
the said pests within five days, the premise shall be deemed to be a nuisance
and a health hazard. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-1720, 28-1321)
SECTION 3-612: RODENTS AND INSECTS; OCCUPANT
It shall be the responsibility of the occupant in a single dwelling unit, whether or
not the dwelling unit is located in a multiple unit structure, to exterminate the
rodents and insects infesting the premise when it is found by the Board of Health
that only the occupant's dwelling is so infested. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-1720,
28-1321)
SECTION 3-613: RODENTS AND INSECTS; OWNER
The owner of a multiple dwelling unit shall have the duty to exterminate therein
for rodents and insects when infestation exists in two or more units, when
infestation exists in shared or public areas of a multiple unit structure, or when
the infestation is due to failure by the owner to maintain the dwelling in an insectand
rodent-proof condition. The owner of a single dwelling unit shall have the
duty to exterminate therein notwithstanding the occupancy of a renter or lessee
when the infestation of insects or rodents is due to the said owner's failure to
construct or maintain the premise in such a manner as to make it reasonably
resistant to the entrance and habitability of such pests. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-
1720, 28-1321)
SECTION 3-614: RODENTS AND INSECTS; RATPROOFING
All business buildings in the City are required to be ratproofed, free of rats, and
maintained in a ratproof and rat-free condition.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation hereunder to construct,
repair or remodel any building, dwelling, stable or market, or other structure
whatsoever, unless such construction, repair, remodeling or installation shall
render the building or other structure ratproof.
SECTION 3-615: RODENTS AND INSECTS; STANDARDS
The owners of all ratproofed business buildings are required to maintain the
premises in a ratproof condition and to repair all breaks or leaks that may occur
in the ratproofing without a specific order from the Board of Health.
It shall be unlawful under the provisions of this section for the occupant, owner,
contractor, public utility company, plumber or any other person to remove and fail
to restore in like condition the ratproofing from any business building for any
purpose. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person or agent to make any new
openings that are not closed or sealed against the entrance of rats.
UPDATED:
12/21/2017 ORDINANCE NO. 1932

ARTICLE VII - PENAL PROVISION
SECTION 3-701: VIOLATION; PENALTY
Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this chapter set forth at full length herein or incorporated by
reference, except for section 3-136, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500.00 dollars for
each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24
hours of such failure to comply.
Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement of Section
3-136 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be subject to fine of not more than $500.00 dollars and/or imprisonment for
up to 30 days for each offense.
Violations of this chapter which are listed in the City’s fine/waiver schedule may
be disposed of pursuant to a waiver of appearance, a plea of “guilty”, and the
payment of court costs and the corresponding fine for such violation listed in the
City’s fine/waiver schedule.
SECTION 3-702: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE
Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this chapter, the City may proceed by
a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the same, in the manner provided by law.
UPDATED:
12/21/2017 ORDINANCE NO. 1930
ARTICLE VIII – SEX OFFENDERS
SECTION 3-801 FINDINGS AND INTENT
A. Pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 29-4002, Sex Offenders are considered high
risk to repeat offenses.
B. Sex Offenders who use physical violence and prey on children are Sexual
Predators and present an extreme threat to public safety.
C. Sexual Predators repeat their offenses but are prosecuted for only a fraction
of their crimes and impose an exorbitant cost on their victims and on society at
large through their crimes.
D. Sexual Predators present an extreme threat to the safety of children who are
unable to protect themselves from the crimes of such Sexual Predators.
E. Pursuant to the Sexual Predator Residency Restriction Act adopted by the
Nebraska State Legislature and signed by the Governor on April 13, 2006 as
Legislative Bill 1199, municipalities have been enabled to restrict such person’s
place of residency in relationship to geographical proximity to schools and child
care facilities.
F. The Mayor and City Council find that it is consistent with the Sexual Predator
Residency Restriction Act adopted by the Nebraska State Legislature and signed
by the Governor on April 13, 2006 as Legislative Bill 1199, to restrict Sexual
Predators in relationship to their use of public facilities utilized by children.
. It is the intent of this ordinance to serve the City s compelling interest to
promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
City by limiting and regulating where Sexual Predators reside and by regulating
Sexual Predators’ use of public facilities which are utilized by children.
SECTION 3-802 DEFINITIONS
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
A. Sex Offender shall be anyone defined in the Sex Offender Registration Act
(Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 29-4001 to 29-4013) as amended, or any person convicted
under the law of another state if, at the time of conviction under the law of such
state, the offense for which the person was convicted would have required
registration under the Nebraska Sex Offender Registration Act, if conviction had
occurred in Nebraska.
B. Sexual Predator means an individual defined as such in the Sexual Predator
Residency Restriction Act adopted by the Nebraska State Legislature and signed
by the Governor on April 13, 2006 as Legislative Bill 1199.
C. Residence means a place where one regularly sleeps, where one has
established a home, where one is habitually present, and to which when one
departs and intends to return. A residence may include more than one location
and may be mobile or transitory. Residency may be shown by, among other
evidence, receipt of mail at the premises or identification of the premises as a
residence on a driver’s license, identification card, vehicle registration or other
document.
D. Child Care Facility means a place with a license issued under the Nebraska
Child Care Licensing Act, Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 71-1908 to 71-1923, as amended.
E. Loiter for purposes of this Article means
(1) Standing, sitting idly, whether or not the person is in a vehicle
or remaining in or around any of the premises described in this
Article; or
(2) Standing, sitting idly, whether or not the person is in a vehicle
or remaining in or around any of the premises described in this
Article, for the purpose of committing or attempting to commit a sex
offense; or
(3) Entering or remaining in a building in or around any of the
premises described in this Article, other than the offender s
residence.
F. School means a public, private, denominational, or parochial school which
meets the requirements for accreditation or approval prescribed in Chapter 79.
SECTION 3-803 PRESENCE WITHIN SCHOOL ZONE BY A SEXUAL
PREDATOR PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS
A. Prohibited on School Grounds and Conveyances. It is unlawful for a Sexual
Predator to knowingly be present in any school building, on real property
comprising any school, or in any conveyance owned, leased, or contracted by a
school to transport students to or from school or a school related activity when
persons under the age of 18 are present in the building, on the grounds or in the
conveyance.
B. Loitering Prohibited near school grounds. It is unlawful for a Sexual Predator
to knowingly loiter within 500 feet of a school building or real property comprising
any school while persons under the age of 18 are present in the building or on
the grounds, unless the Sexual Predator is an invitee of a person who resides
within 500 feet of a school building or real property comprising a school and is
accompanied by such resident, provided such resident is not also a Sexual
Predator.
C. Exception for Parents. A Sexual Predator does not commit a violation of
subsection (A) of this section if that Sexual Predator is the parent or legal
guardian of a child enrolled in the school and complies with the following
circumstances and requirements:
(1) The parent or guardian is attending a conference at the school
with school personnel to discuss his or her child academically,
socially, or for other school or student related issues concerning his
or her child.
(2) The parent or guardian is attending a function at the school in
which his or her child is actively participating. Such functions
include, but are not limited to, athletic contests, music concerts,
theatrical performances and academic competitions.
(3) Prior to entering upon the school property during regular school
hours, such parent or guardian shall contact the school principal (or
his or her designee) and communicate his or her intent to be
present upon such school property. Such communication shall
include the purpose for such person s presence, the anticipated
time of arrival and the anticipated time of departure. The principal
shall communicate to the Sexual Predator any conditions to be
imposed upon such person during such person’s presence at the
school, which conditions may include that the Sexual Predator be
accompanied at all times by an individual approved by the principal
or the principal’s designee. Upon arrival at the school the Sexual
Predator shall immediately check in at the school s office and shall
inform the office of his or her departure.
(4) Prior to entering upon school property at times other than
regular school hours, such parent or guardian shall contact the
school principal (or his or her designee) and communicate to the
principal of such persons intended presence. Such communication
shall include the purpose of such person’s presence, the
anticipated time of arrival and the anticipated time of departure.
The principal shall communicate to such person any conditions to
be imposed upon such person during the person’s presence at the
school, which conditions shall include that such person be
accompanied at all times by an appropriate individual approved by
the principal or the principal’s designee. In the event such person
does not receive communication from the principal (or his or her
designee) such lack of communication shall be deemed a refusal to
authorize the presence of the Sexual Predator.
D. Exception for Non-Parents. A Sexual Predator does not commit a violation of
subsection (A) of this section if that Sexual Predator:
(1) Is in the school or upon the school grounds for a legitimate
business purpose as a representative of a commercial company
supplying goods or services to the school building provided,
however, that prior to entering upon the school grounds the Sexual
Predator shall contact the principal (or his or her designee) and
communicate to the principal the individual s intended presence.
Such communication shall include the purpose of the Sexual
Predator’s presence, the company or business he or she is
representing, the anticipated time of his or her arrival and the
anticipated time of his or her departure. The principal shall
communicate to the Sexual Predator any conditions to be imposed
upon the individual during his or her presence at the school, which
conditions shall include that the individual be accompanied at all
times by an appropriate individual, approved by the principal or the
principal’s designee.
(2) Is a grandparent, aunt, uncle, first cousin, brother or sister of a
child enrolled in the school and is attending a function at the school
of which the child to which he or she is related is an active part;
provided, however, that the related person shall at all times be
accompanied by and in the presence of the parent or guardian of
the enrolled child taking part in the function. Such functions include
by way of illustration and not limitation, athletic contests, music
concerts, theatrical performances and academic competitions.
Provided, further, that prior to entering upon the school grounds the
Sexual Predator shall contact the principal (or his or her designee)
and communicate to the principal the individual s intended
presence. Such communication shall include the purpose of the
individual s presence, the anticipated time of his or her arrival and
the anticipated time of his or her departure, and the identity of the
parent who will accompany the Sexual Predator. The principal
shall communicate to the individual any additional conditions to be
imposed upon the individual during his or her presence at the
school, with which the Sexual Predator must comply.
E. Exception for Residence. A Sexual Predator does not commit a violation of
subsection (B) of this section if that person is a bona fide resident of residential
property located within 500 feet of the school property and remains present on
his or her residential property.
F. Constitutional Exception. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to infringe
upon the constitutional right of a Sexual Predator to be present in a school
building that is used as a polling place for the purpose of voting or for the
purpose of exercising his or her constitutional First Amendment rights.
SECTION 3-804 APPROACHING, CONTACTING, OR COMMUNICATING
WITH A CHILD WITHIN CERTAIN PLACES BY SEXUAL
PREDATORS PROHIBITED
A. It is unlawful for a Sexual Predator to knowingly be present in any public park
building or on real property comprising any public park or on the premises of a
municipal swimming pool when persons under the age of 18 are present in the
building, on the grounds or at the pool and to approach, contact, or communicate
with a child under 18 years of age, unless the Sexual Predator is a parent or
guardian of a person under 18 years of age present in the building or on the
grounds or unless the Sexual Predator is accompanied by a responsible adult
who is not a Sexual Predator.
B. It is unlawful for a Sexual Predator to knowingly loiter on a public way within
500 feet of a public park building or real property comprising any public park or
while persons under the age of 18 are present in the building or on the grounds
and to approach, contact, or communicate with a child under 18 years of age
within the 500 foot zone, unless the Sexual Predator is a parent or guardian of a
person under 18 years of age present in the building or on the grounds or unless
the Sexual Predator is accompanied by a responsible adult who is not a Sexual
Predator.
C. It is unlawful for a Sexual Predator to knowingly loiter on a public way within
500 feet of a child care facility while persons under the age of 18 are present in
the building or on the grounds and to approach, contact, or communicate with a
child under 18 years of age within the 500 foot zone, unless the Sexual Predator
is a parent or guardian of a person under 18 years of age present in the building
or on the grounds or unless the Sexual Predator is accompanied by a
responsible adult who is not a Sexual Predator.
D. It is unlawful for a Sexual Predator to knowingly loiter on a public way within
500 feet of the premises of a municipal swimming pool, tennis court, baseball
field, soccer field, or similar municipal property, while persons under the age of
18 are present in the building, on the grounds or at the property and to approach,
contact, or communicate with a child under 18 years of age within the 500 foot
zone, unless the Sexual Predator is a parent or guardian of a person under 18
years of age present in the building or on the grounds or unless the Sexual
Predator is accompanied by a responsible adult who is not a Sexual Predator.
E. It is unlawful for a Sexual Predator to knowingly be present in any public
library, or on real property comprising any public library, without immediately
notifying the library director or the director’s designee of his or her presence and
to advise of his or her departure immediately before leaving the premises, unless
he or she is accompanied by a responsible adult who is not a Sexual Predator.
While present at a public library, it is unlawful for a Sexual Predator to approach,
contact, or communicate with a child under 18 years of age unless the Sexual
Predator is a parent or guardian of the person under 18 years of age or unless
the Sexual Predator is accompanied by a responsible adult who is not a Sexual
Predator.
F. Exception for Residence. A Sexual Predator does not commit a violation of
subsection (B) of this section if that person is a bona fide resident of residential
property located within 500 feet of the school property and remains present on
his or her residential property.
SECTION 3-805 RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS; EXCEPTIONS
A. It is unlawful for any Sexual Predator to reside within five hundred (500) feet
from any school or child care facility.
B. For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the distance
shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the
residence to the nearest outer boundary line of the school or child care facility.
C. This provision shall not apply to a Sexual Predator who:
1. Resides within a prison or correctional or treatment facility
operated by the state or a political subdivision;
2. Established a residence before the passage of this ordinance
and has not moved from that residence; and
3. Established a residence after the passage of this ordinance and
the school or child care facility triggering the restriction was
established after the initial date of the Sexual Predator’s residence
at that location.
SECTION 3-806 DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION
The City, through its employees at City Hall and through its Police Department,
shall provide a copy of this ordinance to any person subject to the Nebraska Sex
Offender Registration Act, or who has been defined as a Sexual Predator, upon
such person’s request.
SECTION 3-807 SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this ordinance or its application to any person or
circumstances shall be held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance, or the
application of the provisions to other persons or circumstances, shall not be
affected.
SECTION 3-808 VIOLATION; PENALTY
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to fine of not more than
$500.00 dollars and/or imprisonment for up to 30 days for each offense.
ARTICLE IX - NOISE
SECTION 3-901 POLICY
It is declared the public policy to reduce the ambient noise level in the City; to
preserve, protect and promote public health safety and welfare and the peace
and quiet of the inhabitants; to prevent injury to human, plant and animal life and
property; to foster the convenience and comfort of the City’s inhabitants and to
facilitate the enjoyment of the natural attractions of the City.
SECTION 3-902 INDUSTRIAL MACHINERY, MUFFLERS, FANS AND
ENGINES
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any
noise-creating blower or power fan, machinery or any internal combustion
engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating
gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such
engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise, so that
the same shall not cause annoyance to the public or disturb the rest and quiet of
persons on adjacent premises.
(2) It shall be unlawful to operate industrial equipment, heavy machinery, jack
hammer and other industrial equipment emitting loud noise or to race automobile
engines within the City between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. in such a
manner as to disturb the comfort, repose, peace and quiet of residents of the
City, unless such activity has been approved in advance by the City Council or by
permit issued from the City Offices.
SECTION 3-903 SOUND REPRODUCTION DEVICES
No person shall play, use, operate or permit to be played, used or operated, any
radio, tape recorder, cassette player, compact disc (CD) player, or other machine
or device for reproducing sound, if it is located in or on:
(1) Any public property, including any public street, highway, building, sidewalk,
park or thoroughfare; or any motor vehicle on a public street, highway or public
space unless the volume of amplified sound shall be so controlled that it will not
be audible for a distance in excess of one hundred (100) feet from the source
and so that the volume is not unreasonably great and the noise, raucous, jarring,
disturbing or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility; or
(2) Residential property, whether a unit of a multiple-family residential dwelling
or a single family dwelling structure, unless the volume of amplified sound shall
be so controlled that it will not be audible in any adjoining unit. Provided,
however, that actual notice from the occupant of the adjoining residence to the
occupant of the property containing the source of amplified sound shall be a
necessary element under this subsection.
SECTION 3-904 MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE CONTROL
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle or
combination of vehicles at anytime or under any condition of grade, load,
acceleration or deceleration in such a manner as to discharge or emit total noise
beyond the following noise limits for each category of motor vehicle. Noise level
limits shall be applied to each category of vehicle regardless of actual speed of
the motor vehicle or combination of vehicles within the set speed limit zone.
These provisions apply to the total noise discharged or emitted from a motor
vehicle or combination of vehicles. This Ordinance shall not be construed to limit
or preclude the enforcement of any other applicable provision of this Code,
including those relating to motor vehicle mufflers.
Noise Limits for Vehicles: Speed Limit Zones
Type of Vehicle 35 MPH or
Less
Over 35
MPH
I Any motor vehicle with a
manufacturer s gross vehicle weight
rating of 10,000 pounds or more
86 db(A) 9Odb(A)
2 Any motorcycle 82 db(A) 86 db(A)
3 Any other motor vehicle 76 db(A) 82 db(A)
The above limitations shall be taken from a distance 50 feet from the curb line of
the street on which the motor vehicle or combination of vehicles is traveling, and
if the same are not so taken then the following correction factor shall be applied
for each category of motor vehicle or combination of vehicles.
Measurement Distance (Feet) Correction to Limit
25 6
28 5
32 4
35 3
40 2
45 1
50 0
56 -1
63 -2
70 -3
80 -4
90 -5
100 -6
(2) An adequate muffler or similar device is required as follows:
(a) No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, any motor
vehicle or motorcycle not equipped with a muffler or other similar
device in good working order and in constant operation.
(b) No person shall remove or render inoperative, or cause to be
removed or rendered inoperative, other than for purposes of
maintenance, repair or replacement, any muffler or similar device
on a motor vehicle or motorcycle. Mufflers or other similar devices
commonly known referred to as “after market” are permitted only if
they do not emit a noise level above the measured decibel limit
provided in this ordinance. Citizens may request to have their
vehicles noise level measured free of charge by the Plattsmouth
Police Department, by appointment, to ensure modifications or
repairs to their vehicles conform to the limits set within this
ordinance.
(c) Every motor vehicle operated within this city shall be provided
with a muffler in good working order to prevent excessive or
unusual noise or smoke. It shall be unlawful to use a “muffler cutout”
on any motor vehicle upon any streets; provided, however, that
the provisions of this section shall not apply to authorized
emergency vehicles.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to make, or cause to be made, loud or
disturbing noises with any mechanical devices operated by compressed air and
used for purposes of assisting braking on any semi-tractor.
SECTION 3-905 STANDARDS
The American National Standard, Specification for Sound Level Meters,
designated as ANSI SI .4-1971 (R1976), published by the American National
Standards Institute, Inc., 1430 Broadway, New York, New York, 10018, of which
not less than three copies are on file in the office of the city clerk, is adopted and
incorporated as if set out in length, and the provisions shall control and shall be
the specification for sound level meters.
SECTION 3-906 SOUND LEVEL METERS
The noise limit of any motor vehicle shall be measured and determined with a
sound level meter type 2 or better meeting the standards prescribed by the
American National Standards Institute. The sound level meter shall be
maintained in calibration and good working order. A calibration check shall be
made of the system at the time of any noise measurement.
SECTION 3-907 MEASUREMENT STANDARDS
Noise measurements recorded shall be taken so as to provide a proper
representation of the noise source. The microphone, during measurement, shall
be positioned so as not to create any unnatural enhancement or diminution of the
measured noise. A windscreen for the microphone shall be used. Traffic, aircraft
and other transportation noise sources and other background noises shall not be
considered in taking measurements except where such background noise
interferes with the primary noise being measured. Readings taken for the
enforcement of this article shall be taken on the fast response scale.
SECTION 3-908 USE OF NOISE MEASUREMENT AS EVIDENCE OF
VEHICLE NOISE
The noise limit of any motor vehicle measured in accordance with the provisions
of this article shall be accepted as prima facie evidence of the total noise of the
vehicle in any court or legal proceedings when the noise limit of the vehicle is at
issue.
SECTION 3-909 DISTURBING AN ASSEMBLY
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb, interrupt or interfere with any lawful
assembly of people by loud and unnecessary noise, threatening behavior, or
indecent behavior.
SECTION 3-910 EXEMPTIONS
(1) Emergency response vehicles. The provisions of this article shall not apply to
any authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call or
acting in time of emergency.
(2) The authorized use of the cities emergency tornado/foul weather warning
signal. Testing is to be limited to the first Saturday of each month at 11:00 A. M.
for an overall total of one minute.
(3) Public and private fireworks displays conducted between June 30 and July
10 shall be exempted from the noise regulation and thus shall not be deemed in
violation of this section.
(4) Events such as parades, fairs, and attractions shall also be exempt from this
ordinance with the purchase of their parade and event permits to operate from
the City of Plattsmouth and as such, shall not be deemed in violation of this
section.
(5) Private parties may purchase a one day exemption permit for a fee of $50.00
payable to the City of Plattsmouth, if said persons provide written proof of
notification of their neighbors within hearing range of the event. Proof should be
in the form of signatures and addresses from all their neighbors with in hearing
range of the event.
SECTION 3-911 GLOSSARY OF TERMS
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
A band level: The total sound level of all noise as measured with a sound level
meter using the A weighting network. The unit of measurement is the dB(A).
Ambient noise: The all-encompassing noise associated with a given
environment, being usually a composite of sounds from many sources, near and
far.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute or its successor bodies.
Authorized emergency vehicle: Vehicles of the police and fire divisions of the
public safety department of the city and such ambulances and other vehicles as
are designated and authorized as emergency vehicles by the public safety
director of the city.
Band pressure level: Of sound for a specified frequency band, the sound
pressure level for the sound contained within the restricted band. The reference
pressure must be specified.
Bel: A unit of level when the base of logarithm is 10. Use of the bel is restricted
to levels of quantities proportional to power.
Cycle: The complete sequence of values of a periodic quantity that occur during
a period.
Decibel: One-tenth of a bel and a unit of level when the base of the logarithm is
the tenth root of 10, and the quantities concerned are proportional to power.
Frequency: Of a function periodic in time, the reciprocal of the primitive period.
The unit is the cycle per unit time and must be specified.
Microbar A unit of pressure commonly used In acoustics and is equal to one
dyne per square centimeter.
Motor vehicle: Any passenger vehicle, truck, truck-trailer, trailer or semi-trailer
propelied or drawn by mechanical power, and shall include all vehicles except
self-propelled invalid chairs, farm tractors used occasionally outside of general
farm usage, road rollers, and any vehicles which run only on rails or tracks.
Muffler: An apparatus consisting of a series of chambers or baffle plates
designed for the purpose of transmitting gases while reducing sound emanating
from such apparatus.
Period: A periodic quantity, the smallest increment of time for which the function
repeats itself.
Periodic quantity: An oscillating quantity, the values of which recur for equal
increments of time.
SAE: The Society of Automotive Engineers or its successor bodies.
Sound analyzer A device for measuring the band pressure level or pressure
spectrum level of a sound as a function of frequency.
Sound-level meter An instrument including a microphone, an amplifier, an output
meter and frequency weighting networks for the measurement of noise and
sound tevels in a specified manner.
Sound pressure level: In decibels of sound, 20 times the logarithm to the base 10
of the ratio of the pressure of this sound to the reference pressure, which
reference pressure must be explicitly stated.
Spectrum: A function of time, and a description of its resolution into components,
each of different frequency and usually of different amplitude and phase, and is
also used to signify a continuous range of components usually wide in extent
within which waves have some specified characteristics, such as the
audio4requency spectrum, and is also applied to functions of variables other than
time.
Unnecessary noise: Any excessive or unusually loud sound or any Sound which
disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which does annoy, disturb,
injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of any person, or
causes damage to property or business.
All technical terminology used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise
requires, shall be defined in accordance with American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) publication S1.1-1960, revised 1971, or successor publications of
ANSI or its successor bodies.
SECTION 3-912 PENALTIES
Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this chapter, set forth at full length herein or incorporated by
reference, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not more than $500.00 dollars for each offense. A new violation
shall be deemed to have been committed evety 24 hours of such failure to
comply.
(Enacted September 6, 2005 – Ordinance No. 1719) (Re-enacted August 7,
2006 – Ordinance No. 1732)
CHAPTER IV MOTOR VEHICLES, BICYCLES,
COASTERS, SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER
SKATES, SLEDS, SKIS AND OTHER TOY
VEHICLES
ARTICLE I – TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
4-101 DEFINITIONS
4-102 TRUCK ROUTES
4-103 ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
4-104 TRAFFIC LANES; DESIGNATION
4-105 ARTERIAL STREETS; DESIGNATION
4-106 TURNING; HAND SIGNALS
4-107 TURNING; “U” TURNS
4-108 TURNING; GENERALLY
4-109 TURNING; CAUTIOUS
4-110 RIGHT-OF-WAY
4-111 RIGHT-OF-WAY; EMERGENCY VEHICLES
4-112 POSITION OF VEHICLE ON HIGHWAY; GENERALLY
4-113 POSITION OF VEHICLE ON HIGHWAY; PASSING
4-114 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS
4-115 GLASS; POINTED OBJECTS
4-116 SIGNS, SIGNALS
4-117 STOP SIGNS
4-118 SIGNS, TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES, TRAFFIC
SURVEILLANCE DEVICES; DEFACING OR INTERFERING
WITH
4-119 SIGNS; UNAUTHORIZED DISPLAY
4-120 LITTERING
4-121 CROWDING; FRONT SEAT
4-122 EMERGENCY SNOW ROUTES; DESIGNATION
4-123 SPEED LIMITS
4-124 SPEED NEAR SCHOOLS
4-125 SPEED; ELECTRONIC DETECTION
4-126 NEGLIGENT DRIVING
4-127 CARELESS DRIVING
4-128 BACKING
4-129 UNNECESSARY STOPPING
4-130 DRAGGING; ROPE, CHAIN
4-131 PASSING; HINDRANCE
4-132 DRIVING ABREAST
4-133 FOLLOWING; DISTANCE
4-134 DRIVING IN SIDEWALK SPACE
4-135 DRIVING OFF ROADS IN PARK GROUNDS; PROHIBITED
4-136 VEHICLE; MUFFLER (Repealed by Ordinance No. 1719 –
09/06/2005)
4-137 EMERGENCY REGULATIONS
4-138 POLICE; ENFORCEMENT
4-139 POLICE; REFUSAL TO OBEY
4-140 POLICE; TRAFFIC OFFICERS
4-141 LOADS; PROJECTING
4-142 LOADS; SPILLING
4-143 SPILLING OF LIVESTOCK WASTE
4-144 SEMI-TRACTORS; PROHIBITED NOISES
4-144.01 TRUCK ROUTES
4-145 RIDING OUTSIDE VEHICLE
4-146 SCREECHING OF TIRES; PROHIBITED
4-147 BUS STOPS
4-148 TAXI STANDS
4-149 RAILROAD CROSSING WATCHMAN; AUTHORITY
4-150 DISPLAY OF MERCHANDISE IN PARKING ZONE
4-151 NEW PAVEMENT, DRIVING OVER
4-152 VEHICLES; UNOBSTRUCTED VIEW
ARTICLE II – ABANDONED VEHICLES
4-201 TERMS DEFINED
4-202 ENFORCEMENT
4-203 NOTICE
4-204 DISPOSITION
4-205 TRANSFER OF TITLE
4-206 PENAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE III – PARKING
4-301 PARKING GENERALLY
4-302 DESIGNATION
4-303 AREAS
4-304 OBSTRUCTING ALLEY
4-305 ALLEYS
4-306 EMERGENCY VEHICLES
4-307 FIRE HYDRANTS AND STATIONS
4-308 CHURCHES, SCHOOLS, THEATERS
4-309 CURB
4-310 CURBS, PAINTED
4-311 DISPLAY OR REPAIR OF VEHICLES
4-312 TIME LIMIT
4-313 MAXIMUM TIME LIMIT
4-314 FLOOD AND SNOW ZONES
4-315 FLOOD AND SNOW ZONES; EXEMPTIONS, CONDITIONS
4-316 TRUCKS; PROHIBITED PARKING AREA; PARKING LOTS
4-317 TRUCKS; LOADING OR UNLOADING
4-318 TRUCKS; MOTOR CARRIERS AND LIVESTOCK TRUCKS
4-319 TRUCKS; TANKERS AND TRANSPORT TRUCKS
4-320 HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; DESIGNATION
OF ONSTREET PARKING SPACES; DISPLAY OF
PERMITS
4-321 HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; DESIGNATION
OF OFFSTREET PARKING STALLS OR SPACES
4-322 HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; DEFINITIONS
4-323 HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; PERMIT
ISSUANCE
4-324 HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; ISSUANCE OF
CITATION; TRIAL; DISMISSAL
4-325 HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; REMOVAL OF
UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE; PENALTY
4-326 OWNER-OPERATOR
4-327 CITY-OWNED PARKING LOT; REGULATIONS
4-328 REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES
ARTICLE IV – BICYCLES, MINIBIKES, SNOWMOBILES, MOTORCYCLES,
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND MOPEDS
4-401 BICYCLE; DEFINED
4-402 OPERATON OF BICYCLES, COASTERS, SKATEBOARDS,
ROLLER SKATES, SLEDS, SKIS OR OTHER TOY
VEHICLES
4-403 CLINGING TO MOTOR VEHICLE
4-404 BICYCLES; IMPOUNDING
4-405 MINIBIKES; DEFINED
4-406 MINIBIKES; EMERGENCIES AND PARADES
4-407 MINIBIKES; PUBLIC LANDS
4-408 SNOWMOBILES; DEFINED
4-409 SNOWMOBILES; EQUIPMENT
4-410 SNOWMOBILES; UNLAWFUL ACTS
4-411 SNOWMOBILES; STREETS
4-412 SNOWMOBILES; REGISTRATION
4-413 MOTORCYCLES; LIGHTS
4-414 MOTORCYCLES; RIDING TANDEM
4-415 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES; DEFINED
4-416 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES; OPERATION
4-417 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES; HEADLIGHTS
4-418 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES; EQUIPMENT, REQUIREMENT
4-419 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES; MODIFICATIONS PROHIBITED
4-420 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES; COMPETITION
4-421 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES; ACCIDENT REPORT
4-422 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES; PENALTY
4-423 MOPEDS; DEFINED
4-424 MOPEDS; OPERATOR'S LICENSE REQUIRED
4-425 MOPEDS; TRAFFIC REGULATIONS APPLICABLE
4-426 MOPEDS; OPERATION
4-427 MOPEDS; USE OF TRAFFIC LANES
4-428 MOPEDS; EQUIPMENT
4-429 SKATEBOARDS, SCOOTERS AND OTHER MINIATURE
UNPOWERED VEHICLES; UNLAWFUL OPERATION,
IMPOUNDMENT (Replaced by Section 4-402 Number 2)
4-430 MINIATURE MOTORIZED VEHICLES; DEFINITIONS
4-431 MINIATURE MOTORIZED VEHICLES; OPERATION ON
PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION
4-432 MINIATURE MOTORIZED VEHICLES; ENFORCEMENT
ARTICLE V – PENAL PROVISION
4-501 VIOLATION; PENALTY
CHAPTER IV MOTOR VEHICLES, BICYCLES,
COASTERS, SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER
SKATES, SLEDS, SKIS AND OTHER TOY
VEHICLES
ARTICLE I - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
SECTION 4-101: DEFINITIONS
The words and phrases used in this chapter, pertaining to motor vehicles and
traffic regulations, shall be construed as defined in Chapter 60, Article 6 of the
Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, as now existing or hereafter amended. If
not defined in the designated statutes, the word or phrase shall have its common
meaning. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-606 through 60-676)
SECTION 4-102: TRUCK ROUTES
The City Council may, by resolution, designate certain streets in the City that
trucks shall travel upon, and it shall be unlawful for persons operating trucks
larger than pickups or passenger size panel trucks to travel on streets other than
those so designated, unless to pick up or deliver goods, wares or merchandise or
to travel to off-street truck parking facilities. In the event of deliver or pick up, the
operator of such truck shall return to such truck routes as soon as possible when
traveling through or about the City. The City Council shall cause signs to be
posted or cause notice to be posted designating such streets as truck routes.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-681)
SECTION 4-103: ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
The City Council may, by resolution, provide for one-way travel in any street or
alley located in the City and shall provide for appropriate signs and markings
when said streets have been so designated by resolution. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat.
§60-680)
SECTION 4-104: TRAFFIC LANES; DESIGNATION
The City Council may, by resolution, mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at
such places as it may deem advisable. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-680)
SECTION 4-105: ARTERIAL STREETS; DESIGNATION
The City Council may, by resolution, designate any street or portion thereof as an
arterial street and shall provide for appropriate signs or markings when such
street has been so designated. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-680)
SECTION 4-106: TURNING; HAND SIGNALS
A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given continuously during not less
than the last 100 feet traveled; shall be given either by means of a hand and arm,
or by a signal device of a type approved by the Department of Roads. The hand
and arms signals herein required shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in
the following manner: Stop or decreased speed, hand and arm extended
downward; Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally; Right turn, hand and
arm extended upward.
SECTION 4-107: TURNING; "U" TURNS
No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction, except at a
street intersection. No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite
direction at any intersection where an automatic signal is in operation or where a
sign is posted indicating that U-turns are prohibited. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-
6,160, 60-680)
SECTION 4-108: TURNING; GENERALLY
Vehicles turning to the right into an intersecting street shall approach such
intersection in the lane of traffic nearest to the right hand side of the highway and
must turn the corner as near the right hand curb as possible to keep between the
curb to the right and the center of the intersection of the two streets. The driver of
a vehicle intending to turn to the left shall approach such center line of the
highway, and in turning shall pass as near as possible to the center of the
intersection, passing as closely as practicable to the right thereof before turning
such vehicle to the left. For the purposes of this section, the center of the
intersection shall mean the meeting point of the medial lines of the highways
intersecting one another. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,159)
SECTION 4-109: TURNING; CAUTIOUS
The operator of a vehicle shall, before stopping, turning or changing the course
of such vehicle, see that there is sufficient space to make such movement in
safety. If any pedestrian might be affected by such movement, the operator shall
give a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn, and whenever the operation of
any other vehicle may be affected by such movement, he/she shall give some
unmistakable signal to the drivers of all other vehicles of his/her intention to make
such movement.
SECTION 4-110: RIGHT-OF-WAY
1. When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection at approximately the
same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the
vehicle on the right when the paths of such vehicles intersect and there is danger
of a collision, unless otherwise directed by a city policeman stationed at the
intersection.
2. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection, or
into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle
approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so
close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
3. The driver of a vehicle on any street shall yield the right-of-way to a
pedestrian crossing such street within any clearly marked crosswalk, or at any
regular pedestrian crossing at the end of a block where the movement of traffic is
being regulated by traffic officers or traffic direction devices. Every pedestrian
crossing a street at any point other than a pedestrian crossing, crosswalk or
intersection shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles upon the street.
4. The driver of a vehicle emerging from or entering an alley, building, private
road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian approaching on
any sidewalk.
5. The driver of a vehicle entering a city street from a private road or drive shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such streets.
6. The driver of a vehicle upon a street shall yield the right-of-way to authorized
emergency vehicles when the latter are operated upon official business and the
drivers thereof make proper use of visible or audible signals. (Ref. Neb. Rev.
Stat. §60-6,146 through 60-6,154)
SECTION 4-111: RIGHT-OF-WAY; EMERGENCY VEHICLES
Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle, every vehicle within
one block of the route of such emergency vehicle shall immediately stop, except
at the time they are on or crossing a street intersection, in which event, such
vehicle shall drive clear of the street intersection and then stop. Every vehicle
along the route of such emergency vehicle shall immediately move to a position
as near the right hand curb as possible and remain there until such authorized
emergency vehicle or vehicles have passed; provided, said vehicles are operated
on official business and the drivers thereof make use of proper visual or audible
signals. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,151)
SECTION 4-112: POSITION OF VEHICLE ON HIGHWAY; GENERALLY
Upon all highways of sufficient width, one-way streets excepted, the driver of a
vehicle shall drive the same on the right half of the roadway. In passing or
meeting other vehicles, drivers shall give each other at least one-half (½) of the
main traveled portion of the roadway. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,131)
SECTION 4-113: POSITION OF VEHICLE ON HIGHWAY; PASSING
A vehicle shall not be driven to the left of the center line of the highway in
overtaking or passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, unless
such left side is clearly visible and free from oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance to permit such overtaking and passing to be made in safety. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat. §60-6,136)
SECTION 4-114: FUNERAL PROCESSIONS
No vehicle, except police vehicles, fire department vehicles when responding to
emergency calls or orders in their several departments, ambulances responding
to emergency calls or vehicles carrying U.S. mail shall be driven through a
funeral procession or cortege except with the permission of a police officer.
SECTION 4-115: GLASS; POINTED OBJECTS
No person shall throw, cast, lay or place upon any street any thorns, nails, tacks,
glass, bottles, window glass, or other articles made of or containing glass, and in
case of an accident causing the breaking of any glass upon any street, the owner
or person responsible for such breakage shall at once remove or cause the same
to be removed from the street.
SECTION 4-116: SIGNS, SIGNALS
The City Council may, by resolution, provide for the placing of stop signs or other
signs, signals, standards or mechanical devices in any street or alley under the
City's jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating or prohibiting traffic thereon. Such
resolution shall describe the portion of the street or alley wherein traffic is to be
regulated or prohibited; the regulation or prohibition; the location where such
sign, signal, standard or mechanical device shall be placed; and the hours when
such regulation or prohibition shall be effective. It shall be unlawful for any
person to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with such regulation or prohibition.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,119 through 60-6,121, 60-680)
SECTION 4-117: STOP SIGNS
Every person operating any vehicle shall, upon approaching any stop sign
erected in accordance with the resolution prescribed heretofore, cause such
vehicle to come to a complete stop before entering or crossing any street,
highway or railroad crossing. The vehicle operator shall stop at a marked stop
line, or, if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk; but if neither is
indicated, then as near the right-of-way line of the intersecting roadway as
possible. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,119 through 60-6,121, 60-680)
SECTION 4-118: SIGNS, TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES, TRAFFIC SURVEILLANCE
DEVICES; DEFACING OR INTERFERING WITH
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously deface, injure,
remove, obstruct, knock down or interfere with any official traffic sign or signal,
traffic control device, or traffic control surveillance device. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat.
§60-6,129, 60-6,129.01)
SECTION 4-119: SIGNS; UNAUTHORIZED DISPLAY
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or display upon or in view of any
street, any unofficial sign, signal or device which purports to be, is an imitation of,
or resembles an official traffic sign or signal which attempts to direct the
movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness
of any official sign or signal. Every such prohibited sign, signal or device is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and any police officer is hereby
empowered to remove the same, or cause it to be removed, without notice.
SECTION 4-120: LITTERING
It shall be unlawful for any person to drop, or cause to be left, upon any city
highway, street or alley, except at places designated by the City Council, any
rubbish, debris or waste, and any person so doing shall be guilty of littering.
SECTION 4-121: CROWDING; FRONT SEAT
Front occupancy of any motor vehicle while the same is in the process of being
started or in motion within the corporate limits shall be limited to one driver and
not more than two other persons over the age of 12 years. It shall be unlawful for
any person to operate a motor vehicle upon any street when such person has in
his/her lap or embrace another person, package or other encumbrance which
prevents the free and unhampered operation of such vehicle.
SECTION 4-122: EMERGENCY SNOW ROUTES; DESIGNATION
The City Council may by resolution designate any street as a snow route and
shall provide for appropriate signs or markings when such street has been so
designated.
SECTION 4-123 SPEED LIMITS
1. Except as provided in 4-124 related to speed near schools and except as set
forth in subsection 2 below, no person shall operate a motor vehicle on any
street, alley or other place at a rate of speed greater than 25 miles per hour
within the limits of the City. Provided, however, in no instance shall a person
drive a vehicle on a highway at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent
under the conditions. Where a different maximum speed is set by ordinance,
appropriate signs shall be posted. Ref. RRS Neb. §§ 60-6,185; -6,186; and -
6,190)
2. The following speed limits apply to the locations set opposite thereto:
20 mph 1ST Avenue from 7TH Street to 6TH Street
S 6TH Street from 1ST Avenue to Main Street
N 6TH Street form Avenue A to Main Street
Avenue A from N 7TH Street to N 3RD Street
N 7TH Street and S 7TH Street from Avenue A to 1ST Avenue
N 5TH Street and S 5TH Street from Avenue A to 1ST Avenue
N 4TH Street and S 4TH Street from Avenue A to 1ST Avenue
N 3RD Street and S 3RD Street from Avenue A to 1ST Avenue
Chicago Avenue from 1ST Avenue to 2ND Avenue
Main Street form Richey to 7TH Street
4TH Avenue from S 14TH to S 18TH
Hill Street
Valley Street
South 1ST Street from Livingston Road to 5TH Avenue
South 23RD from Avenue B to 1ST Avenue
35 mph Chicago Avenue from 2ND Avenue to City Limits
Washington Avenue from
North 9TH to City Limits
3. The following speed limits are established for United States Highways 34 and
75:
Highway US-34/US-75
55 mph - Re-enter Corporate Limits at 1600' South of
N-66 (379+18) to Leave Corporate Limits at 500'
South of N-66 (379+40)
Highway US-34
40 mph - Re-enter Corporate Limits at 8TH Ave.
(379+55) to Leave Corporate Limits at 1500' West of
Chicago Ave. (379+63)
35 mph - Re-enter Corporate Limits at Chicago Ave.
(379+70) to 150' Southwest of 1ST Ave (380+32)
20 mph - 150' Southwest of 1ST Ave (380+32) to 300'
Southeast of 1ST St. (38 1+04)
35 mph - 300' Southeast of 1ST St. (381+04) to East
Corporate Limits at 600' Southeast of Silver St.
(381+33)
Highway US-75
55 mph - South Corporate Limits at 1100' North of N-
66 (72+35) to Leave Corporate Limits (50' North of
151 Ave. (72+65)
55 mph - Re-enter Corporate Limits 1300' North of
Ave. B (73+ 14) to North Corporate Limits (350' North
of Fulton Ave. (73+39)
SECTION 4-124: SPEED NEAR SCHOOLS
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, when passing premises on which
school buildings are located and which are used for school purposes during
school recess or while children are going to or leaving school during the opening
or closing hours, to drive such vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of 20 miles
per hour past such premises and such driver shall stop at all stop signs located
at or near such school premises.
SECTION 4-125: SPEED; ELECTRONIC DETECTION
Determinations made regarding the speed of any motor vehicle based upon the
visual observation of any law enforcement officer may be corroborated by the
use of radio microwaves or other electronic device. The results of such radio
microwave or other electronic speed measurement may be accepted as
competent evidence of the speed of such motor vehicle in any court or legal
proceeding when the speed of the vehicle is at issue. Before the City may offer
in evidence the results of such radio microwave or other electronic speed
measurement for the purpose of establishing the speed of any motor vehicle, the
City shall prove the following:
A. The measuring device was in proper working order at the time of
conducting the measurement;
B. The measuring device was being operated in such a manner and under
such conditions so as to allow a minimum possibility of distortion or outside
interference;
C. The person operating such device and interpreting such measurement
was qualified by training and experience to properly test and operate the device;
and
D. The operator conducted external tests of accuracy upon the measuring
device, within a reasonable time both prior to and subsequent to an arrest being
made, and the measuring device was found to be in proper working order.
The driver of any such motor vehicle may be arrested without a warrant under
the authority herein granted if the arresting officer is in uniform or displays his or
her badge of authority; provided that such officer shall have observed the
recording of the speed of such motor vehicle by the radio microwaves or other
electronic device or had received a radio message from the officer who observed
the speed of the motor vehicle recorded by the radio microwaves or other
electronic device. In the event of an arrest based on such a message, such radio
message must have been dispatched immediately after the speed of the motor
vehicle had been recorded, and must include a description of the vehicle and the
recorded speed. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,192)
SECTION 4-126: NEGLIGENT DRIVING
Any person who operates a motor vehicle in such a manner as to indicate a want
of ordinary care and caution that a person of ordinary prudence would use under
like circumstances shall be deemed guilty of negligent driving. (Ref. Neb. Rev.
Stat. §60-4,182)
SECTION 4-127: CARELESS DRIVING
Any person who drives any motor vehicle in this City carelessly or without due
caution so as to endanger a person or property shall be guilty of careless driving.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,212)
SECTION 4-128: BACKING
It shall be unlawful for any person to back a motor vehicle on the city streets
except to park in or to remove the vehicle from a permitted parking position, to
move the vehicle from a driveway, or to back to the curb for unloading where
such unloading is permitted; provided, a vehicle shall be backed only when such
movement can be made in safety and in no case shall the distance of the
backing exceed one and one-half lengths of the vehicle. Before backing, ample
warning shall be given and while backing, unceasing vigilance must be exercised
not to injure those behind. The driver of a parked vehicle about to back shall give
moving vehicles the right-of-way. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,169, 60-680)
SECTION 4-129: UNNECESSARY STOPPING
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop any vehicle on any public street or
alley, other than in permitted parking areas, except when such a stop is
necessary for emergency situations, to comply with traffic control devices and
regulations, or to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians or to other vehicles.
SECTION 4-130: DRAGGING; ROPE, CHAIN
No person shall permit any rope, strap, chain or other article to drop behind any
vehicle while in use on the streets, except persons operating vehicles
transporting gasoline, benzene or other flammable materials.
SECTION 4-131: PASSING; HINDRANCE
The driver of a vehicle about to be overtaken and passed by another vehicle shall
not increase the speed of his/her vehicle until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,133)
SECTION 4-132: DRIVING ABREAST
Two or more vehicles shall not be driven abreast except when passing or when
traversing a multilane or one-way street; provided, motorcycles may be driven no
more than two abreast in a single lane. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,139, 60-
6,308)
SECTION 4-133: FOLLOWING; DISTANCE
The operator of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is
reasonable and prudent having due regard for the speed of the vehicles, the
traffic and condition of the street. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,140)
SECTION 4-134: DRIVING IN SIDEWALK SPACE
No motor vehicle or livestock shall be driven or ridden within any sidewalk space,
except a permanent or temporary driveway. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,178)
SECTION 4-135: DRIVING OFF ROADS IN PARK GROUNDS; PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle in the city parks
except on roads and parking lots provided for that purpose.
SECTION 4-136: REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 1719 – 09/06/2005 – See
3-901 through 3-912
SECTION 4-137: EMERGENCY REGULATIONS
The chief of police is hereby empowered to make and enforce temporary traffic
regulations to cover emergencies. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §80-2005)
SECTION 4-138: POLICE; ENFORCEMENT
The city police are hereby authorized, empowered and ordered to exercise all
powers and duties with relation to the management of street traffic and to direct,
control, stop, restrict, regulate, and, when necessary, temporarily divert or
exclude, in the interest of public safety health and convenience, the movement of
pedestrian, animal and vehicular traffic of every kind in streets, parks, and on
bridges. The driver of any vehicle shall stop upon the signal of any police officer.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-683)
SECTION 4-139: POLICE; REFUSAL TO OBEY
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to comply with any lawful
order, signal or direction of a police officer. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-680)
SECTION 4-140: POLICE; TRAFFIC OFFICERS
The City Council or the city police may at any time detail officers, to be known as
"traffic officers," at street intersections. All traffic officers shall be vested with the
authority to regulate and control traffic at the intersections to which they are
assigned. It shall be their duty to direct the movement of traffic and prevent
congestion and accidents. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any order
or signal of any such traffic officer, notwithstanding the directive of a stop sign or
signal device which may have been placed at any such intersection. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat. §60-680, 60-683)
SECTION 4-141: LOADS; PROJECTING
When any vehicle shall be loaded in such a manner that any portion of the load
extends more than four feet beyond the rear of the bed or the body of such
vehicle, a red flag shall be carried by day, and red light after sunset at the
extreme rear end of such load. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,243)
SECTION 4-142: LOADS; SPILLING
All vehicles used for carrying coal, earth, cinders, sand, gravel, rock, asphalt, tar,
or any similar substance shall be so constructed as to prevent the sifting or
spilling of any of the contents. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,304)
SECTION 4-143: SPILLING OF LIVESTOCK WASTE
It is deemed unlawful for any person to permit the spilling of animal wastes and
manure from any livestock trailer or truck on any street or highway within the
corporate limits of the City.
SECTION 4-144: SEMITRACTORS; PROHIBITED NOISES
It is unlawful for any person in any part of the City to make or cause to be
made loud or disturbing noises with any mechanical devices operated by
compressed air and used for purposes of assisting braking on any
semitractor, straight truck aor dump truck, commonly referred to as
jakebraking. Notices shall posted at various locations within the City
indicating this prohibition.
SECTION 4-144.01: TRUCK ROUTES
1. The following definitions shall apply to this ordinance:
(a) Road means any street, highway or route within the
corporate limits of the City of Plattsmouth, Nebraska.
(b) Semi-trailer means every vehicle with or without motive
power, designed for carrying persons or property and for being
drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its
weight and that of its load rests upon what is carried by some other
vehicle.
(c) Trailer means every vehicle with or without motive power,
designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests
upon the towing vehicle.
(d) Truck means every motor vehicle which is designed, used or
maintained primarily for the transportation of property, except a
pickup truck or a van designed so as to carry loads of no more than
two tons.
(e) Truck tractor means every motor vehicle designed and used
primarily for drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to
carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load
so drawn.
(f) Person includes an agency, company, organization, firm,
association, partnership, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, trust or equivalent entity or a combination of any of them
as well as a natural person.
2. Any word or term not defined herein shall be considered to
be defined in accordance with its common or standard definition.
3. United States Highway 34 and Nebraska Highway 66 in the
City of Plattsmouth, Nebraska, to the exclusion of all other roads,
are hereby designated as Truck Routes and classified for truck
traffic.
4. Except as expressly permitted under this Ordinance, no
person shall operate a truck or truck-tractor and semi-trailer or
truck-tractor and trailer combination, or truck and trailer
combination in Plattsmouth, Nebraska, on any road other than a
designated Truck Route.
5. The Truck Route limitations described in this Ordinance shall
not apply to emergency vehicles of the Police Department, Fire
Department, Emergency Medical Services Department, or Street
Department, any public utility vehicle where actually engaged in the
performance of emergency duties to be performed by said public
utilities, any vehicle owned by or performing work for the United
States of America, State of Nebraska, Cass County or City of
Plattsmouth.
6. A vehicle which would otherwise be restricted to Truck
Routes and which is being used to make pick-ups, deliveries or
service calls in the City of Plattsmouth on roads other than
designated Truck Routes may travel upon any street where such
delivery or pick-up is to be made, but shall reach or leave such
location on said street by traveling over the shortest route from the
nearest designated Truck Route; however, a direct travel shall be
allowed between points of pick up or delivery, without necessity of
returning to Truck Routes.
7. Nothing herein contained shall prevent a truck or truck-trailer
and semi-trailer, or truck tractor and trailer combination, or truck
and trailer combination from leaving or returning to its customary
storage location at the owner or operator’s personal residence or a
commercial or industrial location in the City of Plattsmouth,
provided the most direct route to and from a designated Truck
Route is utilized.
8. The City Administrator, Public Works Director or the
Assistant Public Works Director shall have authority to grant a
written permit in special cases which would otherwise be in
violation of the provisions of this Ordinance. The permit shall be
issued, at the discretion of the City Administrator, Public Works
Director or the Assistant Public Works Director, after application
therefore and shall describe the vehicle, the time and dates of
travel, and the route to be taken by the vehicle. The City Council
may, by Ordinance or Resolution, set a fee for special permits.
9. The City Administrator, or his or her agent, shall procure and
have posted appropriate signs along the designated Truck Routes
and all other entrances to town as required by the laws of the State
of Nebraska to so advise of the Truck Routes.
10. This Ordinance and the various parts, sections, subsections,
sentences, phrases and clauses thereof are hereby declared to be
severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section, subsection,
phrase or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, it is hereby
declared that the remainder of this Ordinance shall not be affected
thereby.
11. Any person who violates this provision shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, subject to fine of not less than
$250 nor more than $500.00 dollars for each offense. It is hereby
authorized that a person may plead guilty by waiver and pay a fine of
$100.00 plus court costs.
SECTION 4-145: RIDING OUTSIDE VEHICLE
No person shall permit any other person to ride on the running board, hood, top
or fenders of any motor vehicle, nor shall any person ride on the running board,
hood, top or fenders of any motor vehicle.
SECTION 4-146: SCREECHING OF TIRES; PROHIBITED
The operation of any motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause the tires thereof
to screech, except where necessarily caused by an emergency or an attempt by
the vehicle operator to avoid an accident or infliction of damage or injury, is
prohibited. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-680)
SECTION 4-147: BUS STOPS
All buses shall stop at the curb for the purpose of receiving and discharging
passengers, at such locations as the City Council may, by resolution, designate.
Appropriate signs or standards shall be erected at each location so designated.
Alternately, the location may be designated by markings on the curb or
pavement.
SECTION 4-148: TAXI STANDS
The City Council may, by resolution, designate parking locations throughout the
City for licensed taxicabs. Appropriate signs or street or curb painting shall
indicate the locations designated. When a location is designated as a taxi stand,
no other vehicle may legally park in that location.
SECTION 4-149: RAILROAD CROSSING WATCHMAN; AUTHORITY
All watchmen, gatemen, trainmen or other agents of any railroad company, when
stationed at a railway crossing, shall be vested with the authority to regulate and
control traffic of all kinds at that intersection. It shall be his/her duty to direct the
movement of traffic at the crossing in such a manner as will facilitate the
movement of traffic and prevent congestion and accidents. He/she shall take
appropriate measures to prevent any vehicle from entering the crossing when
any engine, care or conveyance of the railway is approaching the crossing. It
shall be unlawful for any person to violate the order or signal of any such
watchman. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,125, 60-6,170)
SECTION 4-150: DISPLAY OF MERCHANDISE IN PARKING ZONE
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any parking stall, lane or space for the
display of merchandise, goods or ware, or for any purpose whatsoever except
the parking of motor vehicles; and no parking stall, lane or space shall be
blocked or barricaded by any person; provided, however, parking areas may be
temporarily blocked, used or barricaded for construction and other necessary
purposes by obtaining special permission therefor from the city police. (Ref.
Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-802)
SECTION 4-151: NEW PAVEMENT, DRIVING OVER
No person shall drive any vehicle over or across any newly laid pavement in any
public street, across or around which pavement there is a barrier over or near
which there is a person or a sign warning persons not to driver over or across
such pavement. No person shall drive a vehicle over, against or upon any traffic
barrier or sign stating that the street or alley is closed.
SECTION 4-152: VEHICLES; UNOBSTRUCTED VIEW
No person shall drive on a street any motor vehicle constructed or loaded in such
a way as to prevent the driver from obtaining a view of the street to the rear
unless such vehicle is equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the driver
a view of the street for a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of such vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive upon a street any vehicle with a sign,
poster or other non-transparent material upon the front windshield, side windows
or rear windows of such motor vehicle other than a certificate or paper required
to be so displayed by law. Every windshield on a motor vehicle shall be
equipped with a device for removing rain, snow or other moisture from the
windshield, which device shall be so constructed as to be operated by the driver
within the vehicle. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,254 through 60-6,256)

ARTICLE II - ABANDONED VEHICLES
SECTION 4-201: TERMS DEFINED
No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or organization of any kind
shall abandon any vehicle, as defined by Section 60-301(1), R.R.S. 1943, within
the City of Plattsmouth. A motor vehicle shall be deemed to be an abandoned
vehicle if left unattended:
1. With no number plates affixed thereto, for more than six hours on any
public property;
2. For more than 24 hours on any public property, except a portion
thereof on which parking is legally permitted;
3. For more than 48 hours, after the parking of such vehicle shall have
become illegal if left on a portion of public property on which parking is legally
permitted;
4. For more than seven days on private property if left initially without the
permission of the owner, or after permission of the owner shall be terminated.
No person in charge or control of any private property, whether as owner, tenant,
occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, nonoperating,
wrecked, junked, discarded or unlicensed vehicle to remain on such property
longer than seven continuous days. Any vehicle described in this paragraph
shall be deemed to be an abandoned vehicle for purposes of this article.
For purposes of this article, "public property" shall mean (A) any public right of
way, street, highway, alley, park or other city-owned property, and (B) any
privately owned property which is not included within the definition of public
property. Vehicles in an enclosed building, appropriate storage pound, or
depository licensed by the City, or owned and being restored or repaired, with
satisfactory progress being shown by the controller of the real property where
said vehicle is located, is specifically hereby excluded from this section.
SECTION 4-202: ENFORCEMENT
The city police chief or his/her designated officer shall remove or cause to be
removed any abandoned vehicle. Such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully
claimed or disposed of, as provided in Section 4-204 hereafter; provided, any
such abandoned vehicle which is located on private property shall not be
removed or impounded until the city police have given written notice of intent to
remove said abandoned vehicle ten days prior thereto to the property owner
upon whose property said abandoned vehicle is located. The city police may
enter upon private property at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting
such abandoned vehicle, posting notice thereon and/or removing or impounding
such abandoned vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent the city
police from entering on private property for the purpose of carrying out their
duties. Neither the owner, lessee, occupant of the premises from which any
abandoned vehicle shall be removed, nor the city shall be liable for any loss or
damage to such abandoned vehicle which occurs during its removal, while in the
possession of the City, or as a result of any subsequent disposition.
SECTION 4-203: NOTICE
Except for vehicles automatically becoming the property of the City as set forth in
Section 4-205 hereunder, the chief of police or his/her designated officer shall
make an inquiry concerning the last registered owner of such abandoned vehicle
as follows:
1. Abandoned vehicles with numbered plates affixed---to the jurisdiction
which issued said plates; or
2. Abandoned vehicles with no numbered plates affixed---to the
Department of Motor Vehicles.
The city police shall notify the last registered owner, if any, that the vehicle in
question has been recovered as an abandoned vehicle and that, if unclaimed, it
will be sold at public auction after five days from the date that such notice was
mailed. If the agency described in Subsections 1 or 2 of this section also notifies
the city police that a lien or mortgage exists, such notice shall also be sent to the
lien holder or mortgagee. Any person claiming such vehicle shall be required to
pay the cost of its removal and storage. In the event the owner does not appear
within the time prescribed herein, or in the event that the owner cannot be
determined, such abandoned vehicle shall be disposed of as hereinafter
provided.
SECTION 4-204: DISPOSITION
The city police shall sell said abandoned vehicle at public auction to the highest
bidder within 60 days from the date that title to an abandoned vehicle is vested in
the City as provided for in Section 4-205 hereafter. Such sale and the time and
place thereof shall be advertised for one week in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City. Any proceeds from the sale of an abandoned vehicle, less
any expenses incurred by the City, shall be held by the City without interest for
the benefit of the owner of such abandoned vehicle for a period of two years. If
not claimed within such two year period, such proceeds shall be paid into the
general fund of the City.
SECTION 4-205: TRANSFER OF TITLE
If an abandoned vehicle at the time of abandonment has no numbered plates of
the current year affixed and is of a wholesale value of $250.00 or less, taking into
consideration the vehicle's condition as determined by the city police, title shall
immediately vest in the City and the city police are not required to follow Section
4-203 herein. With respect to those abandoned vehicles governed by Section 4-
203 herein, title to such vehicles, if unclaimed, shall vest in the City five days
from the date the notice referred to therein is mailed or, if the last registered
owner cannot be determined, when notice of that fact is received by the city
police. Upon the sale of an abandoned vehicle at auction, the City shall furnish
the purchaser with the requisite affidavit to provide to the county clerk where the
vehicle was last registered that said vehicle was abandoned and became the
property of the City prior to the sale. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-1902)
SECTION 4-206: PENAL PROVISIONS
Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined in a sum of not more than
$500.00.

ARTICLE III - PARKING
SECTION 4-301: PARKING GENERALLY
No person shall park any vehicle, or approach the curb with a vehicle, except
when headed in the direction of the traffic. Vehicles, when parked, shall stand
parallel with and adjacent to the curb or edge of the roadway, in such manner as
to have both right wheels within 12" of the curb or edge of the roadway and so as
to leave at least four feet between the vehicle so parked and any other parked
vehicle, except where the City Council designates that vehicles shall be parked
at an angle so as to have the front right wheel at the curb or edge of the
roadway. Where stalls are designated either on the curb or pavement, vehicles
shall be parked within such stalls. No vehicle shall be parked upon a roadway
when there is a shoulder adjacent to the roadway which is available for parking.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-680, 60-6,167)
SECTION 4-302: DESIGNATION
The City Council may, by resolution, designate any street or portion thereof
where vehicles shall be parked parallel with and adjacent to the curb or at an
angle so as to have the right front wheel at the curb. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-
6,167, 60-680)
SECTION 4-303: AREAS
The City Council may, by resolution, set aside any street, alley, public way or
portion thereof where the parking of a particular kind or class of vehicle shall be
prohibited or where the parking of any vehicle shall be prohibited. No vehicle
prohibited from parking thereon shall stand or be parked adjacent to the curb of
said street, alley, public way or portion thereof longer than a period of time
necessary to load and unload freight or passengers. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-
680)
SECTION 4-304: OBSTRUCTING ALLEY
No vehicle, while parked, shall have any portion thereof projecting into any alley
entrance. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-680)
SECTION 4-305: ALLEYS
No vehicle shall be parked in any alley, except for the sole purpose of loading or
unloading. Said vehicles’ motors shall remain in operation while said vehicles
are parked in the above described alleys and in any event, parking shall be
limited to not more than one-half hour by any motor vehicle in such alley. Every
vehicle while loading or unloading shall be parked in such manner as will cause
the least obstruction possible to traffic in such alley. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-
680)
SECTION 4-306: EMERGENCY VEHICLES
The provisions of this article regulating the movement, parking and standing of
vehicles shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles while the driver of such
vehicle is operating the same in an emergency in the necessary performance of
public duties.
SECTION 4-307: FIRE HYDRANTS AND STATIONS
No vehicle shall be parked within 15 feet in either direction of any fire hydrant nor
within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat.
§60-6,166)
SECTION 4-308: CHURCHES, SCHOOLS, THEATERS
The City Council may, by resolution, prohibit the parking or stopping except for
unloading of passengers or freight, of vehicles at the curb on streets directly in
front of any entrance to a church, church building, schoolhouse, school building,
or theater. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-680)
SECTION 4-309: CURB
No vehicle shall park on any street with its left side to the curb, unless said street
has been designated to be a "one-way" street by the City Council. Vehicles must
not be parked at any curb in such a position as to prevent another vehicle
already parked at the curb from moving away. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,167)
SECTION 4-310 CURBS, PAINTED
It shall be the duty of the public works director or his/her designee to cause the
curb space to be painted and keep the same painted as provided in this article.
No person, firm or corporation shall paint the curb of any street, or in any manner
set aside or attempt to prevent the parking of vehicles in any street, or part
thereof, except at such places where the parking of vehicles is prohibited by the
provisions of this article. The marking or designating of portions of streets or
alleys where the parking of vehicles is prohibited or limited shall be done only by
the City through its proper officers, at the direction of the City Council. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat. §60-680)
SECTION 4-311: DISPLAY OR REPAIR OF VEHICLES
It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon any street, alley or public place
within this city any vehicle displayed for sale. No person shall adjust or repair
any automobile or motorcycle, or race the motor of same, while standing on the
public streets or alleys of this city, excepting in case of breakdown or other
emergency requiring same. No person or employee connected with a garage or
repair shop shall use sidewalks, streets or alleys in the vicinity of such garage or
shop for the purpose of working on automobiles or vehicles of any description.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-680)
SECTION 4-312: TIME LIMIT
The City Council may, by resolution, entirely prohibit or fix a time limit for the
parking and stopping of vehicles on any street, streets or district designated by
such resolution, and the parking or stopping of any vehicle in any such street,
streets or district for a period of time longer than fixed in such resolution shall
constitute a violation of this article. The street which have any such time
limitations shall have appropriate signs placed thereon to designate the same.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-680)
SECTION 4-313: MAXIMUM TIME LIMIT
The parking of a motor vehicle on a public street for over 24 consecutive hours is
unlawful, except where a different maximum time limit is posted. (Ref. Neb. Rev.
Stat. §60-680)
SECTION 4-314: FLOOD AND SNOW ZONES
The following streets and parking lot areas are hereby designated as flood and
snow zones in the City:
(a) Sixth Street, from Avenue A to First Avenue.
(b) Main Street, from the Burlington Northern Railroad right-of-way to the west
curb line of Sixth Street inclusive.
(c) The city parking lot located west of Fourth Street between First Avenue and
the alley north of First Avenue.
In the designated areas above, no motorized vehicle (except those authorized by
Section 4-315 below) shall be parked or permitted to remain thereon for more
than ten minutes between the hours of 2:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M., throughout the
year; provided, the owner of any vehicle parked within the above-designated
areas during the prohibited time shall not be in violation hereof if the parking can
be justified under a lawful business purpose and the vehicle remains subject to
immediate removal as directed. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-680)
SECTION 4-315 FLOOD AND SNOW ZONES; EXEMPTIONS, CONDITIONS
In the areas designated in Section 4-314 as prohibited parking areas, the
following residents shall be entitled to park a single motor vehicle in such
designated areas:
Adult residents who reside in an apartment on Main Street between Third and
Sixth Streets, or on Sixth Street from Avenue A to First Avenue.
Such parking exceptions shall be permitted under the following conditions:
1. That such parking shall be limited to one vehicle per apartment.
2. Parking under such permit shall be limited to one vehicle per apartment and
only during the hours of 6:00 P.M. to 6:00 A.M. each day.
3. Such permitted parking shall be subject to immediate removal by the owner or
proper city personnel as required for snow removal or flood damage prevention.
Parking in these areas is prohibited during the hours of 2:00 A.M. to 6:00 A.M.
following a snowfall of two inches or more. Vehicle not removed may be towed
by a wrecker service at the owner's expense.
4. That the owner of the vehicle qualified for such parking exemption shall, prior
to exercising the parking privilege:
a. Secure and complete an application and registration form with the city clerk's
office, describing the vehicle, the address of residence and phone number.
b. Secure approval of such application, and obtain from the city clerk's office, a
sticker or decal identifying the registered vehicle and owner.
c. That the sticker or decal shall be affixed to either the rearview mirror of the
vehicle or its rear windshield.
d. Issuance of a permit is subject to the payment of the required fee and is valid
for six months from the date of issuance.
In absence of compliance with these conditions, all parking regulations as set
forth in this article shall apply to any such vehicle.
SECTION 4-316: TRUCKS; PROHIBITED PARKING AREA; PARKING LOTS
It shall be unlawful for any truck, truck-tractor, semi-trailer, or any vehicle with a
trailer attached having an overall length of more than 18 feet, including load, to
stop or park such vehicle for any period of time on any street in the City where
the City Council shall prohibit such parking by resolution. In the case of such
prohibition, signs, markers or traffic standards shall be to that effect.
The City Council may provide truck parking lots adjoining or adjacent to the notruck
parking area. When such lots are provided, it shall be the duty of the truck
operators to use such lots for parking purposes.
SECTION 4-317: TRUCKS; LOADING OR UNLOADING
The operator of any truck covered by the truck parking area prohibition may stop
or park in any alley adjoining or adjacent to premises abutting a street included in
the "no-truck parking area" for the purpose of loading or unloading goods, wares,
merchandise or other commodities intended for delivery at such premises. In no
case shall such truck remain stopped longer than one-half hour. If stopping or
parking such vehicle for loading or unloading its cargo in such alley requires a
longer time, then oral application shall be made to the chief of police indicating
that such loading or unloading cannot be accomplished in one-half hour. The
chief of police may grant and allow such additional time for such loading or
unloading, in each instance, as is reasonably necessary to do so.
If such consignor or consignee has no alley entrance to his/her premises or if
loading or unloading the cargo of such vehicle while standing in such alley is
inconvenient, then such consignor may be permitted or allowed to load or unload
such cargo from certain designated street space abutting his/her premises in the
"no-truck parking area" for such periods of time, not longer than one-half hour,
upon oral application to and permission from the chief of police, who may extend
the one-half hour period in necessary cases.
Vehicles, regardless of length, if and when permitted to load or unload freight at
the curb of any street, shall back to the curb and shall occupy as little of the
street as possible. The cab, truck-tractor or first section of the combination of
vehicles, as the case may be, shall during the time when the loading or unloading
is in progress, be jack-knifed parallel with the curb and headed in the direction of
the traffic. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-680)
SECTION 4-318: TRUCKS; MOTOR CARRIERS AND LIVESTOCK TRUCKS
No motor carrier, common carrier or contract carrier of property, as defined by
statute, now existing or as hereafter amended, shall stop or park in any street or
alley within the residential district between the hours of 5:00 P.M. of any one day
and 9:00 A.M. of the succeeding day; and no such carrier shall use or employ
any portion of the parking space in the residential district for any commercial
purpose.
No livestock truck, whether or not loaded with livestock, shall stand or park for
any period of time except in a "truck parking area." (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §75-
302)
SECTION 4-319: TRUCKS; TANKERS AND TRANSPORT TRUCKS
No oil tanker, gasoline transport or tank truck for transporting inflammable liquids,
loaded or empty, shall park or stop for any period of time within any truck parking
lot provided in this article or within the limits of any other street or alley of the
City, except to load or unload its cargo in a safe and expeditious manner;
provided that drivers of such oil tankers, gasoline transports or tank trucks may
stop or park such vehicles one time while en route through the City within the
limits of any truck parking lot designated in this article for a period of time not
more than 30 minutes for rest and meals; provided further that in case of
breakdown or stalling on account of exhaustion of fuel on any of such streets, the
stopping of the disabled vehicle for the reasonable time necessary to remove the
same to the next point where repairs can be made or to meet the emergency
shall not be a violation of this section. No oil tanker, gasoline transport or tank
truck, whether containing any inflammable materials or not, shall park or stop for
any period of time on any private premises within the City except for the purpose
of loading or unloading or breakdowns, unless such private premise is used and
employed exclusively for the wholesale or retail petroleum business with ample
facilities for parking oil tankers and gasoline transports or tank trucks if such use
is not in violation with any other section of this code.
SECTION 4-320: HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; DESIGNATION
OF ONSTREET PARKING SPACES; DISPLAY OF PERMITS
(1) The City Council may designate parking spaces for the exclusive use of (a)
handicapped or disabled persons whose motor vehicles display the
distinguishing license plates issued to handicapped or disabled persons pursuant
to Section 60-311.14 RS Neb., (b) handicapped or disabled persons whose
motor vehicles display a distinguishing license plate issued to a handicapped or
disabled person of another state, (c) such other handicapped or disabled persons
or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons, as certified by the City, whose
motor vehicles display the permit specified in Section 18-1739, and (d) such
other motor vehicles, as certified by the City, which display such permit. All such
permits shall be displayed by hanging the permit from the motor vehicle's
rearview mirror so as to be clearly visible through the front windshield. The permit
shall be displayed on the dashboard only when there is no rearview mirror.
(2) If the City Council so designates a parking space, it shall be indicated by
posting aboveground and immediately adjacent to and visible from each space a
sign which is in conformance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
In addition to such sign, the space may also be indicated by blue paint on the
curb or edge of the street adjacent to the space. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-1736,
18-1737)
SECTION 4-321: HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; DESIGNATION
OF OFFSTREET PARKING STALLS OR SPACES
The City Council and any person in lawful possession of any offstreet parking
facility may designate stalls or spaces in such facility for the exclusive use of (a)
handicapped or disabled persons whose motor vehicles display the
distinguishing license plates issued to handicapped or disabled persons pursuant
to Section 60-311.14 RS Neb., (b) such other handicapped or disabled persons
or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons, as certified by the City, whose
motor vehicles display the permit specified in Section 18-1739, and (c) such
other motor vehicles, as certified by the City, which display such permit. Such
designation shall be made by posting aboveground and immediately adjacent to
and visible from each stall or space a sign which is in conformance with the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-1737)
SECTION 4-322 HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; DEFINITIONS
“Handicapped or disabled person” shall mean any individual to whom the State of
Nebraska has issued a handicap permit.
“Handicapped parking infraction” shall mean the violation of any section of this
article regulating (a) the use of parking spaces designated for use by
handicapped or disabled persons or (b) the obstruction of any wheelchair ramps
constructed or created in accordance and in conformity with the federal
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-1738, 18-
1741.01)
SECTION 4-323 HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; PERMIT
ISSUANCE
1. The city clerk shall take an application for a handicapped or disabled person
parking permit upon presentation of the completed application and photo
identification. Thereafter the city clerk shall forward the same to the Nebraska
Department of Motor Vehicles. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-1738, 18-1738.02)
SECTION 4-324 HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; ISSUANCE OF
CITATION; TRIAL; DISMISSAL
1. For any offense classified as a handicapped parking infraction, a handicapped
parking citation may be issued by any peace officer or by any person designated
by ordinance by the City Council to exercise the authority to issue a citation for
any handicapped parking infraction.
2. When a handicapped parking citation is issued for a handicapped parking
infraction, the person issuing the handicapped parking citation shall enter thereon
all required information, including the name and address of the cited person or, if
not known, the license number and description of the offending motor vehicles,
the offense charged, and the time and place the person is cited to appear in
court. Unless the person cited requests an earlier date, the time of appearance
shall be at least three days after the issuance of the handicapped parking
citation. One copy of the handicapped parking citation shall be delivered to the
person cited or attached to the offending motor vehicle.
3. At least 24 hours before the time to set for the appearance of the cited
person, either the city attorney or other person authorized by law to issue a
complaint for the particular offense shall issue and file a complaint charging such
person with a handicapped parking infraction or such person shall be released
from the obligation to appear as specified.
4. For any handicapped parking citation issued for a handicapped parking
infraction by reason of the failure to display a handicapped parking permit issued
pursuant to Section 18-1738 or 18-1738.01 RS Neb., the complaint shall be
dismissed if, within seven business days after the date of the issuance of the
citation the person cited files with the court the affidavit included on the citation,
signed by a peace officer certifying that the recipient is the lawful possessor in
his or her own right of a handicapped parking permit issued under Section 18-
1738 or 18-1738.01 RS Neb. and that the peace officer has personally viewed
the permit. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-1741.01, 18-1741.04, 18-1741.06)
SECTION 4-325 HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS; REMOVAL OF
UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE; PENALTY
1. The owner or person in lawful possession of an offstreet parking facility, after
notifying the police or sheriff's department and the City providing onstreet parking
or owning, operating or providing an offstreet parking facility, may cause the
removal, from a stall or space designated exclusively for handicapped or
disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons or motor
vehicles for the transportation of such persons, of any vehicle not displaying the
proper permit or the distinguishing license plates specified in this article if there is
posted aboveground and immediately adjacent to and visible from such stall or
space a sign which clearly and conspicuously states the area so designated as a
tow-in zone.
2. Anyone who parks a vehicle in any onstreet parking space which has been
designated exclusively for handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily
handicapped or disabled persons or motor vehicles for the transportation of such
persons or in any so exclusively designated parking space in any offstreet
parking facility without properly displaying the proper permit or when the
handicapped or disabled person to whom or for whom the license plate or permit
is issued will not enter or exit the vehicle where it is parked in the designated
space shall be guilty of a handicapped parking infraction. The display on a motor
vehicle of a distinguishing license plate or permit issued to a handicapped or
disabled person by and under the duly constituted authority of another state shall
constitute a full and complete defense in any action for a handicapped parking
infraction. If the identity of the person who parked the vehicle in violation of this
section cannot be readily determined, the owner or person in whose name the
vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation and
shall be guilty and subject to the penalty provided for in this chapter.
3. In the case of a privately owned offstreet parking facility, the owner or person
in lawful possession of such facility shall not be required to inform the City of a
violation of this section prior to the City issuing the violator a handicapped
parking infraction citation.
SECTION 4-326 OWNER-OPERATOR
For any violation of this article the citation or complaint may be issued to or
against either the owner or operator of the vehicle. It shall be unlawful for either
to violate or allow a vehicle owned by him/her to violate any provision of this
article.
SECTION 4-327 CITY-OWNED PARKING LOTS; REGULATIONS
The following regulations in regard to the city-owned parking lot shall apply:
1. Except in those lots otherwise signed, the time limit permitted for parking
in city-owned parking lots is 24 hours Monday through Friday and 48 hours on
Saturday and Sunday.
2. Trailers and large trucks in excess of 10,000 lbs gross motor vehicle
weight may be allowed only for the purpose of expeditious loading and/or
unloading. Authorization for such use may be granted by the Director of Public
Works or Chief of Police. Closing of any parking lots for special events shall
require City Council authorization.
SECTION 4-328 REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES
1. In addition to all other penalties pursuant to this article, whenever any
police officer shall find a vehicle standing upon a street, alley, or city-owned
parking lot in violation of any of the provisions of this article, such individual may
remove or have such vehicle removed, or require the driver or other person in
charge of the vehicle to move such vehicle to a position off the roadway of such
street, alley or out of such parking lot.
2. If a vehicle is removed by the City, the owner or other person lawfully
entitled to the possession of any vehicle towed or stored shall be charged with
the reasonable cost of towing and storage. Any such towing or storage fee shall
be a lien upon the vehicle prior to all other claims. Any person towing or storing
a vehicle shall be entitled to retain possession of such vehicle until such charges
are paid. The lien provided for in this section shall not apply to the contents of
any vehicles. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,165, 60-680)
ARTICLE IV – BICYCLES, MINIBIKES, SNOWMOBILES,
MOTORCYCLES, ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND MOPEDS
SECTION 4-401 BICYCLE; DEFINED
For the purposes of this article, "bicycle" shall mean every device propelled
solely by human power, upon which any person may ride and having two tandem
wheels, either of which is more than 14 inches in diameter.
SECTION 4-402 OPERATION OF BICYCLES, COASTERS,
SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, SLEDS, SKIS OR
OTHER TOY VEHICLES
1. Bicycles:
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle on a
street, highway or alley within the City with another person on the
handlebars or in any position in front of the operator.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle faster
than is reasonable and proper, or without reasonable regard to the
safety of the operator and any other persons upon the streets,
highways and alleys.
c. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle to fail to
observe all traffic signs and to fail to stop at all stop signs.
d. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle on any
street or highway from sunset to sunrise without a headlight visible
from the front thereof for not less than 500 feet on a clear night and
a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall be visible on a clear
night from all distances between 100 feet and 600 feet to the rear
when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlights on a
motor vehicle. A red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the
rear may be used in addition to such red reflector.
e. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle upon a
street or highway more than single file except on parts of streets or
highways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
f. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle upon a
roadway at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and
place and under conditions then existing, or to fail to ride as near to
the right-hand curb or right-hand edge of the roadway as
practicable except when:
(1) Overtaking and passing another bicycle or vehicle
proceeding in the same direction;
(2) Preparing for a left turn onto a private road or
driveway at an intersection;
(3) Reasonably necessary to avoid conditions that
make it unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb
or right-hand edge of the roadway, including fixed or
moving objects, stopped or moving vehicles, bicycles,
pedestrians, animals or surface hazards;
(4) Riding upon a lane of substandard width which is
too narrow for a bicycle and a vehicle to travel safely
side by side within the lane, or
(5) Lawfully operating a bicycle on the paved
shoulders of a highway included in the state highway
system as provided in Section 60-6,142 R.S. Neb.
g. Any person who operates a bicycle upon a roadway with a posted speed limit
of 35 miles per hour or less on which traffic is restricted to one direction of
movement and which has two or more marked traffic lanes may ride as near to
the left-hand curb or left-hand edge of the roadway as practicable. Whenever a
person operating a bicycle leaves the roadway to ride on the paved shoulder or
leaves the paved shoulder to enter the roadway, the person shall clearly signal
his/her intention and yield the right-of-way to all other vehicles.
h. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a bicycle on any sidewalk unless a
bicycle stand is located on said sidewalk.
i. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle on the sidewalks within
the boundaries of the following streets: From and including the east side of
Richey Street to and including the west side of 7TH Street and from and including
the south side of 1ST Avenue to and including the north side of Avenue A. (Ref.
Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,315, 60-6,317, 60-6,318 )
2. Coasters, Skateboards, Roller Skates, Sleds, Skis or Other Toy Vehicles
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate coasters, skateboards, roller
skates, sleds, skis or other toy vehicles which are unpowered on any street,
highway or alleyway in the City of Plattsmouth.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate coasters, skateboards, roller
skates, sleds, skis or other toy vehicles which are unpowered on the sidewalks of
the City of Plattsmouth within the boundaries of the following streets: From and
including the east side of Richey Street to and including the west side of 7TH
Street and from and including the south side of 1ST Avenue to and including the
north side of Avenue A.
3. In addition to all other penalties for violations of this section, the judgment of
conviction may include the impoundment of the bicycle, coaster, skateboard,
roller skates, sled, skis or other toy vehicle by the City Police Department for a
period of not to exceed one hundred and eighty (180) days and the operator
thereof may be ordered not to operate any such vehicle within the City for a
period not to exceed thirty (30) days.
SECTION 4-403: CLINGING TO MOTOR VEHICLE
No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, skis or toy vehicle
shall attach himself/herself or the bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, skis or toy
vehicle to any vehicle upon a roadway, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of
any vehicle to suffer or permit any person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller
skates, sled, skis, or toy vehicle to cling or attach himself/herself or the bicycle to
such vehicle driven and operated by him/her. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,316 )
SECTION 4-404: BICYCLES; IMPOUNDING
Upon the conviction of a violation of Sections 4-401 through 4-403, the judgment
may include the impounding of any bicycle involved in such a violation and the
operator may be ordered not to operate a bicycle within the City for a period of
not to exceed 30 days.
SECTION 4-405: MINIBIKES; DEFINED
For purposes of this article, "minibike” shall mean a two-wheel motor vehicle
which has a total wheel and tire diameter of less than 14 inches or an engine
rated capacity of less than 45 cubic centimeters displacement or any other twowheel
motor vehicle primarily designed by the manufacturer for off-road use only.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,353)
SECTION 4-406: MINIBIKES; EMERGENCIES AND PARADES
Minibikes shall be exempt from the provisions of this article during any public
emergency or while being used in parades by regularly organized units of any
recognized charitable, social, education or community service organization.
SECTION 4-407: MINIBIKES; PUBLIC LANDS
Minibikes shall be prohibited upon the public lands owned by the City except
where allowed by resolution of the City Council.
SECTION 4-408: SNOWMOBILES; DEFINED
For the purposes of this article, "snowmobile" shall mean a self-propelled motor
vehicle designed to travel on snow or ice or a natural terrain steered by wheels,
skis or runners and propelled by a belt-driven track with or without snow cleats.
SECTION 4-409: SNOWMOBILES; EQUIPMENT
Every snowmobile operated within the City shall be registered with the State of
Nebraska as required by law and shall be equipped as required by state statutes.
SECTION 4-410: SNOWMOBILES; UNLAWFUL ACTS
It shall be deemed a misdemeanor for any person to allow a snowmobile, either
owned or operated by him/her, to be operated:
1. Within the congested area of the City unless weather conditions are such that
it provides the only practicable method of safe vehicular travel, or said
snowmobile is engaged in responding to an emergency.
2. At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under the surrounding
circumstances.
3. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger person or
property.
4. Without a lighted headlight and taillight when such would be required by
conditions.
5. In any tree nursery or planting in a manner which damages or destroys
growing stock.
6. Upon any private lands without first having obtained permission of the owner,
lessee or operator of such lands.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,337)
SECTION 4-411: SNOWMOBILES; STREETS
The operation of snowmobiles on any city street or other public property owned
by the City, except in times of a snow emergency as defined below, is prohibited.
A “snow emergency” is defined to be that time during and immediately
subsequent to snowfall within the City when two-wheel-drive vehicular travel is
not possible and the City’s snow removal crew has not commenced work on
removal of snow from city streets and alleys.
SECTION 4-412: SNOWMOBILES; REGISTRATION
All snowmobiles used for transportation purposes during times of snow
emergency shall be registered with the State of Nebraska as required by law,
and shall be equipped with at least one headlight, one taillight, reflective material
of a minimum area of 16 square inches mounted on each side forward of the
handlebars, and with brakes as prescribed by the director of motor vehicles. In
addition, all laws applicable to the operation of other motor vehicles shall apply to
snowmobiles, except those relating to required equipment and those which, by
their nature, have no application.
SECTION 4-413: MOTORCYCLES; LIGHTS
No person shall ride a motorcycle upon the streets, alleys or highways from onehalf
hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, unless the same shall be
equipped with at least one and not more than two headlights plainly visible from
the front and with a light on the rear exhibiting a red light visible under normal
atmospheric conditions from a distance of at least 500 feet to the rear thereof;
provided said lamps shall comply with the requirements and limitations of the
statutes of the State of Nebraska.
SECTION 4-414: MOTORCYCLES; RIDING TANDEM
No person operating a motorcycle shall carry another person in front of the
operator. Motorcycles shall not be operated more than two abreast in a single
lane.
SECTION 4-415: ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES; DEFINED
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires, “all-terrain vehicle”
shall mean any motorized off-highway vehicle which (1) is 50 inches or less in
width; (2) has a dry weight of 600 pounds or less, (3) travels on three or more low
pressure tires, (4) is designed for operator use only with no passengers, (5) has
a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator, and (6) has
handlebars or any other steering assembly for steering control.
All-terrain vehicles which have been modified to include additional equipment not
required by Section 4-417 and 4-418 of this article shall not be registered under
Chapter 60, Article 3. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,355)
SECTION 4-416: ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES; OPERATION
1. Except as provided in subsections 2 through 5 of this section, an all-terrain
vehicle shall not be operated on any street, road or highway within the City.
The crossing of any controlled-access highway shall not be permitted.
2. The crossing of a street, road or highway shall be permitted only if:
a. The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the street, road or highway and at a place where no
obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing;
b. The vehicle is brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder or
roadway of the street, road or highway;
c. The operator yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic that constitutes
an immediate potential hazard;
d. In crossing a divided street, road or highway, the crossing is made only at
an intersection of such street, road or highway with another street, road or
highway; and
e. Both the headlight and taillight of the vehicle are on when the crossing is
made.
3. An all-terrain vehicle may be operated on a street, road or highway when
such operation occurs only between the hours of sunrise and sunset and
such operation is incidental to the vehicle’s use for agricultural purposes. Any
person operating an all-terrain vehicle on a street, road or highway shall have
a valid Class O operator’s license or a farm permit as provided in Neb. Rev.
Stat. §60-4,126, and shall not operate such vehicle at a speed in excess of 30
miles per hour. When operated on a street, road or highway, the headlight
and taillight of the vehicle shall be on and the vehicle shall be equipped with a
bicycle safety flag which extends not less than five feet above the ground
attached to the rear of such vehicle. The bicycle safety flag shall be triangular
in shape with an area of not less than 30 square inches and shall be day-glow
in color.
4. All-terrain vehicles may be operated on streets, roads or highways in parades
which have been authorized by the State of Nebraska or the City.
5. All-terrain vehicles may be operated on highways outside the corporate limits
of the City by electric utility personnel within the course of their employment in
accordance with the operation requirements of subsection 3 of this section,
except that the operation of the vehicle pursuant to this subsection need not
be incidental to the use of the vehicle for agricultural purposes. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat. §60-6,356 )
SECTION 4-417: ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES; HEADLIGHTS
Every all-terrain vehicle shall display a lighted headlight and taillight during the
period of time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise and
at any time when visibility is reduced due to insufficient light or unfavorable
atmospheric conditions. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,357)
SECTION 4-418: ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES; EQUIPMENT, REQUIREMENT
Every all-terrain vehicle shall be equipped with:
1. A brake system maintained in good operating condition;
2. An adequate muffler system in good working condition; and
3. A United States Forest Service qualified spark arrester. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat.
§60-6,358)
SECTION 4-419: ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES; MODIFICATIONS PROHIBITED
No person shall:
1. Equip the exhaust system of an all-terrain vehicle with a cutout, bypass or
similar device.
2. Operate an all-terrain vehicle with an exhaust system so modified; or
3. Operate an all-terrain vehicle with the spark arrester removed or modified
except for use in closed-course competition events.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,359)
SECTION 4-420: ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES; COMPETITION
All-terrain vehicles participating in competitive events may be exempted from
Sections 3-415 to 3-417 of this article at the discretion of the Director of Motor
Vehicles. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,360)
SECTION 4-421: ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES; ACCIDENT REPORT
If an accident results in the death of any person or in the injury of any person
which requires the treatment of the person by a physician, the operator of each
all-terrain vehicle involved in the accident shall give notice of the accident in the
same manner provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-699. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-
6,361)
SECTION 4-422: ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES; PENALTY
Any violation of Section 4-416 to 4-421 of this article which is also a violation
under Chapter 60 of R.S. Neb. may be punished under the penalty provisions of
such chapter. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,362)
SECTION 4-423: MOPEDS; DEFINED
For the purposes of this article, "moped" shall mean a bicycle with fully operative
pedals for propulsion by human power, an automatic transmission, and a motor
with a cylinder capacity not exceeding 50 cubic centimeters which produces no
more than two brake horsepower and is capable of propelling the bicycle at a
maximum design speed of no more than 30 miles per hour on level ground.
Mopeds, their owners and their operators shall be subject to Chapter 60, article
4, but shall be exempt from the requirements of Chapter 60, articles 1, 3 and 5.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-637, 60-6,309)
SECTION 4-424: MOPEDS; OPERATOR'S LICENSE REQUIRED
No person shall operate a moped upon the streets, alleys or public highways of
the City unless such person has a valid motor vehicle operator's license or a
valid school or learner's permit. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,310)
SECTION 4-425: MOPEDS; TRAFFIC REGULATIONS APPLICABLE
1. Any person who rides a moped upon a roadway shall have all the rights and
shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a motor vehicle
under the Nebraska Rules of the Road except for special moped regulations
in the rules and except for those provisions of the rules which by their nature
can have no application.
2. Such regulations applicable to mopeds shall apply whenever a moped is
operated upon any street, alley or highway within the City or upon any path
set aside by the Department of Roads or the City for the use of mopeds.
Notwithstanding any established maximum speed limits in excess of 25 miles
per hour, no person shall operate any moped at a speed in excess of 30 miles
per hour. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,311)
SECTION 4-426: MOPEDS; OPERATION
1. Any person who operates a moped shall ride only upon a permanent and
regular seat attached to the moped. A person operating a moped shall not
carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a moped unless
such moped is designed by the manufacturer to carry more than one person.
2. A person shall ride upon a moped only while sitting astride the seat, facing
forward.
3. No person shall operate a moped while carrying any package, bundle or other
article which prevents him/her from keeping both hands on the handlebars.
4. No operator shall carry any person, nor shall any person ride, in a position
that interferes with the operation or control of the moped or the view of the
operator.
5. Any moped which carries a passenger shall be equipped with footrests for
such passenger. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,312)
SECTION 4-427: MOPEDS; USE OF TRAFFIC LANES
1. A moped shall be entitled to full use of a traffic lane of any highway with an
authorized speed limit of 45 miles per hour or less and no vehicle shall be
operated in such a manner as to deprive any moped of the full use of such
lane, except that mopeds and motorcycles may be operated two abreast in a
single lane.
2. No person shall operate a moped between lanes of traffic or between
adjacent lines or rows of vehicles.
3. Mopeds shall not be operated more than two abreast in a single lane.
4. Any person who operates a moped on a roadway with an authorized speed
limit of more than 45 miles per hour shall ride as near to the right side of the
roadway as practicable and shall not ride more than single file.
5. No person who rides upon a moped shall attach himself/herself to the moped
to any other vehicle on a roadway.
6. Mopeds shall not be operated on the sidewalks. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-
6,313)
SECTION 4-428: MOPEDS; EQUIPMENT
Any moped which carries a passenger shall be equipped with footrests for such
passenger. No person shall operate any moped with handlebars more than 15
inches above the mounting point of the handlebars. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-
680)
SECTION 4-429: REPLACED BY SECTION 4-402 Number 2
SECTION 4-430: MINIATURE MOTORIZED VEHICLES; DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply:
"Miniature motor vehicle" means a motor powered vehicle which is not defined in
Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-638 that (a) has an engine rated capacity of less than 45
cubic centimeters displacement; or (b) is not more than 76 inches in overall
length or not more than 26 inches in height or not more than 50 inches in width;
(c) or which has a total individual wheel and/or tire diameter of less than 14
inches; (d) has a dry weight of 600 pounds or less; or (e) is designed by the
manufacturer for off-road use and travels on low-pressure tires; or (f) is otherwise
a miniature motor vehicle that has been modified to include additional equipment
to otherwise satisfy state law or this ordinance. "Miniature motor vehicle" also
means a miniature motor vehicle as herein defined which has been modified so
that it may be registered as a motor vehicle and display proper registration plates
issued under the laws of the State of Nebraska.
"Minibike, motor scooter, motorcycle, bicycle, snowmobile and moped" - all such
vehicles are as otherwise defined in other provisions of this article.
"Motor vehicle" shall mean all motor vehicles defined in Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-638,
unless it is a miniature motor vehicle which has been modified to satisfy the
requirement of state law as a motor vehicle defined by Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-638.
"Public property" means all public streets, alleys, roads, highways and sidewalks,
including any state, city, county or any other governmental subdivision right-ofway.
Vehicles excluded from cover of this ordinance are (a) motor powered vehicles
governed by other provisions of this code; (b) farm equipment other than
miniature motor vehicles as defined by this article; (c) self-propelled equipment
designed and used exclusively on, and for the care of yards and lawns, which are
not operated on public property for any purpose other than loading on to and
unloading from vehicles on which the equipment was transported to the yard or
lawn or as used in the actual performance of lawn or yard care; (d) road and
general-purpose construction and maintenance machinery not designed or used
primarily to transport people and which is operated on public property for the
actual purpose of construction or while in transit to or from a construction site,
including but not limited to, ditch digging apparatus, asphalt spreaders, bucket
loaders, leveling graders, earth moving carryalls, power shovels, earth moving
equipment and crawler tractors, and (e) self-propelled invalid chairs.
SECTION 4-431: MINIATURE MOTORIZED VEHICLES; OPERATION ON
PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION
Miniature motor vehicles shall not be operated on public property, with the
following exceptions:
1. Crossing public property is permitted only if (a) crossing is made at an angle
of approximately 90° to the direction of the public property at a place where
no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing; (b) the vehicle is brought
to a complete stop before crossing the public property; (c) the operator yields
the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic that constitutes an immediate potential
hazard; (d) in crossing public property, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of public property; and (e) the miniature motor vehicle has both a
headlight and taillight in operation when the crossing is made.
2. Miniature motor vehicles may be operated on public streets, roads or
highways as an integral part of a parade authorized or approved by the State,
County or City.
It shall not be unlawful for any person to operate a miniature motor vehicle on
private property owned by that person or owned by another person if the
operation is with that person's permission.
SECTION 4-432: MINIATURE MOTORIZED VEHICLES; ENFORCEMENT
Any peace officer of the State, County or City, including conservation officers of
the Game and Parks Commission, shall have the authority to enforce this article.
ARTICLE V - PENAL PROVISION
SECTION 4-501 VIOLATION; PENALTY
1.Any violations of this Chapter which are also a violation under Chapter 39 or
Chapter 60 of the Revised Statutes of Nebraska may be punished under the
penalty provisions of such Chapter of the Revised Statutes of Nebraska.
2.Violations of this chapter which are the equivalent of state statutes listed in the
Nebraska Supreme Court’s fine/waiver schedule, as the same may be amended
by the Court, may be disposed of pursuant to a waiver of appearance, a plea of
“guilty”, and the payment of court costs and the corresponding fine for such
violation listed on the Nebraska Supreme Court’s fine/waiver schedule; provided,
if the amount of the fine for any parking violation listed on the Nebraska Supreme
Court’s fine/waiver schedule exceeds the amount of the fine for such parking
violation listed in the City’s fee ordinance, the amount of the fine shall be that
listed on the City’s fee ordinance.
3.Violations of this chapter which are listed on the City’s fine/waiver schedule
may be disposed of pursuant to a waiver of appearance, a plea of “guilty”, and
the payment of courts costs and the corresponding fine for such violation listed in
the City’s fine/waiver schedule.
UPDATED:
12/21/2017 ORDINANCE NO. 1930
CHAPTER V BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE I – ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
5-101 DEFINITIONS
5-102 LICENSE REQUIRED
5-103 RIGHT OF ENTRY TO POLICE
5-104 DWELLINGS
5-105 LICENSE DISPLAYED
5-106 LICENSEE REQUIREMENTS
5-107 LIQUOR APPLICATION; MUNICIPAL EXAMINATION
5-108 LIQUOR LICENSE RENEWAL
5-109 MUNICIPAL POWERS AND DUTIES
5-110 OWNER OF PREMISES
5-111 EMPLOYER
5-112 PUBLIC ENTRANCES REQUIRED
5-113 MINORS AND INCOMPETENTS
5-114 CREDIT SALES
5-115 SPIKING BEER
5-116 ORIGINAL PACKAGE
5-117 HOURS OF SALE
5-118 SANITARY CONDITIONS
5-119 HIRING MINORS
5-120 CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES; LICENSE
REQUIRED
5-121 ACQUISITION AND POSSESSION
5-122 NUDE ENTERTAINMENT
5-123 INSPECTIONS
5-124 CITIZEN COMPLAINTS
5-125 LIQUOR APPLICATION; NOTICE; PROCEDURE
5-126 LIQUOR APPLICATIONS; RETAIL LICENSING
STANDARDS; BINDING RECOMMENDATIONS
5-127 CATERING LICENSE
5-128 REMOVAL OF INTOXICATED PERSONS FROM PUBLIC
OR QUASI-PUBLIC PROPERTY
ARTICLE II – NON-RESIDENT SALESPEOPLE
5-201 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
5-202 REGISTRATION, EXCEPTIONS
5-203 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT
5-204 DUTY TO CARRY AND DISPLAY PERMIT
5-205 HOURS OF SOLICITATION
5-206 FAILURE TO OBTAIN A PERMIT; VIOLATION
ARTICLE III – OCCUPATION TAXES
5-301 TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES OCCUPATION TAX
5-302 FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES OCCUPATION TAX
5-303 RETAIL LIQUOR LICENSEES AND CRAFT BREWERY
LICENSEES OCCUPATION TAX
5-304 CERTIFICATES
5-305 FAILURE TO PAY
ARTICLE IV – FAIR HOUSING REGULATIONS
5-401 PURPOSE
5-402 DEFINITIONS
5-403 UNLAWFUL ACTS
5-404 HANDICAPPED PERSON; DISCRIMINATORY
PRACTICES PROHIBITED; DESIGN AND
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
5-405 TRANSACTION RELATED TO RESIDENTIAL REAL
ESTATE; DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED
5-406 MULTIPLE LISTING SERVICE; OTHER SERVICE;
DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED
5-407 RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION, PRIVATE HOME, PRIVATE
CLUB, OR HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS;
RESTRICTING USE NOT PROHIBITED
5-408 INFORMATION
ARTICLE V - MINIMUM RENTAL HOUSING STANDARDS
5-501 RENTAL HOUSING STANDARDS CODE
5-502 INSPECTION
5-503 INSPECTION; EXEMPTION, FEE
5-504 TIME LIMIT TO BRING OCCUPANCY INTO
COMPLIANCE; EXTENSION, FEE
5-505 VIOLATION
5-506 INSPECTION ORDERED BY HOUSING INSPECTOR
5-507 CONTINUOUS VIOLATION; NUISANCE, ABATEMENT
ARTICLE VI – TRAILER REGULATIONS
5-601 TERMS DEFINED
5-602 TRAILER COURTS; PERMIT REQUIRED
5-603 PERMIT RENEWAL
5-604 ASSIGNING PERMIT PROHIBITED
5-605 PERMIT REVOCATION
5-606 UNIT SPACES
5-607 DRAINAGE
5-608 PLUMBING FACILITIES
5-609 WASTE DISPOSAL
5-610 ELECTRICAL SUPPLY
5-611 UNLAWFUL PARKING
5-612 CONVERSION
5-613 COURTS LIMITED
5-614 LIABILITY
5-615 INSPECTIONS
5-616 COMPLIANCE WITH NUISANCE ORDINANCES
ARTICLE VII – RAILROAD COMPANIES
5-701 DRAINAGE
5-702 SAFE CROSSINGS
5-703 SPEED
5-704 OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC
5-705 OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT CROSSING PROHIBITED
ARTICLE VIII - SALVAGE YARDS
5-801 DEFINITIONS
5-802 REGULATION
5-803 OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY
5-804 INSPECTIONS; NOTICE OF HEALTH HAZARD
5-805 NUISANCE
5-806 RECORDS
5-807 RODENTS
5-808 ADDITIONAL JUNKYARDS PROHIBITED
ARTICLE IX - LOTTERY
5-901 PARTICIPATION; RESTRICTIONS
5-902 LOTTERY; SALES OUTLET LOCATIONS; APPROVAL
REQUIRED; QUALIFICATION STANDARDS (Ordinance
No. 1749 – May 7, 2007)
ARTICLE X - TOBACCO AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS SALES
5-1001 DEFINITIONS
5-1002 PROHIBITED ACTS; EXCEPTION
5-1003 DUTIES
ARTICLE XI - PENAL PROVISION
5-1101 VIOLATION; PENALTY
ARTICLE XII – SIDEWALK CAFÉ
5-1201 OPERATION OF SIDEWALK CAFÉ WITHOUT PERMIT
PROHIBITED
5-1202 DEFINITIONS
5-1203 PERMIT FEE; DISPOSITION OF FUNDS
5-1204 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
5-1205 REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS
5-1206 CONDITIONS OF OPERATION
5-1207 DENIAL, REVOCATION, OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT
CHAPTER V BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE I - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION 5-101: DEFINITIONS
All words and phrases herein used are to have the definitions applied thereto as
defined in the Liquor Control Act of the State of Nebraska. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat.
§53-103)
SECTION 5-102: LICENSE REQUIRED
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture for sale, sell, keep for sale, or
to barter any alcoholic liquors within the City unless said person shall have in full
force and effect a license as provided by the Nebraska Liquor Control Act. (Ref.
Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-168.06)
SECTION 5-103: RIGHT OF ENTRY TO POLICE
All police officers of the City are hereby authorized and directed to enter upon the
premises of all licensees at frequent intervals, to determine whether any of the
provisions of this article or of the Nebraska Liquor Control Act have been or are
being violated.
SECTION 5-104: DWELLINGS
Except in the case of hotels and clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be sold at retail
upon any premise which has any access which leads from such premise to any
other portion of the same building used for dwelling or lodging purposes and
which is permitted to be used by the public. Nothing herein shall prevent any
connection with such premise and such other portion of the building which is
used only by the licensee, his/her family or personal guests. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat.
§53-178)
SECTION 5-105: LICENSE DISPLAYED
Every licensee under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act shall cause his/her license
to be framed and hung in plain public view in a conspicuous place on the
licensed premise. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-148)
SECTION 5-106: LICENSEE REQUIREMENTS
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to own an establishment that sells
at retail any alcoholic beverages unless said person is a person of good
character and reputation; a citizen of the United States; a person who has never
been convicted of a felony or any Class I misdemeanor pursuant to Chapter 28,
Article 3, 4, 7, 8, 10, 11 or 12 Reissue Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, or
any similar offense under a prior criminal statute or in another state; a person
who has never had a liquor license revoked for cause; a person whose premises,
for which a license is sought, meets standards for fire safety as established by
the State Fire Marshal. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-125)
SECTION 5-107 LIQUOR APPLICATION; MUNICIPAL EXAMINATION
1. Any person desiring to obtain a license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail shall file
an application with the Liquor Control Commission. Upon receipt from the
Commission of the notice and copy of the application as provided in Section 53-
131, RS Neb., the City Council shall fix a time and place at which time the City
Council shall receive evidence, under oath, either orally or in writing, from the
applicant and any other person concerning the propriety of the issuance of such
license. Such hearing shall be held not more than 45 days after the receipt of
notice from the Commission. The City Council may examine, or cause to be
examined, under oath, any applicant; examine, or cause to be examined, the
books and records of any such applicant; to hear testimony, and to take proof for
its information in the performance of its duties. For purposes of obtaining any of
the information desired, the City Council may authorize its agent, the city clerk or
the city attorney, to act on its behalf.
2. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a legal
newspaper in, or of general circulation in, the City one time not less than seven
nor more than 14 days before the time of the hearing. Such notice shall include,
but not be limited to, a statement that all persons desiring to give evidence before
the City Council in support of or in protest against the issuance of such license
may do so at the time of the hearing.
3. The City Council shall, after the hearing provided in subsection (1), consider
making a recommendation favorable or non-favorable to the Nebraska Liquor
Control Commission. This recommendation must be made within 45 days of
receipt of such application from the Commission, and shall cause to be spread at
large in the minute record of its proceedings. The city clerk shall thereupon mail
or deliver to the Commission a copy of the minute record within ten days of the
decision to approve or deny the application.
4. Any minute record to recommend denying an application shall be in writing or
stated in the record and shall be accompanied by findings. The findings shall
consist of concise statements of the conclusions upon each contested issue.
The applicant shall be notified of the decision in person or by mail. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat. §53-131, 53-132, 53-134, RS, Neb.)
SECTION 5-108: LIQUOR LICENSE RENEWAL
Retail or bottle club licenses issued by the Commission and outstanding may be
automatically renewed in the absence of a request by the City Council to require
the said licensee to issue an application for renewal. Any licensed retail or bottle
club establishment located in an area which is annexed to the City shall file a
formal application for a license, and while such application is pending, the
licensee shall be authorized to continue all license privileges pursuant to this
Article until the original license expires, is canceled, or revoked. If such license
expires within 60 days following the annexation date of such area, the license
may be renewed by order of the Commission for not more than one year. The
city clerk, upon notice from the Commission, between January 10th and January
30th of each year, shall cause to be published in a legal newspaper in or of
general circulation in the City, one time, a notice in the form prescribed by law of
the right of automatic renewal of each retail liquor and beer license within the
City; provided, Class C license renewal notices shall be published between the
dates of July 10th and July 30th of each year. The city clerk shall then file with
the Commission proof of publication of said notice on or before February 10th of
each year or August 10th of each year for Class C licenses. Upon the conclusion
of any hearing required by this section, the City Council may request a licensee
to submit an application. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-135, 53-135.01)
SECTION 5-109: MUNICIPAL POWERS AND DUTIES
The City Council is authorized to regulate by ordinance not inconsistent with the
provisions of the Nebraska Liquor Control Act, the business of all retail and bottle
club licensees carried on within the corporate limits. The City Council shall
further have the power and duties in respect to licensed retailers of alcoholic
beverages to cancel or revoke for cause retail or bottle club licenses to sell or
dispense alcoholic liquors issued to persons for premises within its jurisdiction
subject to the right of appeal to the Commission; to enter or to authorize any law
enforcement officer to enter at any time upon any premise licensed by the State
of Nebraska to determine whether any of the provisions of the Municipal laws, or
the laws of the State of Nebraska, are being violated; to receive signed
complaints from any citizens within its jurisdiction that any of the Municipal laws
or laws of the State of Nebraska are being violated, and to act upon such
complaints in the manner herein provided; to cancel or revoke on its own motion
any license if, upon the same notice and hearing as provided in Section 5-124, it
determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of the Nebraska
Liquor Control Act or any valid and subsisting ordinance or regulation duly
enacted relating to alcoholic liquors; and to collect for the benefit of the State of
Nebraska and the City all license fees and occupation taxes as prescribed by
law. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-134)
SECTION 5-110: OWNER OF PREMISES
The owner of any premise used for the sale at retail of alcoholic beverages shall
be deemed guilty of a violation of these laws to the same extent as the said
licensee if the owner shall knowingly permit the licensee to use the said licensed
premise in violation of any Municipal Code section or Nebraska Statute. (Ref.
Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-1,101)
SECTION 5-111: EMPLOYER
The employer of any officer, director, manager or employees working in a retail
liquor establishment shall be held to be liable and guilty of any act of omission or
violation of any law or ordinance, and each such act or omission shall be deemed
and held to be the act of the employer, and will be punishable in the same
manner as if the said act or omission had been committed by him/her personally.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-168.06)
SECTION 5-112: PUBLIC ENTRANCES REQUIRED
No person holding a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquors, including
beer, shall sell at retail any such beverages on a premise which is not provided
with a public entrance at the front thereof opening upon a public street. During
the hours when alcoholic beverages may legally be sold, all public entrances at
the front thereof shall be unlocked or otherwise unsecured, so that the general
public and law enforcement officers may have easy access to such premises.
SECTION 5-113: MINORS AND INCOMPETENTS
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to sell, give away, dispose of,
exchange, permit the sale of or make a gift of, any alcoholic liquors, or to procure
any such alcoholic liquors to or for any minor, or to any person who is mentally
incompetent. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-180)
SECTION 5-114: CREDIT SALES
No person shall sell or furnish alcoholic liquor at retail to any person or persons
for credit of any kind, barter, or services rendered; provided, nothing herein
contained shall be construed to prevent any bona fide club from permitting
checks or statements for alcoholic liquor to be signed by members or guests of
members and charged to the accounts of the said members or guests in
accordance with the by-laws of any such club; and provided further, nothing
herein shall be construed to prevent any hotel from permitting checks or
statements for liquor to be signed by bona fide guests residing in the said hotel,
and charged to the accounts of such guests. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-183)
SECTION 5-115: SPIKING BEER
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons who own, manage or lease any
premise in which the sale of alcoholic beverages is licensed, to serve or offer for
sale any beer to which there has been added any alcohol, or permit any person
or persons to add alcohol to any beer on the licensed premise of such licensee.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-174)
SECTION 5-116: ORIGINAL PACKAGE
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons who own, manage or lease any
premise in which the sale of alcoholic beverages is licensed, to have in their
possession for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor contained in casks or other
containers, except in the original package. Nothing in this section shall prohibit
the refilling of original packages of alcoholic liquor for strictly private use and not
for resale. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-184)
SECTION 5-117 HOURS OF SALE
1. It shall be unlawful for any licensed person or persons or their agents
to sell any alcoholic beverages, for consumption off the premises, within
the City except during the hours provided herein:
Alcoholic Liquors (except beer and wine)
Secular Days 6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M.
Sundays 6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M.
Beer and Wine
Secular Days 6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M.
Sundays 6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M.
2. It shall be unlawful for any licensed person or persons or their agents
to sell any alcoholic beverages, for consumption on the premises, within
the City except during the hours provided herein:
Alcoholic Liquors (except beer and wine)
Secular Days 6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M.
Sundays 6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M.
Beer and Wine
Secular Days 6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M.
Sundays 6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M.
4 3. No person or persons shall consume any alcoholic beverages on
licensed premises for a period of time longer than 15 minutes after the
time fixed herein for stopping the sale of alcoholic beverages on said
premises. For the purposes of this section, "on sale" shall be defined as
alcoholic beverages sold by the drink for consumption on the premises of
the licensed establishment; "off sale" shall be defined as alcoholic
beverages sold at retail in the original container for consumption off the
premises of the licensed establishment.
5. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit licensed premises
from being open for other business on days and hours during which the
sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by this section.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-179)
SECTION 5-118: SANITARY CONDITIONS
It shall be unlawful to open for public use any retail liquor establishment that is
not in a clean and sanitary condition. Toilet facilities shall be adequate and
convenient for customers and patrons and said licensed premise shall be subject
to any health inspections the City Council or the City Police may make or cause
to be made. All applications for liquor licenses shall be viewed in part from the
standpoint of the sanitary conditions, and a report concerning the said sanitary
conditions shall be made at all hearings concerning the application for, or
renewal of, a liquor license.
SECTION 5-119: HIRING MINORS
It shall be unlawful for any person to hire a minor, regardless of sex, under the
age of 19 years to serve or dispense alcoholic liquors, including beer, to said
licensee's customers. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-168.06)
SECTION 5-120: CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES; LICENSE REQUIRED
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating, managing or conducting
any dance hall, restaurant, café, club or any other place open to the general
public to permit or to allow any person to consume alcoholic beverages upon
such premises, or for any person to consume alcoholic liquor in any dance hall,
restaurant, café, club or any place open to the general public, except as
permitted by a license theretofore issued to such premises pursuant to Nebraska
statutes.
This section shall not apply to a retail licensee while lawfully engaged in the
catering of alcoholic beverages. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-168.01)
SECTION 5-121: ACQUISITION AND POSSESSION
It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, receive, acquire, accept or
possess any alcoholic liquor acquired from any other person other than one duly
licensed to handle alcoholic liquor under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act;
provided, nothing in this section shall prevent (1) the possession of alcoholic
liquor for the personal use of the possessor and his or her family and guests, as
long as the quantity of alcoholic liquor transported, imported, brought or shipped
into the State does not exceed nine liters in any one calendar month; (2) the
making of wine, cider or other alcoholic liquor by a person from fruits, vegetables
or grains, or the product thereof, by simple fermentation and without distillation, if
made solely for the use of the maker and his or her family and guests; (3) any
duly licensed practicing physician or dentist from possessing or using alcoholic
liquor in the strict practice of his or her profession, any hospital or other institution
caring for the sick and diseased persons from possessing and using alcoholic
liquor for the treatment of bona fide patients of such hospital or other institution,
or any drug store employing a licensed pharmacist from possessing or using
alcoholic liquor in compounding of prescriptions of licensed physicians; (4) the
possession and dispensation of wine by an authorized representative of any
church for the purpose of conducting any bona fide rite or religious ceremony
conducted by such church; (5) persons who are sixteen years old or older from
carrying alcoholic liquor from licensed establishments when they are
accompanied by a person not a minor; (6) persons who are sixteen years old or
older from handling alcoholic liquor containers and alcoholic liquor in the course
of their employment; (7) persons who are sixteen years old or older from
removing and disposing of alcoholic liquor containers for the convenience of the
employer and customers in the course of their employment; or (8) persons who
are nineteen years old or older from serving or selling alcoholic liquor in the
course of their employment. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-168.06, 53-175, 53-
194.03)
SECTION 5-122: NUDE ENTERTAINMENT
It shall be cause for suspension or revocation of any liquor license if licensee,
his/her manager or agent shall allow any live person to appear, or have
reasonable cause to believe that any live person shall appear, on any licensed
premises in a state of nudity to provide entertainment, to provide service, to act
as hostess, manager or owner, or to serve as an employee in any capacity.
For the purposes of this section, the term "nudity" shall mean the showing of the
human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks or the human female
breast including the areola, the nipple or any portion below the nipple with less
than a full opaque covering.
SECTION 5-123: INSPECTIONS
It shall be the duty of the City Council to cause frequent inspections to be made
on the premises of all retail and bottle club licensees. If it is found that any such
licensee is violating any provision of the Nebraska Liquor Control Act or
regulations of the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission, or is failing to observe in
good faith the purposes of said Act, the license may be suspended, canceled or
revoked after the licensee has been given an opportunity to be heard by the City
Council. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-116.01)
SECTION 5-124: CITIZEN COMPLAINTS
Any five residents of the City shall have the right to file a complaint with the City
Council stating that any retail or bottle club licensee, subject to the jurisdiction of
the City Council, has been or is violating any provision of the Nebraska Liquor
Control Act or the rules or regulations issued pursuant thereto. Such complaint
shall be in writing in the form prescribed by the City Council and shall be signed
and sworn by the parties complaining. The complaint shall state the particular
provision, rule or regulation believed to have been violated and the facts in detail
upon which belief is based. If the City Council is satisfied that the complaint
substantially charges a violation and that from the facts alleged there is
reasonable cause for such belief, it shall set the matter for hearing within ten
days from the date of the filing of the complaint and shall serve notice upon the
licensee of the time and place of such hearing and of the particular charge in the
complaint; provided that the complaint must in all cases be disposed of by the
City Council within 30 days from the date the complaint was filed by resolution
thereof, said resolution shall be deemed the final order for purposes of appeal to
the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission as provided by law. (Ref. Neb. Rev.
Stat. §53-134.04)
SECTION 5-125: LIQUOR APPLICATION; NOTICE; PROCEDURE
A. Notice. Notice of a hearing held pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. Section 53-
134 shall be given to the applicant by the city clerk and shall contain the date,
time and location of the hearing. Two or more proceedings which are legally or
factually related may be heard and considered together unless any party thereto
makes a showing sufficient to satisfy the City Council that prejudice would result
there from.
B. Procedure. Hearings will be informal and conducted by the city attorney.
The intent is an inquiry into the facts, not an adversarial action. Each witness
may present their testimony in narrative fashion or by question and answer.
The City Council or the applicant may order the hearing to be recorded by the
clerk, at the expense of the applicant(s).
The City Council may admit and give probative effect to evidence which
possesses probative value commonly accepted by reasonably prudent
individuals. The city attorney may limit testimony where it appears incompetent,
irrelevant or unduly repetitious. If there is opposition to any application and such
opposition desires the opportunity to present arguments and to cross-examine
the applicant and any witnesses in favor of such application, they shall choose a
spokesperson to perform such function who shall notify the city attorney of
his/her representation prior to the start of the hearing.
The order of the proceeding is as follows:
1. Exhibits will be marked in advance by the clerk and presented to the city
attorney during the presentation;
2. Presentation of evidence, witnesses and arguments by applicant;
3. Testimony of any other citizens in favor of such proposed license;
4. Examination of applicant, witnesses or citizens by city attorney, City
Council, or duly appointed agent;
5. Cross-examination of applicant, witnesses or citizens by spokesperson for
opposition, if any;
6. Presentation of evidence and witnesses by opposition;
7. Testimony of any other citizens in opposition to such proposed license;
8. Presentation of evidence by City and law enforcement personnel;
9. Cross-examination by applicant;
10. Rebuttal evidence by both parties, and by city administration and agent;
11. Summation by applicant and opposition spokesperson, if any.
In all cases, the burden of proof and persuasion shall be on the party filing the
application.
Any member of the City Council and the city attorney may question any witness,
call witnesses, or request information.
All witnesses shall be sworn.
The City Council may make further inquiry and investigation following the
hearing.
The City Council or the applicant may order the hearing to be recorded by the
clerk, at the expense of the applicant(s). (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-134)
SECTION 5-126: LIQUOR APPLICATIONS; RETAIL LICENSING STANDARDS;
BINDING RECOMMENDATIONS
Local governing bodies shall only have authority to approve applications and
deny licenses pursuant to the Nebraska Liquor Control Act. The City Council
shall only consider the following licensing standards and criteria at the hearing
and an evaluation of any applicant for a retail alcoholic liquor license, for the
upgrading of a license to sell alcoholic liquor, or for the expansion or change in
location of the premises, and for the purpose of formulating a recommendation
from the City Council to the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission in accordance
with the Nebraska Liquor Control Act:
a. The adequacy of existing law enforcement resources and services in the
area;
b. The recommendation of the Police Department or any other law
enforcement agency;
c. Existing motor vehicle and pedestrian traffic flow in the vicinity of the
proposed licensed premises, potential traffic and parking problems, and the
proximity and availability of on-street and off-street parking;
d. Zoning restrictions and the local governing body's zoning and land-use
policies;
e. Sanitation or sanitary conditions on or about the proposed licensed
premises;
f. The existence of a citizen's protest and similar evidence in support of or in
opposition to the application;
g. The existing population and projected growth within the jurisdiction of the
local governing body and within the area to be served;
h. The existing liquor licenses, the class of each such license, and the
distance and times of travel between establishments that were issued such
licenses;
i. Whether the proposed license would be compatible with the neighborhood
or community where the proposed premises are located;
j. Whether the type of business or activity proposed to be operated or
presently operated in conjunction with the proposed license is and will be
consistent with the public interest as declared in Section 53-101.01;
k. Whether the applicant can ensure that all alcoholic beverages, including
beer and wine, will be handled by persons in accordance with Section 53-102;
l. Whether the applicant has taken every precaution to protect against the
possibility of shoplifting of alcoholic liquor, which alcoholic liquor shall be
displayed and kept in and sold from an area which is reasonably secured;
m. Whether the applicant is fit, willing and able to properly provide the service
proposed in conformance with all provisions and requirements of and rules and
regulations adopted and promulgated pursuant to the act;
n. Whether the applicant has demonstrated that the type of management and
control exercised over the licensed premises will be sufficient to ensure that the
licensee can conform to all the provisions and requirements of and rules and
regulations adopted and promulgated pursuant to the act;
o. The background information of the applicant established by information
contained in the public records of the Commission and investigations conducted
by law enforcement agencies;
p. Past evidence of discrimination involving the applicant as evidenced by
findings of fact before any administrative board or agency of the local governing
body, any other governmental board or agency of the local governing body, any
other governmental unit, or any court of law;
q. Whether the applicant or the applicant's representatives suppressed any
fact or provided any inaccurate information to the Commission or local governing
body or the employees of the Commission in regard to the license application or
liquor investigations. The applicant shall be required to cooperate in providing a
full disclosure to the investigating agents of the local governing body;
r. Proximity of and impact on schools, hospitals, libraries, parks and public
institutions;
s. Whether activities proposed to be conducted on the licensed premises or
in adjacent related outdoor areas will create unreasonable noise or disturbance;
and
t. Compliance with state laws, liquor rules and regulations, and municipal
ordinances and regulations and whether or not the applicant has ever forfeited
bond to appear in court to answer charges of having committed a felony or
charges of having violated any law or ordinance enacted in the interest of good
morals and decency or has been convicted of violating or has forfeited bond to
appear in court and answer charges for violating any law or ordinance relating to
alcoholic liquor.
It shall be the applicant's duty to produce evidence pertaining to the designated
criteria prescribed in this subsection. The burden of proof and persuasion shall
be on the party filing the application. When applicable for purposes of this
section, "applicant" shall be synonymous with "licensee." (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat.
§53-134)
SECTION 5-127 CATERING LICENSE
1. The holder of a Class C, Class D, or Class I license issued under subdivision
(5) of Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-124, or a brewpub license, may obtain an annual
catering license as prescribed in this section. Any such licensee desiring to
obtain a catering license shall file an application with the Liquor Control
Commission.
2. Upon receipt from the Commission of the notice and copy of the application as
provided in Section 53-124.12 RS Neb., the City Council shall fix a time and
place at which a hearing will be held and at which time the City Council shall
receive evidence, under oath, either orally or in writing, from the applicant and
any other person concerning the propriety of the issuance of such license. Such
hearing shall be held not more than 45 days after the receipt of the notice from
the Commission. The City Council may examine, or cause to be examined,
under oath, any applicant; examine, or cause to be examined, the books and
records of any such applicant, to hear testimony, and to take proof for its
information in the performance of its duties. For purposes of obtaining any of the
information desired, the City Council may authorize its agent, the city clerk or the
city attorney, to act on its behalf.
3. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a legal
newspaper in, or of general circulation in, the City one time not less than seven
nor more than 14 days before the time of the hearing. Such notice shall include,
but not be limited to, a statement that all persons desiring to give evidence before
the City Council in support of or in protest against the issuance of such license
may do so at the time of the hearing.
4. The City Council shall, after the hearing provided in subsection (2), consider
making a recommendation favorable or non-favorable to the Nebraska Liquor
Control Commission. This recommendation must be made within 45 days of
receipt of such application from the Commission, and shall cause to be spread at
large in the minute record of its proceedings. The city clerk shall thereupon mail
or deliver to the Commission a copy of the minute record within ten days of the
decision to approve or deny the application.
5. Any minute record to recommend denying an application shall be in writing or
stated in the record and shall be accompanied by findings. The findings shall
consist of concise statements of the conclusions upon each contested issue.
The applicant shall be notified of the decision in person or by mail.
6. The City Council, with respect to catering licensees within its corporate limits,
may cancel a catering license for cause for the remainder of the period for which
such license is issued. Any person whose catering license is canceled may
appeal to the District Court. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-124.12)
SECTION 5-128: REMOVAL OF INTOXICATED PERSONS FROM PUBLIC OR
QUASI-PUBLIC PROPERTY
Any law enforcement officer with the power to arrest for traffic violations may take
a person who is intoxicated and in the judgment of the officer dangerous to
himself/herself or others, or who is otherwise incapacitated, from any public or
quasi-public property. An officer removing an intoxicated person from public or
quasi-public property shall make a reasonable effort to take such person to
his/her home or to place such person in any hospital, clinic, alcoholism center, or
with a medical doctor as may be necessary to preserve life or to prevent injury.
Such effort at placement shall be deemed reasonable if the officer contacts those
facilities or doctors which have previously represented a willingness to accept
and treat such individuals and which regularly do accept such individuals. If such
efforts are unsuccessful or are not feasible, the officer may then place such
intoxicated person in civil protective custody, except that civil protective custody
shall be used only as long as is necessary to preserve life or to prevent injury,
and under no circumstances longer than 24 hours. The placement of such
person in civil protective custody shall be recorded at the facility or jail at which
he/she is delivered and communicated to his/her family or next of kin, if they can
be located, or to such person designated by the person taken into civil protective
custody.
The law enforcement officer who acts in compliance with this section shall be
deemed to be acting in the course of his/her official duty and shall not be
criminally or civilly liable for such actions. The taking of an individual into civil
protective custody under this section shall not be considered an arrest. No entry
or other record shall be made to indicate that the person has been arrested or
charged with a crime.
For purposes of this section, "public property" shall mean any public right-of-way,
street, highway, alley, park or other state, county or city-owned property; and
"quasi-public property" shall mean and include private or publicly-owned property
utilized for proprietary or business uses which invites patronage by the public or
which invites public ingress and egress. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-1,121)
ARTICLE II - NON-RESIDENT SALESPEOPLE
SECTION 5-201 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
Any non-resident salesperson intending to sell or attempting to sell at retail any
merchandise, magazines, books, services or other items of value or attempting to
take orders or subscriptions for the same within the corporate limits of the City
shall prior to making any attempt to sell such items, register with the City Clerk.
Such registration may be for periods of either one week of one year.
There shall be a registration fee of $___.00 for a week long permit and a fee of
$___.00 for an annual permit. At the end of each permit period, the sales person
shall be required to obtain a new permit. The fee is due upon the issuance of the
permit by the City Clerk.
The City Clerk may issue the permit after the following is provided:
(1) All sales persons full name, date of birth, current address,
telephone number and proof of identity (which will be verified by law
enforcement);
(2) A brief description of the nature, character and quality of goods,
wares or merchandise to be offered for sale;
(3) The specific location, if any, in which the vendor intends to
conduct business;
(4) If the applicant is employed by another, the name and address
of the person, firm, association, organization, company or
corporation;
(5) If a motor vehicle is to be used, a description of the vehicle
together with the motor vehicle registration number and permit
number;
(6) A sales tax permit as required by Neb. R.S. § 77-2705; and,
(7) Proof of a public liability bond or insurance policy in an amount
not less than $300,000.00 for property damage and injuries,
including death, caused by the operation of the business.
SECTION 5-202 REGISTRATION, EXCEPTIONS
The provisions of Section 5-201 shall not extend to individuals calling on retail
merchants in corporate limits of the City for the purpose of taking orders or
selling of merchandise for resale by such merchants, or farmers selling produce
raised in their gardens or on their farms.
SECTION 5-203 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT
The applicant shall be notified in writing by the City Clerk of his or her decision to
issue or deny the permit no earlier than three (3) days, nor later than thirty (30)
days, after the applicant has filed a completed application for the permit with the
City Clerk. Each permit shall show the name and address of the applicant; the
duration of the permit; the kind of goods to be sold; the amount of the permit fee;
the date of issuance and expiration;; the license plate number of any vehicle the
applicant will use in conducting business; the permit number; an identifying
description of any vehicle or conveyance used by the permit plus, where
applicable, the motor vehicle registration number.
SECTION 5-204 DUTY TO CARRY AND DISPLAY PERMIT
The permit herein provided shall at all times be carried on the person of said
salesperson and shall be displayed by the salesperson upon the request of any
citizen of the City or any police officer of the City.
Permits are non-assignable and non-transferable, and permits may be revoked
or suspended by the Mayor upon a vote of the City Council following a public
hearing of which the applicant is notified by mail not less than 10 days prior to the
hearing.
SECTION 5-205 HOURS OF SOLICITATION
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, salesperson or peddler to solicit any
individual between the hours of 8:00 P.M. and 9:00 A.M., unless the have a
previous appointment with the resident or residents on the premises solicited.
SECTION 5-206 FAILURE TO OBTAIN A PERMIT; VIOLATION
A sales person who has failed to obtain a permit or who violates Section 5-205
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. A new violation shall be deemed to have been
committed for each 24 hours of continued non-compliance.

ARTICLE III - OCCUPATION TAXES
SECTION 5-301 TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES OCCUPATION TAX
1. Commencing March 1, 2009, there is hereby charged on all
telecommunications companies an occupation tax equaling five percent (5%) on
the gross receipts resulting from any toll services and charges on basic local
exchange services; inter-exchange services; mobile services; and other
telecommunication services as provided for herein.
a. Basic local exchange services shall include the access and
transmission of two-way switched communications within the city,
including local telephone and telecommunication services.
b. Inter-exchange services shall mean the access and
transmission of communications between two or more local
exchange areas, provided that such inter-exchange service either
(a) originates from an end user within the city or (b) terminates with
an end user within the city, and is charged to a service address
within the city regardless of where the charges are actually paid.
c. Mobile services shall include any radio or similar communication
services provided pursuant to license or authority granted by the
Federal Communications Commission, charged to a service
address within the city regardless of where the charges are actually
paid, including cellular, radio paging, and mobile radio services.
d. Any other similar telecommunication services involving any
electronic or electromagnetic transmission of messages originating
and terminating in the State of Nebraska and charged to a service
address in the City, regardless of where the charges are actually
paid.
e. Gross receipts shall not include any toll services and charges as
follows:
(1) For interstate telecommunications between
persons in this city and persons outside of this state.
(2) For local carrier access charges, transmission
facilities and switching services provided to
telecommunications companies.
(3) From accounts charged to the United States
government or any of its departments, or the State of
Nebraska, or any of its agencies, subdivision or
departments.
2. This occupation tax on telecommunications services shall be due, and made
payable to the Plattsmouth City Treasurer, as follows:
a. For services provided from January through March of each year,
said tax shall be due on May 1 of that year;
b. For services provided from April through June of each year, said
tax shall be due on August 1 of that year;
c. For services provided from July through September of each
year, said tax shall be due on November 1 of that year; and
d. For services provided from October through December of each
year, said tax shall be due on February 1 of the following year.
3. The City Treasurer shall give a receipt, properly dated, and specifying the
person paying the said tax, and the amount paid. The revenue collected shall
then be immediately deposited into the General Fund by the City Treasurer. The
City treasurer shall keep an accurate account of all revenue turned over to
him/her. All forms, and receipts herein mentioned shall be issued in duplicate.
One copy shall then be kept by each party in the transaction. (Ref. Neb. Rev.
Stat. §§ 16-205 and 86-704).
SECTION 5-302 FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES OCCUPATION TAX
There is hereby charged an occupation tax of not more than five dollars per
annum on each fire insurance corporation, company or association, doing
business in the City of Plattsmouth, for the use, support, and benefit of volunteer
fire department. The City Clerk shall collect with diligence the occupation tax so
imposed and upon receipt shall pay over the proceeds to the City Treasurer who
shall credit the same to a fund to be known as special occupation tax fund for
benefit of the volunteer fire department. Upon proper claim filed by the chief of
the fire department and allowed by the local governing body of the municipality,
the City Treasurer shall pay over the proceeds of the tax in the fund from time to
time for the use of the fire department, as hereinbefore provided. Said tax shall
be due each year no later January 31. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-205 and 35-
106)
SECTION 5-303 RETAIL LIQUOR LICENSEES AND CRAFT BREWERY
LICENSEES OCCUPATION TAX
There is hereby charged an occupation tax on all retail liquor licensees and craft
brewery licensees doing business within the corporate limits of the City of
Plattsmouth in an amount equal to the license fee imposed under the Nebraska
Liquor Control Act to obtain such license. Said fee is due upon the issuance and
renewal of such licenses by the Liquor Control Commission. Said tax shall be
paid to the City Treasurer who shall give a receipt, properly dated, and specifying
the person paying the said tax, and the amount paid. The revenue collected
shall then be immediately deposited into the General Fund by the City Treasurer.
The City Treasurer shall keep an accurate account of all revenue turned over to
him/her. All forms, and receipts herein mentioned shall be issued in duplicate.
One copy shall then be kept by each party in the transaction. (Ref. Neb. Rev.
Stat. §§ 16-205 and 53-132)
SECTION 5-304: CERTIFICATES
The receipt issued after the payment of any occupation tax shall be the
occupation tax certificate. The said certificate shall specify the amount of the tax
and the name of the person and business that paid the said tax. The occupation
tax certificate shall then be displayed in a prominent place, or carried in such a
way as to be easily accessible, while business is being conducted. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat. §16-205)
SECTION 5-305: FAILURE TO PAY
If any person, company or corporation fails or neglects to pay the occupation
taxes as provided herein on the day it becomes due and payable, the City shall
then proceed by civil suit to collect the amount due. All delinquent taxes shall
bear interest at the rate of 1% per month until paid. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-
205)
ARTICLE IV - FAIR HOUSING REGULATIONS
SECTION 5-401: PURPOSE
The purpose of this article is to promote the general welfare of the residents of
Plattsmouth, Nebraska, by endorsing the provisions of the Nebraska Fair
Housing Act, Sections 20-301 through 20-344 RS Neb., to the effect that there
shall be no discrimination in the City of Plattsmouth, Nebraska, in the acquisition,
ownership, possession or enjoyment of housing in accordance with Article I,
Section 25, of the Constitution of the State of Nebraska.
SECTION 5-402: DEFINITIONS
As used in this article unless the context otherwise requires:
1. “Aggrieved person” shall include any person who: (a) claims to have been
injured by a discriminatory housing practice, or (b) believes that he or she will be
injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur;
2. “Commission” shall mean the Nebraska Equal Opportunity Commission;
3. “Dwelling” shall mean any building, structure or portion thereof which is
occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence for one or
more families and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof;
4. “Familial status” shall mean one or more minors being domiciled with: (a)
a parent or another person having legal custody of such individual; or (b) the
designee of a parent or other person having legal custody, with written
permission of the parent or other person;
5. “Handicap” shall mean, with respect to a person: (a) a physical or mental
impairment, excluding the current illegal use of or addiction to a controlled
substance as defined in Section 28-401 RS Neb., which substantially limits one
or more of such person's major life activities, (b) a record of having such an
impairment, or (c) being regarded as having such an impairment;
6. “Person” shall include one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, jointstock
companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in
bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries;
7. “Rent” shall include lease, sublease, let, and otherwise grant for
consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant; and
8. “Restrictive covenant” shall mean any specification limiting the transfer,
rental or lease of any housing because of race, creed, religion, color, national
origin, sex, handicap, familial status or ancestry.
SECTION 5-403: UNLAWFUL ACTS
Except as exempted by Section 5-407, it shall be unlawful to:
1. Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, refuse to
negotiate for the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable or deny, refuse
to show, or refuse to receive and transmit an offer for a dwelling to any person
because of race, color, religion, national origin, familial status or sex;
2. Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of
sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in
connection therewith because of race, color, religion, national origin, familial
status or sex;
3. Make, print, publish, or cause to be made, printed or published any notice,
statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that
indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color,
religion, national origin, handicap, familial status or sex or an intention to make
any such preference, limitation or discrimination;
4. Represent to any person because of race, color, religion, national origin,
handicap, familial status or sex that any dwelling is not available for inspection,
sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available.
5. Cause to be made any written or oral inquiry or record concerning the
race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status or sex of a person
seeking to purchase, rent or lease any housing;
6. Include any transfer, sale, rental or lease of housing any restrictive
covenants or honor or exercise or attempt to honor or exercise any restrictive
covenant pertaining to housing;
7. Discharge or demote an employee or agent or discriminate in the
compensation of such employee or agent because of such employee's
compliance with this article on the Nebraska Fair Housing Act; and
8. Induce or attempt to induce, for profit, any person to sell or rent any
dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the
neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, national
origin, handicap, familial status or sex.
The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial status
shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal
custody of any minor.
SECTION 5-404: HANDICAPPED PERSON; DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES
PROHIBITED; DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
1. Except as exempted by Section 5-407, it shall be unlawful to:
(a) Discriminate in the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable
or deny a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap of:
(i) The buyer or renter;
(ii) Any person associated with the buyer or renter; or
(iii) A person residing in or intending to reside in the dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available; or
(b) Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities
in connection with a dwelling because of a handicap of:
(i) Such person;
(ii) Any person associated with such person; or
(iii) A person residing in or intending to reside in the dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available.
2. For purposes of this section, “discrimination” shall include:
(a) A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by the
person if the modifications may be necessary to afford the person full enjoyment
of the premises, except that in the case of rental, the landlord may, when it is
reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter
agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed
before the modification, reasonable wear and tear expected;
(b) A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford
the handicapped person equal opportunity to use or enjoy a dwelling; and
(c) In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily
dwellings, a failure to design and construct the dwellings in such manner
that:
(i) The public use and common use portions of the dwelling are
readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;
(ii) All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises within the dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow
passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and
(iii) All premises within the dwellings contain the following
features of adaptive design:
(A) An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
(B) Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and
other environmental controls in accessible locations;
(C) Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later
installation of grab bars; and
(D) Kitchens and bathrooms such that a handicapped
person In a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
3. Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National
Standards Institute standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and
usability for physically handicapped people, ANSI A117.1, shall satisfy the
requirements of subdivision (2)(c)(iii) of this section.
4. For purposes of this section, “covered multifamily dwellings” shall mean:
(a) Buildings consisting of four or more units if such buildings have one
or more elevators; and
(b) Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four or more
units.
5. Nothing in this section shall require that a dwelling be made available to
an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or
safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical
damage to the property of others.
SECTION 5-405: TRANSACTION RELATED TO RESIDENTIAL REAL
ESTATE; DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED
1. It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business includes
engaging in transactions related to residential estate to discriminate against any
person in making available such a transaction because of race, color, religion,
sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.
2. For purposes of this section, “transaction related to residential estate”
shall mean any of the following:
(a) The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance:
(i) For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or
maintaining a dwelling; or
(ii) Secured by residential real estate; or
(b) The selling, brokering or appraising of residential real property.
3. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person engaged in the business of
furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into consideration factors other
than race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status or sex.
SECTION 5-406: MULTIPLE LISTING SERVICE; OTHER SERVICE;
DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation
in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers’ organization or other service,
organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or to
discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of such access,
membership or participation on account of race, color, religion, national origin,
handicap, familial status or sex.
SECTION 5-407: RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION, PRIVATE HOME, PRIVATE
CLUB, OR HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS;
RESTRICTING USE NOT PROHIBITED
1. Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association or
society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or
controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society
from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of a dwelling which it owns or
operates, for other than commercial purposes, to persons of the same religion or
from giving preferences to such persons unless membership in such religion is
restricted on account of race, color, national origin, handicap, familial status or
sex.
2. Nothing in this article shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the
public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings
which it owns or operates for other than commercial purposes, from limiting the
rental or occupancy of such lodging to its members or from giving preference to
its members.
3. Nothing in this article shall prohibit or limit the right of any person or his or
her authorized representative to refuse to rent a room or rooms in his or her own
home for any reason or for no reason or to change tenants in his or her own
home as often as desired, except that this exception shall not apply to any
person who makes available for rental or occupancy more than four sleeping
rooms to a person or family within his or her home.
4. Nothing in this article regarding familial status shall apply with respect to
housing for older persons. For purposes of this subsection, “housing for older
persons” shall mean housing:
(a) Provided under any state program that the commission determines
is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons or defined in the
program;
(b) Intended for and solely occupied by persons 62 years of age or
older; or
(c) Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55
years of age or older per unit.
SECTION 5-408: INFORMATION
The city clerk, upon request, shall make available to an aggrieved person, or any
other person, information regarding the Nebraska Fair Housing Act and the
Nebraska Equal Opportunity Commission without cost to such individual. (Ref.
Neb. Rev. Stat. §20-301 through 20-322)
ARTICLE V - MINIMUM RENTAL HOUSING STANDARDS
SECTION 5-501: RENTAL HOUSING STANDARDS CODE
To provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe and
stable design, construction, uses of materials, and maintenance of rental
residential dwellings, the regulations promulgated by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development and known as Section 8 Existing Housing
Program, published by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
and printed in book or pamphlet form, is hereby incorporated by reference in
addition to all amended editions as though printed in full herein insofar as said
regulations do not conflict with the statutes of the State of Nebraska. The City
Council shall have the authority to establish regulations differing from the Section
8 Existing Housing Program, by resolution, and any such resolution is hereby
incorporated by reference, together with the regulations known as Section 8
Existing Housing Program, shall constitute the Rental Housing Standards Code
for the City. Three copies of the Rental Housing Standards Code are on file at
the office of the city clerk and are available for public inspection at any
reasonable time. The provisions of the Rental Housing Standards Code shall be
controlling throughout the City. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §17-1001, 18-132, 19-902)
SECTION 5-502: INSPECTION
To insure compliance with the Rental Housing Standards Code, every residential
dwelling unit within the City which is not occupied by a person who is a record
title owner of said unit shall be inspected by the City and brought into compliance
with this Code by the owner of said dwelling at the time of any change of
occupancy of said unit.
SECTION 5-503: INSPECTION; EXEMPTION, FEE
An inspection shall not be required if, within the two-year period immediately
preceding the change of occupancy, a change of occupancy occurred in the unit
which resulted in an inspection and certification of compliance with the Rental
Housing Standards Code. All costs of compliance with the Rental Housing
Standards Code shall be paid by the owner of the unit. The owner of the
dwelling shall pay a fee of $50.00 for the inspection required under this section.
SECTION 5-504: TIME LIMIT TO BRING OCCUPANCY INTO COMPLIANCE;
EXTENSION, FEE
The owner of a residential dwelling unit shall have a period of 90 days from the
date of initial inspection to bring the unit into compliance with the code. An
additional 60-day period shall be allowed, upon payment of a fee of $25.00 for
said extension to the City, provided that the extension fee must be paid prior to
the expiration of the initial 90-day period. Any further extension request will be
charged an additional $25.00 fee and must be approved by the City Council prior
to the expiration of the original period allowed for compliance. The City Council
shall have the authority to grant or deny requests for additional extensions of
time.
SECTION 5-505: VIOLATION
An owner of a residential dwelling unit who has failed to report a change of
occupancy which requires an inspection; failed to allow the City to inspect a
residential dwelling covered by this section; failed to pay fees required under this
section; failed to bring a dwelling into compliance with the Code within the time
allowed to said owner; or an owner in violation of any other aspect of this
ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. A new violation shall be deemed to
have been committed for each 24 hours of continued non-compliance.
SECTION 5-506: INSPECTION ORDERED BY HOUSING INSPECTOR
Notwithstanding the above, the city housing inspector shall have the authority to
order an inspection of any residential dwelling covered by this section for the
purpose of determining whether or not said dwelling is in compliance with the
Code. No fee shall be required for the inspection ordered by the housing
inspector under this provision. If it is determined, after any such inspection, that
a dwelling is not in compliance, a $50.00 inspection fee will be collected and all
owners of said dwelling shall be in violation of this section until said dwelling is
brought into compliance with this section, and a new violation shall be deemed to
have been committed for each 24 hours of continued non-compliance.
SECTION 5-507: CONTINUOUS VIOLATION; NUISANCE, ABATEMENT
Any violation of this ordinance or any part thereof which continues for more than
seven consecutive days is hereby declared to be a threat to public safety and a
nuisance. The City may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin, prevent, abate and
remove the same in the manner provided by law. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §17-123,
18-1720)
ARTICLE VI - TRAILER REGULATIONS
SECTION 5-601: TERMS DEFINED
The term "court" as used in this code shall mean and include any tract of land
upon which are located two or more trailers or other temporary enclosures used
for living purposes, whether a charge is made or not.
The term "trailer" as used in this code shall mean and include any vehicle
commonly designated as such, also called "mobile home," and constructed to
permit occupancy for sleeping, advertising, or business purposes, and so
designed that it is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on
the public ways, and does not comply with the city building code.
The term "unit space" as used in this code shall mean and include the ground
space that is actually set aside in a trailer court for the occupancy by and use of
a trailer or other temporary dwelling.
SECTION 5-602: TRAILER COURTS; PERMIT REQUIRED
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish a trailer court within the
City or within two miles beyond the corporate limits until he or she shall
first obtain a permit for such purpose from the City Council. The city clerk
shall provide permit application forms, which shall require: the name and
address of the applicant; the name and residence of the proposed
manager of the premises; the location and size of the court; a plat of the
court showing the number and location of each unit space; the water
service available; the toilet or sewer facilities available; the proposed
means of disposing of garbage; the electrical current sources available;
and the type of buildings proposed to be erected thereon.
Upon receipt of any such permit application, the city clerk shall furnish the
city inspector with a copy of the said application. The city inspector shall
then examine the premises involved and the proposed unit spaces for the
purpose of determining whether the proposed court will violate any of the
provisions of the municipal code or the laws of the State of Nebraska.
The city inspector's findings shall then be submitted in writing to the City
Council.
The City Council at its next regular meeting shall consider such
application, and if the members find that all of the provisions of this
ordinance are complied with, shall issue a permit for the operation of the
trailer court. In the event that any of the provisions of this ordinance shall
not be provided for in such permit application, then such trailer court
permit shall not be issued until the City Council receives assurances that
all provisions of this ordinance shall be complied with.
In the event that all of the terms and conditions of this ordinance have
been complied with and the City Council votes to permit such trailer court
to exist, then the city clerk shall issue a permit to such applicant, which
permit shall be for a one-year period, to be renewed annually. All permits
shall run from March 1 through the last day of February of the next
calendar year.
SECTION 5-603: PERMIT RENEWAL
Applications for renewal, and all required documentation associated
therewith, shall be due by December 31. If the same together with the
applicable fee are not received by the City Clerk by December 31, then
the applicant shall be assessed a late fee in the amount of $100 on the
immediately following January 1 and on the first day of each month
thereafter until the application, required documentation, fee, and late fee
are received by the City Clerk; provided, applicant shall remain subject to
the penalty set forth in Section 5-1101 for each day applicant operates a
trailer court without such permit on and after March 1.
The annual fee for such permit shall be set by resolution of the City
Council and shall be on file at the office of the city clerk. Except to the
extent provided in this Section, the same procedure shall apply for the
renewal of a permit as was heretofore prescribed for the issuance of a
permit. No permit shall be issued for any period longer than one year.
SECTION 5-604: ASSIGNING PERMIT PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful to assign or transfer without the written consent of the city
clerk and the authorization of the City Council any permit issued by the City for
the purpose of allowing the operation of a trailer court.
SECTION 5-605: PERMIT REVOCATION
Any permit granted under the provisions of this code shall be subject to
revocation at any time by the City Council. Notice shall be served by the city
clerk upon the person holding such permit, setting forth the manner in which the
owner or operator of the court has failed to comply with the provisions of this
code and allowing him/her an opportunity for a hearing before the City Council at
a day and hour therein specified. The said hearing shall be held not less than
three days after the personal service of the said notice. The owner or operator
shall then be required to show cause why the said permit should not be revoked.
Any owner or operator allowed an appearance under the provisions herein shall
have the right to be represented by counsel.
SECTION 5-606: UNIT SPACES
Each trailer home shall be located on a site not less than 1,000 square feet. No
trailer home shall be parked closer than five feet to the lot lines of the trailer court
without the permission of the City Council; provided, nothing herein shall be
construed to allow any trailer to be parked or located in such a manner as to
obstruct the traffic on or the use of any public way or public property, and in the
event that the lot line is adjacent to the public ways and property, the trailer shall
be parked not less than ten feet therefrom. Each unit space shall abut a
driveway of not less than 20 feet in width and shall have unobstructed access to
a public street or alley. There shall be an open space of at least ten feet
between the ends of the trailers located thereon, and there shall be on each
trailer space an additional parking space for one vehicle for each unit in said
court.
SECTION 5-607: DRAINAGE
Every trailer court shall be located on a well-drained area and the premises of
such shall be properly graded so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant
water thereon.
SECTION 5-608: PLUMBING FACILITIES
The owner or operator of a trailer court shall make available connections with the
sewer system for the trailer homes thereon unless other arrangements are
agreed to in writing by the City Council.
SECTION 5-609: WASTE DISPOSAL
For garbage and refuse collection, tight receptacles of the type permitted for use
within the City shall be provided for each unit space within the trailer court.
SECTION 5-610: ELECTRICAL SUPPLY
Each unit space within the trailer court shall be provided with an electrical service
outlet installed and maintained in accordance with the current issue of the
National Electrical Code.
SECTION 5-611: UNLAWFUL PARKING
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to place, allow to be placed, or
occupy for any purpose a trailer home within the City or two miles beyond the
corporate limits unless the same shall be located within the boundaries of a duly
established trailer court. Modular homes shall not be subject to this prohibition if
they have their towing tongue and axles removed and are placed on a permanent
concrete or concrete block foundation.
SECTION 5-612: CONVERSION
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove the wheels or transporting device
from any trailer or to otherwise affix the said trailer to the ground without first
obtaining a written permit from the City Council; provided, the trailer so converted
shall be subject to all rules and regulations prescribed herein for other habitable
dwellings. Applications for such permits shall be made through the city clerk.
SECTION 5-613: COURTS LIMITED
There shall be a limit of three trailer home courts which shall be licensed within
the City or within two miles beyond the corporate limits.
SECTION 5-614: LIABILITY
The owner of the property upon which any trailer or trailer court is located shall
be primarily liable for any violations of the provisions of this article and shall also
be primarily liable for the cost of any and all utility services provided by the City to
the owner or occupant of a trailer located thereon.
SECTION 5-615: INSPECTIONS
It shall be the duty of the owner, manager, or occupants of any public trailer court
to allow any city officials to enter upon the premises for the purpose of inspection
at any reasonable time.
SECTION 5-616: COMPLIANCE WITH NUISANCE ORDINANCES
It shall be the duty of the licensee to assure that the Trailer Park licensed
by the City Council is, at all times, compliant with the nuisance ordinances
of the City of Plattsmouth, Nebraska.
ARTICLE VII - RAILROAD COMPANIES
SECTION 5-701: DRAINAGE
Any railroad company doing business within the City shall construct and keep in
repair ditches, drains and culverts along and under its railroad tracks at all places
within the City where the same may be necessary for the escape of water and
the proper draining of the areas on either side of the tracks. When any such
drainage, ditch or culvert may be necessary, the City Council may, by resolution,
call upon the proper company to construct or repair the ditch, drain or culvert and
to put the same in a proper condition for the escape of water. A copy of such
resolution shall be served upon the local agent of the company. The provisions
of the resolution shall be carried out within 14 days, and failure thereof for each
24-hour period thereafter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
SECTION 5-702: SAFE CROSSINGS
It shall be the duty of every railroad company doing business in or traveling
through the City to keep in a suitable and safe condition the crossings and rightof-
way in the City. If any such crossing shall at any time fall into disrepair and
become unsafe or inconvenient for public travel, the City Council may, by
resolution, call upon the said company to make whatever repairs that they may
deem necessary to correct the dangerous condition. Notice of the said resolution
shall be served upon the local agent of the said company. In the event that the
railroad shall fail or neglect to repair and correct the said condition as aforesaid
within 48 hours, neglect for each 24 hours thereafter shall be deemed and is
hereby made a separate and distinct offense against the provisions herein. (Ref.
Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-212)
SECTION 5-703: SPEED
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, its employees, agents or servants
to operate a railroad engine, locomotive or other vehicle on its tracks within or
through the City at a speed in excess of 45 miles per hour.
SECTION 5-704: OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, its employees, agents or servants
operating a railroad through the City to obstruct traffic on any public street,
except in the event of an emergency, for a period longer than 15 minutes at one
time.
SECTION 5-705: OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT CROSSING PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company to obstruct or obscure the traveling
public’s view by storing or parking any railroad car on a railroad track within 25
feet of the crossing of any such railroad track and a public road within the
corporate limits of the City; provided, however, in no instance shall any person
who is authorized to control the movement of such railroad car within such
distance be prevented from reasonably conducting his/her business. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat. §16-212)
ARTICLE VIII - SALVAGE YARDS
SECTION 5-801: DEFINITIONS
"Junk" as used in this article shall include scrap metals; scrap materials, whether
liquids, solids, or gases; branches of trees; and dismantled or wrecked
automobiles, tractors and machinery or parts thereof.
"Junk collector" shall be construed to mean any person going from place to place
or house to house collecting or buying iron, copper, brass and zinc scraps, rags,
bottles or old paper, and selling the same to a junk dealer.
"Junk dealer" is hereby defined as meaning and including any person engaged
in the business of buying, selling, receiving, collecting or dealing in metals of any
kind and in any form including scrap iron, bottles, rags and used tires; the
dismantling or taking apart of automobiles, other than for repair, or the wrecking
of automobiles; the storage of automobiles unfit for operation; the storage of
automobile bodies and parts thereof; the storage of automobiles or parts thereof
kept for salvage; the storage of scraps from automobiles; and/or the storage of
iron, metals or junk.
"Junk yard" is hereby defined as meaning and shall include any place in the City
where or from which any person shall conduct, engage in and/or carry on the
business of junk dealer as herein defined.
SECTION 5-802: REGULATION
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate or hold open for public use
any junk yard as herein defined without first obtaining a license to do so from the
City. Application for a license to own, operate or hold open for public use any
junk yard shall be made in writing to the city administrator and shall require such
information and documents, or copies thereof, that the city administrator deems
necessary to determine whether to grant or reject the said application. Upon
approval of the application, the city clerk shall issue the license upon the
payment of a fee set by resolution of the City Council. The licensee shall then be
subject to the city zoning ordinance and any occupation taxes, bond
requirements and other rules and regulations which the City Council may
determine to be beneficial to the City. Any such bond shall be set by resolution
of the City Council and will be conditioned upon the faithful observance of the
provisions of this Code. The bond shall be held for the benefit of any person who
may suffer damage by the improper management of the said junk yard.
SECTION 5-803: OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY
The owner of the premise upon which a junk yard is located shall be equally
responsible with the operator, director or employee thereof to see that the
provisions of this Code will not be violated. In the event the provisions of this
Code are violated, he/she shall be equally liable with the operator, director or
employee for the said violation of the provisions herein.
SECTION 5-804: INSPECTIONS; NOTICE OF HEALTH HAZARD
The city police or health official shall have the power and authority to inspect and
examine the premise on which a junk yard is located; provided that the said
inspection is at a reasonable time. Upon a finding that the owner, operator,
director or employee has allowed a health or safety hazard to develop, the health
official or city police shall give written notice to the owner to remove the said
health hazard within 30 days.
SECTION 5-805: NUISANCE
Any junk yard that becomes a danger to the public health or is not operated in
the manner herein provided shall be deemed to be a public nuisance after the 30
days grace period as provided in Section 5-804. The city police or health official
shall then request the city attorney to prosecute the owner, operator, director or
employee of the said junk yard for violation of the provisions of this article.
SECTION 5-806: RECORDS
Any person who shall be engaged in the junk business shall keep a book which
shall be legibly written in ink at the time of any purchase of goods or articles at
the time the same are received and the name, residence, and description of the
person doing the selling. The said book, as well as the articles purchased, shall,
at all reasonable times, be subject to the inspection of the city police or city
administrator.
SECTION 5-807: RODENTS
Any person who owns, operates, directs or is employed at a junkyard shall make
a diligent and continuous effort to exterminate all rats, mice and other harmful
rodents frequenting the said junk yard.
SECTION 5-808: ADDITIONAL JUNKYARDS PROHIBITED
There shall be no additional junk yards licensed within the City or within the twomile
zoning jurisdiction of the City.
ARTICLE IX - LOTTERY
SECTION 5-901: PARTICIPATION; RESTRICTIONS
1. No person under 19 years of age shall play or participate in any way in the
lottery established and conducted by the City.
2. No owner or officer of a lottery operator with whom the City contracts to
conduct its lottery shall play any lottery conducted by the City. No owner or
officer of an authorized sales outlet location for the City shall play any lottery
conducted by the City. No employee or agent of the City, lottery operator, or
authorized sales outlet location shall play the lottery of the City for which
he/she performs work during such time as he/she is actually working at such
lottery or while on duty.
3. Nothing shall prohibit any member of the City Council, a city official, or the
immediate family of such member or official from playing the lottery
conducted by the City; provided that such person is 19 years of age or older.
4. For purposes of this section, immediate family shall mean (a) a person who is
related to the member or official by blood, marriage, or adoption and resides
in the same household, or (b) a person who is claimed by the member or
official, or spouse of the member or official as a dependent for federal income
tax purposes. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §9-646)
SECTION 5-902 LOTTERY; SALES OUTLET LOCATIONS; APPROVAL
REQUIRED; QUALIFICATION STANDARDS
1. The lottery operator with whom the Plattsmouth City Council contracts to
conduct its lottery shall not operate the lottery at a sales outlet location other than
the location of the lottery operator without prior approval of the sales outlet
location by the City Council. The City Council shall approve or disapprove each
sales outlet location and individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, limited
liability company, or corporation which desires to conduct the lottery at its sales
outlet location solely on the basis of the qualification standards prescribed in
division Section 2 below.
2. Any individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, limited liability company, or
corporation which seeks to have its location approved as an authorized sales
outlet location shall:
(a) Obtain a retail liquor license for consumption on the premises
pursuant to Chapter 53, article 1, of the Nebraska Revised
Statutes;
(b) Not have been convicted of, forfeited bond upon a charge of, or
pleaded guilty or nolo contendere to any offense or crime, whether
a felony or a misdemeanor, involving any gambling activity or fraud,
theft, willful failure to make required payments or reports, or filing
false reports with a governmental agency at any level;
(c) Not have been convicted of, forfeited bond upon a charge of, or
pleaded guilty or nolo contendere to any felony other than those
described in section 2 (b) above within the 10 years preceding the
filing of the application;
(d) Not have had a gaming license revoked or canceled under the
Nebraska Bingo Act, the Nebraska County and City Lottery Act, the
Nebraska Lottery and Raffle Act, or the Nebraska Pickle Card
Lottery Act;
(e) Be fit, willing, and able to properly provide the service proposed
in conformance with all provisions and requirements of the
Nebraska County and City Lottery Act and the rules and regulations
adopted and promulgated pursuant to the act.
3. If the person seeking to have its location approved as an authorized sales
outlet location is a partnership, limited liability company, or corporation, the
qualification standards shall apply to every partner of such partnership, every
member of such limited liability company, every officer of such corporation and
every stockholder owning more than 10% of the stock of such corporation.
4. The City shall notify the Department of Revenue of all approved lottery
locations within 30 days of approval. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 9-642.01)
ARTICLE X - TOBACCO AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS SALES
SECTION 5-1001 DEFINITIONS
"Business" means any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation or other
business entity, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold.
"Minor" means any person under 18 years of age.
"Person" means any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee or other legal
entity.
"Self-service merchandising" means any open display of tobacco or tobacco
products and point-of-sale tobacco-related promotional products to which
customers have access without the assistance or intervention of an employee.
"Tobacco product" means any tobacco cigarette or cigar, pipe tobacco,
smokeless tobacco, chewing tobacco, or any other form of tobacco which may be
utilized for smoking, chewing, inhalation or other means of ingestion.
"Tobacco retailer" means any person or entity operating a store, stand, booth,
concession or other place which sells tobacco or tobacco products to customers
for consumption or use, whether utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco or
tobacco products or in which the sale of tobacco or tobacco products is
incidental.
"Tobacco vending machine" means any electronic or mechanical device utilizing
the insertion of money, whether coin or paper currency, or other things of value,
which dispenses or releases tobacco or tobacco products.
"Vendor-assisted access" means access to tobacco or tobacco products only
with the assistance of a store employee so that customers do not have direct
access to take possession without assistance from a store employee.
SECTION 5-1002: PROHIBITED ACTS; EXCEPTION
1. No person may (a) sell, permit to be sold, or offer for sale tobacco or tobacco
products by means other than vendor-assisted access, or (b) display tobacco
or tobacco products in a manner allowing customers access to tobacco or
tobacco products without vendor assistance.
2. No person subject to this ordinance shall sell, offer to sell or permit to be sold
any tobacco or tobacco product to an individual without requesting and
examining identification establishing the purchaser's age as 18 years or
greater.
3. This ordinance shall not apply to tobacco vending machine regulated by
Nebraska state law, tobacco retail stores or to any business, retailer or
establishment which is licensed by the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission
for a dispensing license and required to be posted preventing any minors
from access to the premises, nor shall this ordinance apply to other forms of
sale or distribution which is specifically allowed by federal or state law. This
exception shall not apply to the sale of tobacco or tobacco products by
vending machine or other similar distribution method which is not regulated by
the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission or by other state or federal laws.
SECTION 5-1003: DUTIES
Any person selling or tobacco products shall:
1. Post plainly visible signs at points of purchase or display of tobacco or
tobacco products stating that the sale of tobacco or tobacco products to
persons under the age of 18 is prohibited and that photo identification is
required for purchase.
2. Request identification from any person buying tobacco or tobacco products
which shows the purchaser is of legal age unless the seller has a reasonable
basis for determining that the buyer is of legal age to purchase tobacco or
tobacco products.
3. Except as otherwise provided in this article, vendors of tobacco or tobacco
products shall eliminate self-service merchandising.
ARTICLE XI - PENAL PROVISION
SECTION 5-1101: VIOLATION; PENALTY
Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this chapter set forth at full length herein or incorporated by
reference shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not more than $500.00 for each offense. A new violation shall be
deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of such failure to comply.
ARTICLE XII – SIDEWALK CAFÉ
SECTION 5-1201 OPERATION OF SIDEWALK CAFÉ WITHOUT PERMIT
PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to own or operate a sidewalk café on
the public sidewalks of the City of Plattsmouth, Nebraska, without first having
obtained written permit therefore from the city clerk. Temporary sidewalk and
street vendors subject to Chapter V, Article II, are exempt from this section.
SECTION 5-1202 DEFINITIONS
Abutting property owners or occupants. Any owner or occupant of property,
which abuts the subject sidewalk café site excluding public right-of-way, and any
other person who has requested in writing to be provided such notice.
Alcoholic beverages. Any beverage derived from a process of distillation and or
fermentation.
Adjacent sidewalk area. That portion of the public sidewalk between the curb
line and the property line demarcated by extending the side building line of the
premises until they intersect with the curb.
Food. Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance or ingredient, used or
intended for use in whole or in part for human consumption, and shall include
nonalcoholic beverages allowed to be sold in accordance with this article, but this
definition shall not include alcoholic beverages.
Operation of a sidewalk café. Serving food or alcoholic beverages from a
business establishment to patrons seated at tables located within the permitted
sidewalk area adjacent to said business.
Sidewalk Café. A permitted fenced area located in the adjacent sidewalk area
intended for the operation of a sidewalk café.
Temporary Sidewalk or Street Vendors. Non-resident sales vendors serving food
for a short period of time and outside of a permitted sidewalk café.
SECTION 5-1203 PERMIT FEE: DISPOSITION OF FUNDS
1. The city clerk shall at the time a person or entity makes application to operate
a sidewalk café in Plattsmouth, charge and collect a fee of one-hundred dollars
($100.00). All such fees collected shall be credited to the general fund of the
city, to be used to defray the costs and expense of administering this Chapter
and thereafter for general purposes.
SECTION 5-1204 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
1. The application to obtain a permit to operate a sidewalk café shall be made at
city hall on a form provided by the city clerk and shall contain:
a. A completed application, signed by the operator of the
establishment and if different from the owner of property, then the
property owner also shall sign the application.
b. A diagram of the sidewalk area to be used including the
dimensions thereof, and a description of the tables and materials to
be used.
c. A certificate of insurance showing the applicant has acquired
public liability, food products liability and property damage
insurance in the sum of not less than five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) combined single limit, which insurance may not be
cancelled prior to the expiration of the permit without providing thirty
(30) days written notice to the city. The City of Plattsmouth,
Nebraska, shall be named a secondary insured party on such
policy.
d. By signing the application, the applicant shall agree to indemnify
the City of Plattsmouth, its elected officials, and employees, for any
claims for damages to property, or injury to persons, which may
occur in connection with any activity carried on under the terms of
the permit, pursuant to the indemnity provision contained within the
application form.
SECTION 5-1205 REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS
1. The building inspector and zoning administrator shall review all applications
for compliance with the following criteria and shall recommend approval or denial
to the city council, which shall then approve or deny each application.
a. The operation of a sidewalk café is limited to structures which
abut a public sidewalk, and which are located in the Central
Business District (downtown business).
b. Sidewalk Café locations shall be limited to one of the following
per permitted use (see Figure 1 attached for illustrative descriptions
of locations A, B, C, D, and E):
(1) Sidewalk café allowed on decorative brick
banding six feet wide, leaving full eight feet width for
sidewalk.
(2) Sidewalk café allowed on decorative brick
banding, plus spillover onto sidewalk giving a larger
eight foot width for café use. Sidewalk through way
shall always be at least six feet.
(3) Sidewalk café location allowed in the six feet
closest to the building. There shall be a minimum of
six feet remaining for pedestrian through way. Cafes
in this area shall be located so as to assure a
minimum of six feet remains for pedestrian through
way around street light poles, edge of planter boxes,
benches, and other permanent fixtures and
appurtenances.
(4) Sidewalk café location allowed on decorative
brick banding six feet wide plus two feet closest to the
building may be used for private establishment use to
locate small table, chairs, dining material storage, etc.
(5) Sidewalk café location of three feet closest to the
building for small table or chairs.
c. The type of barrier, construction materials and style, and all
items placed in the designated sidewalk area shall be subject to
approval in the application process.
d. The sidewalk café shall be located at least five (5) feet from
driveways and alleys, and at least ten (10) feet from intersections.
e. Following approval, the sidewalk café boundaries shall be
marked on the sidewalk, by city employees, to identify the area
designated.
SECTION 5-1206 CONDITIONS OF OPERATION
1. Each permit issued shall terminate December 31st of the year in which it is
issued. Such permits may be renewed up to 30 days before expiration.
2. The permit shall be personal to the applicant only and is not transferable in
any manner.
3. A sidewalk café permit shall only authorize food and alcoholic beverage
service in the sidewalk café. Regardless of what other activity may take place
inside the establishment pursuant to license or permit, such activity shall not be
allowed in the sidewalk café by virtue of the sidewalk café permit.
4. The permit is specifically limited to the area approved or as modified by the
city council, and will include a diagram indicating the area, including dimensions,
approved for the sidewalk café.
5. A sidewalk café may be operated only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
midnight.
6. The sidewalk and all elements placed there shall at all times be maintained in
a clean and orderly condition. Only those elements approved by the City Council
and specifically authorized by the permit are allowed on the public sidewalk.
7. Storage of tables and chairs will not be allowed on the public sidewalk except
inside of an approved barrier. Furnishings may not be attached, even in a
temporary manner, to the sidewalk or other public property, except that covers
and railings may be secured by means of flush-mounted anchors in an approved
manner. The property owner who signs the application, regardless of whether
the applicant/operator, shall be responsible for restoration of the sidewalk or
public right-of-way if any damage results from the operation of a sidewalk café.
8. Trash containers shall be placed within all operating sidewalk cafes.
9. No signs shall be attached to any furniture, gates, fencing, or other structure
related to the operation of a sidewalk café, except as provided below and as the
same relate to the purchase and consumption of alcoholic beverages or as
required by state law. Signage on umbrellas and awnings may be approved
when consistent with Article Ten of the City of Plattsmouth Land Development
Ordinance.
10. Tables, chairs, and other structures associated with the sidewalk café shall
be kept free of litter and other debris at all times.
11. Sidewalk cafes and adjoining properties shall remain clear of litter, food
scraps and soiled dishes. All areas surrounding a sidewalk café shall be policed
by the permitee or the permitee’s staff to ensure removal of all wrappings, litter,
debris and food. Daily sanitary cleaning is required. Sidewalks shall be washed
down on a daily basis, and food from the Café shall not be disposed of in City
containers, nor washed into the storm sewers.
12. No activity is allowed within the limits of the sidewalk café outside of its
approved operating hours as noted on the respective permit
13. The sidewalk café permit shall be visibly displayed on the premises.
14. The City of Plattsmouth has the right to repeal or amend this article and
thereby terminate or modify all sidewalk café operations. No permittee shall gain
any property right in the continued private commercial use of the public sidewalk.
15. No portion of the Sidewalk Café can be elevated in the style of a deck.
16. Sidewalk cafes cannot operate under scaffolding or construction canopies.
17. Sidewalk cafes shall meet all requirements of the State of Nebraska
Department of Health, and if applicable those of the Nebraska Liquor Control
Commission.
18. The sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages may be permitted in the
designated sidewalk area so long as the following conditions are met:
a. The City enters into an agreement of revocable consent with the
applicant to authorize the use of that portion of the sidewalk where
the alcohol will be served.
b. A license to sell alcohol has been obtained from the Nebraska
Liquor Control Commission and includes the area of the sidewalk
café.
c. The fence shall be not less than thirty (30) inches in height nor
more than forty-two (42) inches in height and easily removable from
the sidewalk. Provided, however, that to the extent that the
Nebraska Liquor Control Commission mandates other guidelines,
the permitee shall comply with the Commission mandates.
d. All fences used for sidewalk cafes shall also conform to local
building codes, provided that the Nebraska Liquor Control
Commission mandates do not conflict therewith.
e. Outdoor areas serving alcoholic beverages shall be supervised
by employees of the establishment. A one-foot square sign reading
“no food or beverages allowed beyond railing” shall be posted at a
conspicuous location within the perimeter of outdoor cafes serving
alcoholic beverages.
SECTION 5-1207 DENIAL, REVOCATION, OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT
1. The City Council may deny, revoke, or suspend the permit upon finding that
any provision of this article or condition of approval will be or has been violated.
2. Upon denial, revocation, or suspension the city council shall give notice of
such action to the applicant or permittee, in writing, stating the action, which has
been taken and the reason therefore. The action shall be effective immediately,
but the applicant or permittee may make written request, within ten (10) calendar
days after the notice is issued, for a hearing by the city council. Upon hearing
the matter, the city council shall render a final decision concerning the permit.

CHAPTER VI PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
ARTICLE I – MUNICIPAL PROPERTY
6-101 DEFINITIONS
6-102 MAINTENANCE AND CONTROL
6-103 OBSTRUCTIONS
6-104 REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTIONS NEAR UTILITIES
6-105 PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS
6-106 COUNCIL APPROVAL FOR IMPROVEMENTS, PARKING
6-107 UNLAWFUL STORAGE OR BUSINESS USE
6-108 SALE AND CONVEYANCE
6-109 ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY; APPRAISAL
6-110 ACQUISITION OF REAL PROPERTY
6-111 DESTRUCTION OR DAMAGE TO PROPERTY
ARTICLE II – SIDEWALKS
6-201 OVERHANGING BRANCHES
6-202 KEPT CLEAN; NOTICE
6-203 MAINTENANCE
6-204 REPAIR
6-205 CONSTRUCTION BY OWNER
6-206 MUNICIPAL CONSTRUCTION
6-207 CONSTRUCTION BIDS
6-208 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS
6-209 DANGEROUS STAIRWAY OR OPEN GRATE
6-210 TREE PLANTING
ARTICLE III – STREETS
6-301 NAMES AND NUMBERS
6-302 WIDENING AND OPENING
6-303 DRIVING STAKES
6-304 MIXING CONCRETE
6-305 HARMFUL LIQUIDS
6-306 EAVE AND GUTTER SPOUTS
6-307 HEAVY EQUIPMENT
6-308 CONSTRUCTION NOTICE
6-309 PIPELINES AND WIRES
6-310 CONSTRUCTION ASSESSMENT
6-311 PETITION FOR IMPROVEMENTS
6-312 DEFERRAL FROM SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
6-313 VACATING PUBLIC WAYS; DEFINITIONS AND
ASCERTAINING DAMAGES
6-314 VACATING PUBLIC WAYS; PROCEDURE
6-315 INTERSECTION IMPROVEMENTS
6-316 IMPROVEMENTS; ACCEPTANCE BY ENGINEER
6-317 CUTTING PAVING, CURB OR SIDEWALK
6-318 PROTECTION OF PAVING
6-319 UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL OF MARKERS
6-320 UNLAWFUL ACCUMULATION OF DIRT OR OTHER
MATERIAL
6-321 WASHING VEHICLES ON STREETS
6-322 EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL; SUPERVISION OF CITY
OFFICIALS
6-323 EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL; COMPLIANCE
6-324 EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL; BOND
6-325 EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL; SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
6-326 EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL; TIME LIMITATIONS
6-327 EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL; PERMIT APPLICATION,
REQUIREMENTS
ARTICLE IV – PENAL PROVISION
6-401 VIOLATION; PENALTY
CHAPTER VI PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
ARTICLE I - MUNICIPAL PROPERTY
SECTION 6-101: DEFINITIONS
The following definitions shall be applied throughout this chapter. When no definition
is specified, the normal dictionary usage of the word shall apply.
The term "sidewalk space," as used herein, shall mean that portion of a street
between curb lines and adjacent property lines.
SECTION 6-102: MAINTENANCE AND CONTROL
The City Council shall have the care, supervision and control of all public highways,
bridges, streets, alleys, public squares and commons within the City, and
shall cause the same to be kept open, in repair and free from nuisances. (Ref.
Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-201)
SECTION 6-103: OBSTRUCTIONS
Trees and shrubs growing upon public property may be removed or trimmed at
any time by the City. Trees and shrubs growing on private property which overhang
public property may be trimmed by the City to remove such overhanging
growth. Such trimming operation shall not give rise to a cause of action against
the City for damage to the affected tree or shrub. It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to obstruct or encumber any of the streets, alleys or sidewalks
of the City by fences, gates, buildings, structures or otherwise. (Ref.
Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-207)
SECTION 6-104: REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTIONS NEAR UTILITIES
The City or any public utility affected may cause the trimming or removal of any
tree or shrub growing on or over any public right-of-way so close as to interfere
with the maintenance of any utility wires or pipes. Whenever possible, notice of
the intention of such removal shall be given to the owner or occupant prior to
trimming or removal.
SECTION 6-105 PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS
Persons engaged in the erection, construction, reconstruction, wrecking or repair
of any building, or the construction or repair of a sidewalk along any street, may
occupy the public street space with such building material and equipment as long
as necessary if such persons shall make application to and receive a permit in
writing from the Public Works Director or his/her designee to do so; provided, no
permit for the occupancy of the sidewalk space, and more than 1/3 of the roadway
of the public space adjacent to the real estate on which said building is to be
constructed, erected, reconstructed, wrecked or repaired shall be granted; and
provided further, a suitable passageway for pedestrians shall be maintained within
the public space included in the permit, which space shall be protected and
lighted in the manner required by the street and property maintenance superintendent.
SECTION 6-106: COUNCIL APPROVAL FOR IMPROVEMENTS, PARKING
The City Council may, by resolution or ordinance, order or permit the use of any
area which is part of the city right-of-way for parking or improvements by an adjoining
owner when, in the judgment of the City Council, such portion of any
street right-of-way shall not be necessarily required for actual travel. The City
Council may, at the adoption of such ordinance or resolution, impose conditions
of approval and limit the period of such approved use. In any event, any such
approved use shall require an annual renewal thereof by application to the office
of the city clerk, but renewal shall not require City Council approval unless otherwise
described in the grant or permit or by other City Council action.
SECTION 6-107: UNLAWFUL STORAGE OR BUSINESS USE
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any public property for storage or business
purposes of any kind or nature except as may be specifically permitted by
any other section in this Code.
SECTION 6-108 SALE AND CONVEYANCE
Real estate now owned or hereafter owned by the City may be conveyed without
consideration to the State of Nebraska for state armory sites or, if acquired for
state armory sites, such property shall be conveyed strictly in accordance with
the conditions of Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-1001 to 18-1006. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat.
§16-202)
The power to sell and convey any real estate owned by the City, including land
used for park purposes and public squares, except real property used in the operation
of public utilities or real estate for state armory sites for the use of the
State of Nebraska as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-201, shall be exercised by
ordinance directing the conveyance of such real estate and the manner and
terms thereof.
Notice of such sale and the terms thereof shall be published for three consecutive
weeks in a legal newspaper published in or of general circulation in the City
immediately after the passage and publication of such ordinance.
If within 30 days after the passage and publication of such ordinance, a remonstrance
against such sale, signed by registered voters of the City equal in number
to 30% of the registered voters of the City voting at the last regular city election
held therein, is filed with the City Council, such property shall not then, nor
within one year thereafter, be sold. If the date for filing the remonstrance falls
upon a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the signatures shall be collected within
the 30 day period, but the filing shall be considered timely if filed or postmarked
on or before the next business day.
Upon receipt of the remonstrance, the City Council, with the aid and assistance
of the election commissioner or county clerk, shall determine the validity and sufficiency
of signatures on the remonstrance. The City Council shall deliver the
remonstrance to the election commissioner or county clerk by hand carrier, by
use of law enforcement officials or by certified mail, return receipt requested.
Upon the receipt of the remonstrance, the election commissioner or county clerk
shall issue to the City Council a written receipt that the remonstrance is in his/her
custody.
The election commissioner or county clerk shall compare the signature of each
person signing the remonstrance with the voter registration records to determine
if each signer was a registered voter on or before the date on which the remonstrance
was filed with the City Council. The election commissioner or county
clerk shall also compare the signer’s printed name, street and number or voting
precinct, and municipal or post office address with the voter registration records
to determine whether the signer was a registered voter. The signature and address
shall be presumed to be valid only if the election commissioner or county
clerk determines that the printed name, street and number or voting precinct,
municipal or post office address matches the registration records and that the
registration was received on or before the date on which the remonstrance was
filed with the City Council. The determinations of the election commissioner or
county clerk may be rebutted by any credible evidence which the City Council
finds sufficient. The express purpose of the comparison of names and addresses
with the voter registration records, in addition to helping to determine the
validity of the remonstrance, the sufficiency of the remonstrance, and the qualifications
of the signer, shall be to prevent fraud, deception and misrepresentation
in the remonstrance process.
Upon the completion of the comparison of names and addresses with the voter
registration records, the election commissioner or county clerk shall prepare in
writing a certification under seal setting forth the name and address of each signer
found not to be a registered voter and the signature page number and line
number where the name is found, and if the reason for the invalidity of signature
or address is other than the nonregistration of the signer, the election commissioner
or county clerk shall set forth the reason for the invalidity of the signature.
If the election commissioner or county clerk determines that a signer has affixed
his/her signature more than once to the remonstrance and that only one person
is registered by that name, the election commissioner or county clerk shall prepare
in writing a certification under seal setting forth the name of the duplicate
signature and shall count only the earliest date signature.
The election commissioner or county clerk shall certify to the City Council the
number of valid signatures necessary to constitute a valid remonstrance. The
election commissioner or county clerk shall deliver the remonstrance and the certifications
to the City Council within 40 days after the receipt of the remonstrance
from the City Council. The delivery shall be by hand carrier, by use of law enforcement
officials, or by certified mail, return receipt requested. No more than
20 signatures on one signature page shall be counted.
The City Council shall, within 30 days after the receipt of the remonstrance and
certifications from the election commissioner or county clerk, hold a public hearing
to review the remonstrance and certifications and receive testimony regarding
them. The City Council shall, following the hearing, vote on whether or not the
remonstrance is valid and shall uphold the remonstrance if sufficient valid signatures
have been received.
SECTION 6-109: ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY; APPRAISAL
The City shall not purchase, lease-purchase, or acquire for consideration real
property having an estimated value of $100,000.00 or more unless an appraisal
of such property has been performed by a certified real estate appraiser. (Ref.
Neb. Rev. Stat. §13-403)
SECTION 6-110: ACQUISITION OF REAL PROPERTY
When acquiring an interest in real property by purchase or eminent domain, the
City shall do so only after the City Council has authorized the acquisition by action
taken in a public meeting after notice and public hearing. (Ref. Neb. Rev.
Stat. §18-1755)
SECTION 6-111: DESTRUCTION OR DAMAGE TO PROPERTY
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally cause damage to any property
owned or under the jurisdiction of the City, or for any person to cause the destruction
or injury to sidewalk space or any improvement placed thereon by an
adjoining owner by driving any vehicle over the curb and onto such area or in any
other manner.
ARTICLE II - SIDEWALKS
SECTION 6-201 OVERHANGING BRANCHES
The owner or occupant of any lot, piece or parcel of ground abutting or adjacent
to any street or sidewalk over which tree branches or limbs extend shall at all
times keep such branches or limbs trimmed to the height of at least seven and
one-half feet above the surface of said walk. Whenever the limbs or branches of
any tree extend over sidewalks contrary to the provisions herein so as to interfere
with the lighting of the street from street lights, or with the convenience of the
public using said sidewalk, the City Council at any regular or special meeting
may pass a resolution ordering the owner or occupant to cut or remove said obstructions
within five days after having received a copy of the resolution. Such
resolution shall state that the City will remove said branches and charge the
costs thereof to the owner or occupant as a special assessment for improvements
as herein provided, if said resolution is not complied with. In the event the
property owner is a nonresident of the county in which the property lies, the City
shall, before levying any special assessment against that property, send to the
last known address of the nonresident property owner by means of certified mail,
return receipt requested, a copy of any notice required by law to be published.
The last known address shall be that address listed on the current tax rolls at the
time such required notice was first published.
SECTION 6-202 KEPT CLEAN; NOTICE
It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any lot or lots or the owner of any vacant
lot or lots within the corporate limits to permit any snow, sleet, ice, mud or other
substance to remain upon the sidewalks. All sidewalks within the business district
shall be cleaned within five hours after the cessation of a storm, unless the
storm or fall of snow shall have taken place during the night, in which case the
sidewalk shall be cleaned before 8:00 A.M. the following day. Sidewalks within
the residential areas of the City shall be cleaned within 12 hours after the cessation
of the storm.
Notice to remove snow, sleet, mud, ice or other substance shall be made upon
the owner of the premises, said notice to demand the removal of said substance
forthwith. If the person owning such premises is unknown or cannot be found, or
if any reasonable service cannot be made upon any such owner, agent or occupant
within the City, then such service of said notice shall be made by posting a
copy thereof in some conspicuous place on the premises; and in case the owner
or occupant shall fail to remove the snow, sleet, mud, ice or other substance,
then it shall be the duty of the Public Works Director or his/her designee to remove
such substance and the expense thereof shall be charged against the
property and the owner thereof, and may be recovered by proper action in the
name of the City or be chargeable against the property as a special assessment
for improvements. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-207, 16-663)
SECTION 6-203: MAINTENANCE
Every owner of any lot, lots or piece of land within the corporate limits shall at all
times keep and maintain the sidewalk along and contiguous to said lot, lots or
pieces of land, as the case may be, in good and proper repair and in a condition
reasonably safe for all travelers thereon. In the event that the owner or owners of
any lot, lots or lands, abutting on any street, avenue or part thereof shall fail to
construct or repair any sidewalk in front of his/her/their lot, lots or lands, within
the time and in the manner as directed and required herein after having received
due notice to do so, said owner shall be liable for all damages or injury occasioned
by reason of the defective or dangerous condition of any sidewalks or lack
thereof, and the City Council shall have power to cause any such sidewalks to be
constructed or repaired and assess the costs thereof against such property. In
the event the property owner is a nonresident of the county in which the property
lies, the City shall, before levying any special assessment against that property,
send to the last known address of the nonresident property owner by means of
certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of any notice required by law to be
published. The last known address shall be that address listed on the current tax
rolls at the time such required notice was first published. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat.
§16-661, 16-662)
SECTION 6-204: REPAIR
The City Council may require sidewalks of the City to be repaired. Notice to the
owners of property upon which such sidewalks in disrepair are located shall require
said owners to repair said sidewalks within 30 days after issuance of said
notice. Upon receiving notice, the owner of the property adjacent to the sidewalk
in disrepair shall immediately put up barricades and warning lights by night and
after receiving notice to repair the sidewalk shall forthwith contract with a competent
contractor to repair the sidewalk within the time specified herein. No special
assessment shall be levied against the property unless said owner shall neglect
or refuse to repair within the time prescribed; and in the event that such owner
fails to repair, the City shall cause the repairs to be made and assess the property
owner the expense of such repairs. In the event the property owner is a nonresident
of the county in which the property lies, the City shall, before levying any
special assessment against that property, send to the last known address of the
nonresident property owner by means of certified mail, return receipt requested,
a copy of any notice required by law to be published. The last known address
shall be that address listed on the current tax rolls at the time such required notice
was first published. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-661, 16-662)
SECTION 6-205: CONSTRUCTION BY OWNER
Any person desiring to construct, causing to be constructed or required by a
building permit of the City to construct any sidewalk, shall do so only as herein
provided. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any sidewalk without
first having obtained a permit.
Said owner shall make application in writing for a permit and file such application
in the office of the city clerk. The permit fee, which shall be set by resolution of
the City Council and on file at the office of the city clerk, shall be paid to the city
treasurer. The permit shall give a description of the lot or piece of land along
which the sidewalk is to be constructed. The building inspector shall issue the
desired permit unless good cause shall appear why said permit should be denied;
provided, if it is desirable to construct the sidewalk at a location, grade or
elevation other than that regularly prescribed, the building inspector shall submit
the application to the City Council, who shall determine whether the permit
should be granted or denied. When a permit is issued for the construction of a
sidewalk, the building inspector shall approve placement of stakes indicating the
location, grade and elevation of the sidewalk. It shall be unlawful for any person
to construct, or cause to be constructed, said sidewalk at any other location,
grade or elevation than so designated. All sidewalks shall be built and constructed
on the established grade or elevation, and if there is no established
grade, then on the grade or elevation indicated by the city official in charge of sidewalks.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-250)
SECTION 6-206: MUNICIPAL CONSTRUCTION
The City Council may, by resolution, order the construction of a sidewalk on any
lot or piece of ground within the City. Notice of the City Council's intention to
construct said sidewalk shall be given by the city clerk by publication of notice
one time in a legal newspaper of general circulation in the City.
A copy of said notice shall be personally served upon the occupant in possession
of such property, or, when personal service is not possible, said notice shall be
posted upon such premises 30 days prior to the commencement of construction.
The notice required in this section shall be prepared by the city attorney in accordance
with the provisions of this section. Such service shall include a form of return
evidencing personal service or posting as herein required.
Said notice shall notify the owner of the premises of the passage of the resolution
ordering him/her to construct or cause to be constructed a sidewalk within 30
days after the date of publication, and further, that if he/she fails to construct the
sidewalk or cause the same to be done within the time allowed, the City will
cause the sidewalk to be constructed and the cost thereof shall be levied and assessed
as a special tax against the premises; provided, the notice shall contain
the official estimate of the cost of said construction and no special assessment in
excess of this estimate shall be assessed against the property. In the event the
property owner is a nonresident of the county in which the property lies, the City
shall, before levying any special assessment against that property, send to the
last known address of the nonresident property owner by means of certified mail,
return receipt requested, a copy of any notice required by law to be published.
The last known address shall be that address listed on the current tax rolls at the
time such required notice was first published. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-250, 16-
664, 16-666)
SECTION 6-207: CONSTRUCTION BIDS
Whenever the City shall construct, widen, replace or reconstruct any sidewalk,
notice shall be prepared by the city clerk, specifying the work to be done and calling
for bids for doing such work and supplying the necessary materials and labor.
Such notice shall be published in at least one issue of a legal newspaper of general
circulation in the City; provided, bids so invited shall be filed in the office of
the city clerk within ten days after the date of publication. Bids shall be opened
at the next regular or special meeting of the City Council and the City Council
shall then award the work to the lowest responsible bidder.
SECTION 6-208 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS
All sidewalks shall be constructed in conformity with such specifications as are
adopted by the city engineer and approved by the City Council. The city engineer
may reject the use of any materials that do not comply with such requirements
and specifications or any materials that are lacking in quality, and it shall
be unlawful to construct any sidewalks from any material so rejected. In case
any lot owner within the City, under notice given or otherwise, shall construct a
sidewalk in violation of this chapter, the building inspector, or Public Works Director
or his/her designee, may stop the work of such construction and order the
same to be constructed in accordance with this chapter and order the work already
done to be changed. Upon the failure of such owner to change any such
work, the Public Works Director or his/her designee may forthwith change said
work and the expense of the same shall be assessed and taxed to said lot.
All sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet from the curb lines; provided that a
waiver of requirement of location of not less than four feet from curb line may be
granted by the City Council upon application therefor and under conditions acceptable
to the Council.
SECTION 6-209: DANGEROUS STAIRWAY OR OPEN GRATE
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any stairway, cellarway,
open basement, or open entrance thereto in or adjacent to any sidewalk,
pavement or street; provided that all such existing conditions may be permitted to
remain from and after the effective date of this Code if the person responsible
therefor shall protect the public from harm by installation of an appropriate balustrade
or coping, and shall furnish a bond as determined by the City Council for
compensation to any person suffering injury or damage by reason of the existence
of such open stairway, cellarway or basement. No sidewalk shall be constructed
containing any opening or grates.
SECTION 6-210: TREE PLANTING
Any person may plant trees in the sidewalk space if application is first made to
the City Council to do so. Applications shall be filed at the office of the city clerk
upon forms supplied by the City requesting such information as the City Council
may deem necessary to determine the propriety of granting a tree planting permit.
Notwithstanding such permit to plant, the City shall retain the right to remove
such tree or shrub when convenience or necessity demand such removal.

ARTICLE III - STREETS
SECTION 6-301: NAMES AND NUMBERS
All houses or buildings fronting on any of the public streets or alleys of the City
shall be numbered as follows:
1. Each house or lot with frontage of 22 feet shall be entitled to receive a number.
2. The numbering shall be done in accordance with what is known as the Philadelphia
system.
3. The numbers provided for in this section shall be at least three inches high in
size, of good and substantial material and placed on the front of the house or
building in a conspicuous place.
4. On all streets running east and west, the numbers shall commence at First
Street as a base street.
5. On all streets running north and south, the numbers shall commence at Main
Street as a base line.
6. The owner of each building shall place upon his/her house or building the
proper number as provided in this section.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-614)
SECTION 6-302: WIDENING OR OPENING
The City Council shall have the power to open, control, name, rename, extend,
widen, narrow, vacate, grade or pave, install curbs and gutters, or otherwise improve
and control any street, alley or lane within or without the limits of the City
and keep the same in good repair and condition, in any manner it may deem
proper. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-609)
SECTION 6-303 DRIVING STAKES
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any peg or stake of any kind into the
pavement in any street or alley without first procuring the written consent of the
Public Works Director or his/her designee.
SECTION 6-304: MIXING CONCRETE
It shall be unlawful for any person to mix any concrete or plastering material directly
on the street pavement for any reason whatsoever.
SECTION 6-305: HARMFUL LIQUIDS
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to leak in the gutter of any
street any waste gasoline, kerosene, or high lubricating oils, which damage or act
as a solvent upon said streets.
SECTION 6-306: EAVE AND GUTTER SPOUTS
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any dwelling
house or business building within the limits of the City where the said dwelling or
building abuts on any sidewalk or street without providing proper guttering and
eave spouts to receive the waste waters that collect on the said sidewalks and
streets. All eave spouts erected on any dwelling house or business building shall
be constructed to drain into the alleys or, where it is found to be impossible to
drain any eave spout into the alley, it shall be buried beneath the sidewalk and
drain into the street.
SECTION 6-307: HEAVY EQUIPMENT
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person(s) to move or operate heavy equipment
across any curb, gutter, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk or crossing on
any unpaved street without first having protected it with heavy plank sufficient in
strength to warrant against breakage or damage. Hereafter, it shall be unlawful to
run, drive, move, operate or convey over or across any paved street a vehicle,
machine or implement with sharp discs or sharp wheels that bear upon said
pavement with wheels having cutting edges; with wheels having lugs, protruding
parts, or bolts thereon that extend beyond a plain tire so as to cut, mark, mar, indent,
or otherwise injure or damage any pavement, gutter or curb; provided,
where heavy vehicles, structures, and machines move along paved or unpaved
streets the city police are hereby authorized and empowered to choose the route
over which the moving of such vehicles, structures or machines will be permitted
and allowed. Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to pneumatic
tires with metal or metal-type studs not exceeding five-sixteenths (5/16) of an
inch in diameter inclusive of the stud-casting with an average protrusion beyond
the tread surface of not more than seven sixty-fourths (7/64) of an inch, between
October 1st and April 15th; provided that school buses and emergency vehicles
shall be permitted to use metal or metal-type studs all year; farm machinery with
tires having protuberances which will not injure the streets shall be permissible;
and tire chains of reasonable proportions upon any vehicle when required for
safety because of snow, ice, or other conditions tending to cause a vehicle to
slide or skid shall also be permissible. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,250)
SECTION 6-308: CONSTRUCTION NOTICE
The city clerk shall notify the owners of real estate abutting a street, alley, or a
part thereof which is to be put under contract for paving or repaving. Notice shall
also be given to all gas, electric service and telephone companies and all consumers
of gas, water and sewer services which will be discontinued during such
construction. Said notice shall be published one time in a legal newspaper at
least 20 days prior to the beginning of such construction by the party undertaking
such construction; said notice shall state at what date connections must be made
and excavation completed. All gas, water, sewer and underground connections
must be made prior to the paving or repaving of the street under construction.
After expiration of such time, permits for excavation will not be issued, nor will
excavation be allowed, until after the completion of the paving in said street or
alley, and the formal final acceptance thereof by the proper officials of the City.
SECTION 6-309: PIPELINES AND WIRES
Poles, wires, gas mains, pipelines, and other appurtenances of public service
companies shall be located or erected over, upon, or under the streets, alleys,
and common grounds of the City, and shall be confined to the alleys whenever
possible. All poles, wires, gas mains, pipelines or other appurtenances shall be
reset, placed, or erected in such a manner that they will not interfere with the water
system; sewerage system; poles, wires and mains of any public utility; adjacent
buildings; or with travel on the public ways and property. Application for location
of the above shall be made to the City Council in writing, and approval by
that body shall be issued in writing. Any public service company granted a rightof-
way for the erection and maintenance of poles, conduits, gas mains, pipelines
and wires shall at all times erect and locate their poles, wires, gas mains, pipelines
and other appurtenances at such places and in such manner as shall be
designated by the City Council. Such poles, wires, gas mains, pipelines and other
appurtenances shall be removed or relocated by said companies at their own
expense when requested to do so by the City Council. Any such relocation shall
be ordered by resolution of the City Council, and the city clerk shall notify any
and all companies affected. Said companies shall, within 24 hours after receiving
notice, at their own expense, cause the poles, wires, gas mains, pipelines or
other appurtenances to be removed. The City Council shall designate another
location as close as possible to their original location where said poles, wires,
gas mains, pipe lines or other appurtenances may be reset or placed.
SECTION 6-310: CONSTRUCTION ASSESSMENT
To defray the costs and expenses of street improvements, as may be authorized
by law, the City Council shall have power and authority to levy and collect special
taxes and assessments upon the lots and pieces of ground adjacent to, abutting
upon, or especially benefiting from, the street, avenue, alley or sidewalk in whole
or in part opened, widened, curbed, curbed and guttered, graded, paved, repaired,
graveled, macadamized, parked, extended, constructed, or otherwise improved
or repaired. The City Council, sitting as the Board of Equalization, shall
review all such improvements in accordance with the procedure provided by law.
All special assessments shall be made by the City Council at a regular or special
meeting by resolution, taking into account the benefits derived or injuries sustained
in consequence of such improvements and the amount charged against
same. The vote shall be recorded in the minutes. Notice of the time of such
meeting and the purpose for which it is to be held shall be published in a legal
newspaper published or of general circulation in the City at least four weeks before
the same shall be held. In lieu of such aforementioned notice, personal service
may be had upon the persons owning or occupying the property to be assessed.
Such assessments shall be known as "special assessments for improvements"
and, with the cost of notice, shall be levied and collected as a special
tax in addition to the taxes for general revenue purposes, subject to the same
penalties and collected in like manner as other city taxes. Said assessments
shall be certified to the county clerk by the city clerk forthwith after the date of
levy for collection by the treasurer of said county unless otherwise specified. After
it shall become delinquent, said assessment shall draw interest at the legal
interest rate per annum. In the event the property owner is a nonresident of the
county in which the property lies, the City shall, before levying any special assessment
against that property, send a copy of any notice required by law to be
published by means of certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known
address of the nonresident property owner. The last known address shall be that
address listed on the current tax rolls at the time such required notice was first
published.
SECTION 6-311: PETITION FOR IMPROVEMENTS
Owners of lots or land abutting upon any street, avenue or alley within the City
representing 75% of the front footage thereon may petition the City Council to
create an improvement district, so that such district when created will make up
one continuous or extended thoroughfare or more without cost to the City. The
City Council shall assess the entire cost of any such improvements on any such
street, alley or avenue, including intersections of streets or avenues and spaces
opposite alleys, against the private property within such improvement districts. It
shall be the duty of the City Council to create the proper improvement districts,
which shall be consecutively numbered, and to improve the same and to proceed
in the same manner and form as hereinbefore provided for in other paving and
improvement districts; provided, the City Council shall have power to levy the entire
cost of such improvements of any such street, avenue or alley, including intersections
of streets or avenues and spaces opposite alleys, against the private
property within such district, and to issue street improvement bonds to pay for
such improvements. Such bonds shall be issued to cover the entire cost of so
improving such streets or avenues, including intersections of the same, and
spaces opposite alleys. If the assessments hereinbefore provided for, or any
part thereof, shall fail, or for any reason shall be invalid, the City Council shall
make other and further assessments upon such lots or lands as may be required
to collect from the same the cost of any improvements properly chargeable thereto,
as herein provided. The City Council shall have the discretion to deny the
formation of the proposed district when the area has not previously been improved
with a water system, sewer system, and grading of streets. If the City
Council should deny a requested improvement district formation, it shall state the
grounds for such denial in a written letter to interested parties. (Ref. Neb. Rev.
Stat. §16-624)
SECTION 6-312: DEFERRAL FROM SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
Whenever the City Council creates an improvement district as specified in Section
6-311 which includes land adjacent to the City which is within an agricultural
use zone and is used exclusively for agricultural use, the owners of record title of
such adjacent land may apply for a deferral from special assessments. For purposes
of this section, the terms “agricultural use” and "agricultural use zone” shall
have the meaning specified in Neb. Rev. Stat. §77-1343.
Any owner of record title eligible for the deferral granted by this section shall, to
secure such assessment, make application to the City Council within 90 days after
creation of an improvement district as specified in Section 6-108. Any owner
of record title who makes application for the deferral provided by this section
shall notify the county register of deeds of such application in writing prior to approval
by the City Council. The City Council shall approve the application of any
owner of record title upon determination that the property (a) is within an agricultural
use zone and is used exclusively for agricultural use, and (b) the owner has
met the requirements of this section.
The deferral provided for in this section shall be terminated upon any of the following
events:
1. Notification by the owner of record title to the City Council to remove such
deferral;
2. Sale or transfer to a new owner who does not make a new application
within 60 days of the sale or transfer, except as provided in subdivision 3 of this
section;
3. Transfer by reason of death of a former owner to a new owner who does
not make application within 125 days of the transfer;
4. The land is no longer being used as agricultural land; or
5. Change of zoning to other than an agricultural zone.
Whenever property which has received a deferral pursuant to this section becomes
disqualified for such deferral, the owner of record title of such property
shall pay to the City an amount equal to:
A. The total amount of special assessments which would have been assessed
against such property, to the extent of special benefits, had such deferral
not been granted; and
B. Interest upon the special assessments not paid each year at the rate of
6% from the dates at which such assessments would have been payable if no
deferral had been granted.
In cases where the deferral provided by this section is terminated as a result of a
sale or transfer described in subdivision 2 or 3 of this section, the lien for assessments
and interest shall attach as of the day preceding such sale or transfer.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-2428 through 19-2431)
SECTION 6-313: VACATING PUBLIC WAYS; DEFINITIONS AND
ASCERTAINING DAMAGES
A. “Special damages” shall mean only those losses or damages or injuries
which a property owner suffers that are peculiar or special or unique to his/her
property, and which result from the City Council vacating such street, avenue,
alley, lane or similar public ways.
Special damages shall not mean those losses or damages or injuries that a
property owner suffers that are in common with the rest of the City or public at
large, even though those losses or damages or injuries suffered by the property
owner are greater in degree that the rest of the City or public at large.
B. The mayor shall appoint three or five or seven disinterested residents of
the City to a special commission to ascertain the amount of special damages that
the abutting property owners are entitled to receive and which resulted from the
City Council vacating such street, avenue, alley, lane or similar public way. The
appointees of the special commission shall be approved by the Council. Only
special damages, as herein defined, shall be awarded to the abutting property
owners.
C. In determining the amount of compensation to award the abutting property
owners as special damages, the aforementioned commission shall use the following
rule:
The abutting property owner is entitled to recover as compensation the difference
between the value of such property immediately before and immediately after the
vacating of such street, avenue, alley, lane or similar public way. However, if no
difference in value exists the abutting property owner is entitled to no compensation.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-904)
SECTION 6-314: VACATING PUBLIC WAYS; PROCEDURE
Whenever the City Council decides that it would be in the best interests of the
City to vacate a street, avenue, alley, lane or similar public way, the City Council
shall comply with the following procedure:
A. Notice. Notice shall be given to all abutting property owners either by First
Class mail to their last known address or if there is no known address then by
publishing the notice in a newspaper that is of general circulation in the City. The
content of the notice will advise the abutting property owners that the City Council
will consider vacating such street, avenue, alley, lane or similar public way at
their next regular meeting or if a special meeting is scheduled for such discussion,
then the date, time and place of such meeting.
B. Consent/Waiver. The City Council may have all the abutting property
owners sign a form stating that they consent to the action being taken by the City
Council and waive their right of access. The signing of such form has no effect
on claims for special damages, as defined in Section 6-313, by the abutting
property owners, but does create the presumption that the City Council's action
was proper.
However, if all the abutting property owners do not sign the consent/waiver form,
the City Council may still proceed with vacating such street, avenue, alley, lane
or similar public way under the authority granted them by Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-
611.
C. Ordinance. The City Council shall pass an ordinance that shall state essentially
the following:
1. A declaration that the action is expedient for the public good or in
the best interests of the City.
2. A statement that the City shall have an easement for maintaining all
utilities.
3. A method or procedure for ascertaining special damages to abutting
property owners.
D. Filing. The clerk shall file a copy of the ordinance with the county register
of deeds to ensure that abutting property owners can gain title to their share of
the vacated street, avenue, alley, lane or similar public way and so that such land
will be drawn to the attention of the county assessor. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-
611)
SECTION 6-315: INTERSECTION IMPROVEMENTS
The cost of improving the intersections of streets, avenues or the spaces opposite
alleys shall be paid by the City. The City Council is hereby authorized to assess
such improvements, issue improvement bonds, and levy a special tax on
all of the taxable property in the City in the manner provided by law for the payment
thereof. All improvements to any streets, avenues or alleys within the City
for which a special tax shall be levied shall be done by contract with the lowest
responsible bidder to be determined by the City Council.
SECTION 6-316: IMPROVEMENTS; ACCEPTANCE BY CITY ENGINEER
When any improvement is completed according to contract, it shall be the duty of
the city engineer to inspect the same and if the improvement is found to be properly
done, he/she shall accept the same and report his/her acceptance to the
mayor, who shall report the improvement to be approved or disapproved. The
City Council may confirm or reject such acceptance. When the ordinance levying
the special assessment tax makes the same due as the improvement is completed,
the city engineer may accept the same in sections from time to time, if
they are found to be finished according to the contract.
SECTION 6-317 CUTTING PAVING, CURB OR SIDEWALK
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut into any paving, curb or sidewalk for the
purpose of constructing a driveway or any other purpose whatsoever without first
having obtained a written permit from the city building inspector, or the Public
Works Director or his/her designee. The application for such permit shall contain
the following information:
1. The addition, block and lot which the improvement is to serve.
2. The location of the proposed improvement with reference to adjacent
lot lines.
3. The width of the improvement and type of surface which the improvement
will connect.
Upon the application being filed, it shall be the duty of the Public Works Director
or his/her designee to inspect the place of entry into the paving, sidewalk or
curb, and approve such application on such terms and conditions, including starting
and completion dates, as he/she determines necessary. When cutting into
any paving, it shall be the duty of the party to cut the paving under such rules and
regulations as may be prescribed by the street and property maintenance superintendent.
When the applicant is ready to close the opening made, he/she shall
inform the Public Works Director or his/her designee, who shall supervise and
inspect the materials used and the work done in closing the opening. It shall be
discretionary with the City Council, to order the Public Works Director or his/her
designee to do the work of cutting and closing the paving and charge the costs
thereof to the party who obtained such permit. Before any permit is issued, the
applicant for such permit shall deposit with the city treasurer a sum set by resolution
of the City Council for all paving, curb or sidewalk to be cut. Such sum shall
be set on a per square foot cost of construction basis. The deposit shall be retained
by the City for the purpose of replacing the paving, curb or sidewalk, in the
event the work is done by the City. In the event the City elects to require the applicant
to replace the paving, curb or sidewalk, the deposit shall be retained by
the City until the work is completed to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director
or his/her designee. In lieu of making the deposit above set forth, the applicant
may, before any permit is issued, execute a bond to the City with a good
and sufficient surety or sureties to be approved by the City Council, for the total
cost of the improvement.
In the event that the work has not been completed by the completion date as set
forth on the approved application the City may cancel the permit, if work has not
commenced, complete the work and retain a sufficient sum of the deposit to
reimburse the City for such completion work or serve notice on the applicant’s
bonding company of such failure to compete the work and if necessary file legal
action on applicant's bond.
SECTION 6-318: PROTECTION OF PAVING
No person shall remove, destroy or tear down any barricade, fence, railing or
other device erected or constructed for the purpose of protecting paving or any
other work while in the course of construction or after it has been constructed on
any of the streets, alleys or public grounds of the City. No person shall drive over
or upon or go upon any paving or other public work in any of the streets, alleys or
public grounds of the City while the same is protected by any barrier, fence or
railing, or until such barrier, fence or railing has been removed by the contractors
in charge of such work, or by the duly authorized officials of the City.
SECTION 6-319: UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL OF MARKERS
It shall be unlawful for any person to break, remove or destroy any stone, stake,
landmark or other marker on any street, block, lot or public ground except by
proper authority.
SECTION 6-320: UNLAWFUL ACCUMULATION OF DIRT OR OTHER
MATERIAL
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow the accumulation of any dirt or other
material upon the city streets.
SECTION 6-321: WASHING VEHICLES ON STREETS
It shall be unlawful for any person to wash any automobile or other vehicle on
any paved street or alley in the City.
SECTION 6-322 EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL; SUPERVISION OF CITY
OFFICIALS
All practices within the scope of Sections 6-322 through 6-327 in respect to street
right-of-way, including pavement of sidewalks within the street right-of-way, shall
be under the control and supervision of the Public Works Director or his/her designee.
All practices within the scope of the above-named sections in respect to private
property or non-street right-of-way shall be under the control and supervision of
the building inspector. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-232, 16-308)
SECTION 6-323: EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL; COMPLIANCE
The responsibilities for compliance with the requirements of these sections shall
rest with the owners of property with respect to private owned property, and shall
rest with the primary contractor or the sub-department of the City in respect to
publicly owned or right-of-way property, and in each case the delegation of responsibility
to the contractor(s), whether primary or sub-contractors, shall not operate
to relieve the primary responsibility as herein established.
SECTION 6-324: EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL; BOND
All work done in the street right-of-way or upon city property shall not be done
until a bond for completion of work and a certificate showing adequate public liability
insurance are filed with the city clerk under rules to be established from time
to time by resolution of the City Council.
SECTION 6-325 EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL; SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
Proper barricades and warning lights shall be erected and installed at any open
ditch or other obstruction to the normal use of the street or on private property
where a hazard exists, and such barricades and warning lights shall comply with
rules established by the Public Works Director or his/her designee or the building
inspector.
SECTION 6-326 EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL; TIME LIMITATIONS
Paving cuts or open ditches in streets or on private property shall not be permitted
to remain open longer than is necessary for the completion of the work.
Rules as to the time reasonably necessary shall be established by the Public
Works Director or his/her designee and the building inspector, respectively, and
extension of time beyond those established in such rules shall not be permitted
without the written permission of the Public Works Director or his/her designee or
building inspector, as the case may be, and then only for good cause shown.
SECTION 6-327 EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL; PERMIT APPLICATION,
REQUIREMENTS
Any party desiring to make an excavation on public property shall first make application
for a permit to do so with the street and property maintenance superintendent.
Such application shall contain such information deemed necessary by
the Public Works Director or his/her designee and shall be issued on such terms
and conditions as set forth in writing by the Public Works Director or his/her designee.
No application shall be accepted until the requirements of Section 6-324
have been complied with.
Excavation and backfill requirements shall be established by the Public Works
Director or his/her designee. Each applicant shall acknowledge, in writing, receipt
of the requirements as established by the Public Works Director or his/her
designee. Any permit holder who violates any of the written requirements issued
with the permit shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined in a sum not
to exceed $500.00 per day. Each day's violation shall be deemed to be a separate
offense.
ARTICLE IV - PENAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 6-401: VIOLATION; PENALTY
Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this chapter set forth at full length herein or incorporated by reference
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not more than $500.00 for each offense. A new violation shall be
deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of such failure to comply.
CHAPTER VII PUBLIC UTILITIES
ARTICLE I – WATER DEPARTMENT
7-101 OPERATION AND FUNDING
7-102 DEFINITIONS
7-103 CONSUMER’S APPLICATION
7-104 ACCOUNT SET UP FEE
7-105 SERVICE TO NONRESIDENTS
7-106 WATER CONTRACT
7-107 INSTALLATION PROCEDURE
7-108 INSTALLATION EXPENSE
7-109 METERS
7-110 MULTIPLE METER HEADERS
7-111 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE
7-112 METERS; INABILITY TO REPAIR
7-113 FEES AND COLLECTIONS
7-114 MINIMUM RATES
7-115 LIEN
7-116 SINGLE PREMISES
7-117 RESTRICTED USE; LIABILITY OF CITY
7-118 FIRE HYDRANTS
7-119 MANDATORY HOOKUP
7-120 PROHIBITION OF LEAD PIPES, SOLDER AND FLUX
7-121 INSPECTION
7-122 POLICE REPORTS
7-123 DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY
7-124 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE, NOTICE PROCEDURE
7-125 DIVERSION OF SERVICES, METER TAMPERING,
UNAUTHORIZED RECONNECTION, PROHIBITED;
EVIDENCE
7-126 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION; POLICY
AND PURPOSE
7-127 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION;
DEFINITIONS
7-128 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION;
CROSS CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED
7-129 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION; SURVEY
AND INVESTIGATION
7-130 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION; WHERE
PROTECTION IS REQUIRED
7-131 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION; TYPE OF
PROTECTION REQUIRED
7-132 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION;
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES
7-133 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION;
INSTALLATION
7-134 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION;
INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE
7-135 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION;
VIOLATIONS
7-136 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION;
CONFLICTS WITH OTHER APPLICABLE CODES
7-137 CITY WELLS; SAFE ZONE
ARTICLE II – SEWER DEPARTMENT
7-201 OPERATION AND FUNDING
7-202 DEFINITIONS
7-203 SEWER CONTRACT
7-204 SERVICE CONTRACTS
7-205 RATE SETTING
7-206 SEWER FEES; BILLING
7-207 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE, NOTICE PROCEDURE
7-208 LIEN
7-209 CLASSIFICATION
7-210 DISCHARGE OF UNTREATED SEWAGE; UNLAWFUL
7-211 PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED; CESSPOOLS, PRIVIES
AND SEPTIC TANKS PROHIBITED
7-212 PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED; MANDATORY HOOKUP
7-213 BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; PERMIT REQUIRED,
TRANSFERABILITY
7-214 BUILDING SEWER CONSTRUCTION; BOND REQUIRED
AT REQUEST OF CITY COUNCIL
7-215 BUILDING SEWER CONSTRUCTION; PROTECTION OF
WORK
7-216 BUILDING SEWER CONSTRUCTION; ACCESS AND
DRAINAGE
7-217 BUILDING SEWER CONSTRUCTION; PROTECTION OF
PROPERTY
7-218 BUILDING SEWER CONSTRUCTION; GUARANTEE
7-219 BUILDING SEWER CONSTRUCTION; EXCAVATION AND
BACKFILL
7-220 BUILDING SEWER CONSTRUCTION; PREPARATION OF
FOUNDATION FOR PIPE LAYING
7-221 BUILDING SEWER CONSTRUCTION; CONSTRUCTION
CODES
7-222 SEWER INSTALLATION/REPAIR EXPENSE
7-223 SINGLE PREMISE
7-224 USE OF EXISTING SEWERS
7-225 UNLAWFUL CONNECTION
7-226 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES; STORM WATER, SURFACE
WATER, GROUNDWATER, COOLING WATER AND
PROCESS WATER
7-227 HAZARDOUS AND PROHIBITED DISCHARGES;
FLAMMABLE, TOXIC, CORROSIVE AND OBSTRUCTIVE
SUBSTANCES; PRELIMINARY TREATMENT
7-228 HAZARDOUS AND PROHIBITED DISCHARGES;
SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS AS DETERMINED BY
SUPERINTENDENT
7-229 DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS AND PROHIBITED
SUBSTANCES; NATURE OF; SUPERINTENDENT'S
DISCRETION WITH RESPECT TO
7-230 HAZARDOUS AND PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES; SPECIAL
EXCEPTIONS PERMITTED
7-231 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS; WHEN
REQUIRED
7-232 PRELIMINARY TREATMENT OR FLOW-EQUALIZING
FACILITIES; MAINTENANCE BY OWNER
7-233 CONTROL MANHOLES
7-234 SAMPLING OF WATERS AND WASTES; METHOD OF
7-235 COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE; INSPECTIONS, INJURY,
LIABILITY
7-236 UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY OR UNAUTHORIZED
DAMAGING OF EQUIPMENT; UNLAWFUL
7-237 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
7-238 LICENSED PLUMBERS
7-239 PENALTIES
ARTICLE III – LICENSED PLUMBERS
7-301 LICENSED PLUMBER DEFINED
7-302 PROCEDURE TO OBTAIN LICENSE
7-303 RENEWAL OF LICENSES
7-304 TERM OF LICENSE
7-305 FEES TO BE PAID TO CITY TREASURER
ARTICLE IV - GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION
7-401 DEFINITIONS
7-402 GARBAGE; TRASH AND WASTE
7-403 DEAD ANIMALS
7-404 HAZARDOUS WASTE
7-405 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND WASTE; DEPOSIT ON OTHER
PREMISES
7-406 HAULING PERMIT REQUIRED
7-407 VEHICLE SPECIFICATIONS
7-408 PERMIT REVOCATION
7-409 LOCATION OF GARBAGE CONTAINERS
7-410 GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION; AUTHORITY
7-411 GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION; NOTICE,
REMOVAL
7-412 GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION; NUISANCE
7-413 GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION; LIEN
ARTICLE VI – NATURAL GAS RATE REGULATION
7-501 ADOPTION OF NATURAL GAS REGULATION ACT
7-502 GAS RATE COLLECTION FEE
ARTICLE VI - PENAL PROVISION
7-601 VIOLATION; PENALTY
CHAPTER VII PUBLIC UTILITIES
ARTICLE I – WATER DEPARTMENT
SECTION 7-101 OPERATION AND FUNDING
The City owns and operates the City Water Department through the utilities superintendent,
who shall be under the control and general supervision of the city
administrator. The City Council, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the care,
management and maintenance of the Water Department may each year levy a
tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state law on the actual valuation
of all real estate and personal property within the corporate limits that is subject
to taxation. The revenue from the said tax shall be known as the Water Fund
and shall remain in the custody of the city treasurer. The Council shall set the
rates to be charged for services rendered by ordinance and shall file a copy of
the rates in the offices of the Public Works Director and city clerk for public inspection
at any reasonable time. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-675, 16-681, 16-
684.01, 19-1305)
SECTION 7-102 DEFINITIONS
The following definitions shall be applied throughout this chapter. Where no definition
is specified, the normal dictionary usage of the word shall apply.
The term "main" is hereby defined to be any pipe other than a supply or service
pipe that is used for the purpose of carrying water to, and dispersing the same, in
the City.
The term "supply pipe" is hereby defined to be any pipe tapped into a main and
extending from there to a point at or near the lot line of the consumer's premises
where the shut-off, stop box, or curb cock is located.
The term "service pipe" is hereby defined to be any pipe extending from the shutoff,
stop box, or curb cock at or near the lot line to and beyond the property line
of the consumer to the location on the premises where the water is to be dispersed.
The term "separate premises" shall mean more than one consumer procuring
water from the same service or supply pipe. The second premises may be a
separate dwelling, apartment, building or structure used in a separate business.
SECTION 7-103 CONSUMER'S APPLICATION
Every person or persons desiring connection with the city water system must
make application therefor to the utilities superintendent on forms provided by the
him/her. Such application shall state for what purpose the water shall be used;
shall be signed by the owner or authorized agent of the owner of the property to
be served; and be filed in the office of the utilities superintendent.
Applicants for water service shall pay tap fees in an amount set by resolution of
the City Council; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to obligate
the City to furnish water service to nonresidents unless it is able to do so
without curtailing the demands of resident consumers or without overloading its
pumps, machinery or other equipment. Water may not be supplied to any house
or private service pipe except upon the order of the utilities superintendent.
SECTION 7-104 ACCOUNT SET UP FEE
The Public Works Department shall collect an account set up fee each time a
customer puts an account in their name. The fee shall be set by the City Council
in the City fee ordinance.
SECTION 7-105 SERVICE TO NONRESIDENTS
The Water Department shall not supply water service to any person outside the
corporate limits without special permission from the City Council; provided, the
entire cost of laying mains, service pipe, and supply pipe shall be paid by the
owner. Nothing herein shall be construed to obligate the City to provide water
service to nonresidents. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-2701)
SECTION 7-106 WATER CONTRACT
The City, through its Water Department, shall furnish water to persons within its
corporate limits whose premises abut a street or alley in which a commercial
main now is or may hereafter be laid. The City may furnish water to persons
within its corporate limits whose premises do not abut a street or alley in which a
city commercial main is now or may hereafter be laid and may also furnish water
to persons whose premises are situated outside the corporate limits of the City,
as and when, according to law, the City Council may see fit to do so. The rules,
regulations and water rates hereinafter named in this article shall be considered
a part of every application hereafter made for water service and shall be considered
a part of the contract between every consumer now or hereafter served.
Without further formality, the making of application on the part of any applicant or
the use or consumption of water by any present consumer thereof and the furnishing
of water service to said consumer shall constitute a contract between the
consumer and owner and the City, to which said contract both parties are bound.
If the consumer or owner shall violate any of the provisions of said contract or
any reasonable rules and regulations that the City Council may hereafter adopt,
the Public Works Director or his/her agent may cut off or disconnect the water
service from the building or premises or place of such violation until such time as
the city administrator is of the opinion that water service may be resumed without
violation of said rules and regulations. No further connection for water service to
said building, premises or place shall again be made, save or except by order of
said commissioner or his/her agent.
Contracts for water service are not transferable. Any person wishing to change
from one location to another shall set up a new account, make a new application
and sign a new contract. If any consumer shall move from the premises where
service is furnished, or if the said premises is destroyed by fire or other casualty,
he/she shall at once inform the utilities superintendent or his/her agent who shall
cause the water service to be shut off at the said premises. If the consumer
should fail to give such notice, he/she and owner shall be charged for all water
used on the said premises until the utilities superintendent is otherwise advised
of such circumstances. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-681)
SECTION 7-107 INSTALLATION PROCEDURE
Upon the filing of the application and payment of all fees, a permit will be issued
to the duly licensed plumber, agent or applicant to do the necessary work in
bringing water service from the tap to the applicant's premises. All water service
pipe shall be placed in the manner and at the depth as required by the International
Plumbing Code. All installation shall be done under the supervision and
strictly in accordance with the rules, regulations and specifications; provided that
the said rules, regulations and specifications have been reviewed and approved
by the City Council.
In making excavations in streets, alleys or sidewalks for the purpose of installing
pipe, or making repairs, the paving, stones and earth must be removed and deposited
in a manner that will occasion the least inconvenience to the public and
provide for adequate drainage. No person shall leave an excavation made in the
street, alley or sidewalk open at any time without a barricade, and during the
night, warning lights. After service pipes are laid, the streets, alleys and sidewalks
shall be restored to good condition. If the excavation in any street, alley, or
sidewalk is left open or unfinished for a period of 24 hours or more, the city administrator
shall have the duty to finish or correct the work, and all expenses so
incurred shall be charged to the owner. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-232, 16-667,
16-675, 16-681)
SECTION 7-108 INSTALLATION EXPENSE
The expense of providing water service to the premises from the nearest feasible
main to the place of disbursement shall be paid by the owner in the form of a tap
fee paid and impact fees if applicable at the time of application for water service.
In addition to the tap fee, the applicant shall be required to advance the cost of
installation, pipe, stop box, and the expense of procuring the services of a
plumber and other labor necessary to bring the water service to the place of disbursement.
Customers shall be responsible for the costs of all materials except
the meter, which is furnished by the City if it is 2" in size or smaller. Meters over
2" are the customer's responsibility to furnish. The labor to be furnished by the
City shall consist only of the actual tapping of the water main. It shall be unlawful
for any person, except such persons as may specifically be authorized by the utilities
superintendent, to tap the commercial mains of the City or insert ferrules
therein under any circumstances. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-681)
SECTION 7-109 METERS
All water meters shall be of a type and model specified by the Public Works Director
and shall be installed in the manner specified by the Public Works Director.
All meters and extensions shall be set in place by the City at the expense of the
owner and shall be the property of the City; provided, consumers may surrender
to the City meters heretofore purchased by them, and in consideration of such
surrender the City will repair and replace said meters so surrendered at city expense.
All water meters shall be installed inside the residence, building or structure
which said connection serves, or in a building or structure which is heated and
approved by the City to properly prevent said meter and connection from weather
and provide proper maintenance. Meters placed in basements or inside residences
and business buildings shall be equipped with the necessary device to
permit the reading of such meters from the outside. On any new installation or
replacement, there shall be a shutoff valve placed in the water line on each side
of the meter, going into and out of said meter. The property owner shall be responsible
for loss of meters and for repair and damage of meters as provided in
this article. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-681)
SECTION 7-110 MULTIPLE METER HEADERS
Where in commercial or multifamily residential installations the rules provide that
more than one meter is permitted to individually-metered tenants, a multiple meter
header will be permitted, provided:
1. All meters shall meet the requirements of these Rules.
2. The header shall be constructed and installed in such a manner that the service
entrance, the header piping, the meters and all valves shall be located in the
same area and totally visible for inspection in a public access area.
3. Each meter shall be installed with valves on both sides to permit removal of
the individual meter for repair and test purposes. In the case of a two-meter
header, where one meter serves a lawn sprinkler and the other meter serves the
other houses purposes, the master header valve may serve as the upstream
valve on the house meter. The valves going into the meter must be lockable.
4. The meters are not submeters.
5. Each meter will be independently read and billed by the City for water consumed.
6. The header and meters shall be located in a common use area readily accessible
to meter readers and maintenance personnel. Such area shall be accessible
from the exterior of the building without going through residential or commercial
space within the building.
7. The headers are properly constructed with materials compatible with the water
service pipe approved by the City.
8. Adequate provisions are made to handle drainage from the system or where
any meter larger than 1 1/2 inches is required to handle water flow from the test
tee during meter tests.
9. In addition to the shut-off valves at the meters, a single separate valve shall
be located immediately ahead of the header.
SECTION 7-111 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE
If any leak or break in any water pipe shall occur, the utilities superintendent shall
forthwith shut off water to said premises until said leak or break is repaired by the
consumer; provided, such repairs or replacements shall be done by licensed
plumbers or agents of the consumers under the supervision of the utilities superintendent.
All supply or service pipe when leaking or out of condition shall be replaced
or repaired by the plumber. He/she shall warranty the work for a period of
12 months from and after construction is completed and the work accepted and
approved by the utilities superintendent. After the maintenance period shall have
expired, all replacements and repairs to supply or service pipes or any attachment
thereto shall be made as in the case of leaks or breaks as provided hereinbefore.
Should any consumer fail, neglect or refuse to take steps to replace
his/her water pipe, after notification in writing by the utilities superintendent to do
so forthwith, such pipe may be cut off at the curb cock or shut-off until said pipe
is satisfactorily repaired or until new pipe is installed.
If the owner permits or allows a water meter to be damaged, injured or destroyed
through his/her own recklessness, carelessness or neglect so that the meter
must be repaired or replaced, the utilities superintendent shall bill and collect
from the owner the cost of such meter repair or replacement in the same manner
as water rent is collected, including disconnection if necessary. Permitting a water
meter not surrendered to the City to be damaged or destroyed by freezing
shall always be considered negligence on the part of the customer; provided, the
City shall keep in repair all water meters belonging to it at city expense. The City
shall have the exclusive power to repair and test all meters. All repairs and tests
of water meters belonging to or surrendered to the City shall be made at the expense
of the City. If any water meter in service belonging to or surrendered to
the City is beyond repair, worn out and unfit for further use by reason of natural
wear and tear, the same shall be replaced at the expense of the City. The meter
so replaced shall at all times thereafter be and remain property of the City. All
meters shall be tested at the customer's request at the expense of the customer
any reasonable number of times; provided that if the test shows the water meter
to be running 2% or more fast, the expense of such test shall be borne by the
City. The City reserves the right to test any water service meter at any time. Any
water meter belonging to the consumer and not surrendered to the City shall,
when necessary, be repaired, replaced or tested by the City at the expense of
the consumer or owner, who shall be billed for and shall pay for the same in the
same manner as water rent, regardless of whether or not the consumer orders or
requests the City to repair, replace or test said meter. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-
681)
SECTION 7-112 METERS; INABILITY TO REPAIR
In the event it is impossible to read the meter or the meter is not working accurately,
as the case may be, it shall be considered that the amount of water used
shall be the amount used during the corresponding period during the preceding
year, if a meter was in operation on said premises during that period and water
was used for substantially the same purposes during that period of the preceding
year. If the purposes for which water was used during said period and the period
in question were not substantially the same, the utilities superintendent shall
make such charge as he/she deems reasonable, subject to the right of the consumer
to file a claim for a refund with the City Council after paying said charge.
SECTION 7-113 FEES AND COLLECTIONS
Water charges shall commence when both a plumbing permit and a tapping
permit have been issued for a new residence, commercial building or other structure.
Water service meter readings shall be computed by the utilities superintendent
under the direction of the city administrator. Residential consumers shall be
billed every other month and commercial consumers shall be billed every month.
The utilities superintendent shall bill the consumers and collect all money received
by the City on the account of the water department. He/she shall faithfully
account for and pay to the city treasurer all revenue collected by him/her, taking
his/her receipt therefor in duplicate, filing one with the city clerk and keeping the
other on file in the water department's official records. All bills shall be immediately
due upon receipt. If the consumer shall neglect or refuse to pay his/her bill
on or before the 15th day of the month when due, it shall be considered delinquent
and shall result in a late fee set forth in the City’s fee ordinance if the consumer's
water service has been discontinued pursuant to the City’s procedure.
SECTION 7-114 MINIMUM RATES
It shall be the duty of the City Council to set a tariff of rates based on monthly
consumption for each consumer of water service. A schedule of said rates shall
be on file at the offices of the utilities superintendent and city clerk; provided that,
in the judgment of the city administrator, where special conditions exist to the extent
that the application of the service charges as specified herein would be inequitable
and unfair to the City, the city administrator shall recommend to the
City Council a special rate applying to such consumers. Such special rates,
when adopted by the City, shall apply to all consumers using the sanitary facilities
of the City under like circumstances. All water customers shall be liable for
the rate provided by ordinance unless and until the consumer shall, by written
order, direct the Public Works Director to shut off the water at the stop box, in
which case he/she shall not be liable thereafter for water rates until the water is
turned on again. Deductions from the monthly minimum rate as aforesaid shall
be allowed for the time that service has been discontinued only when such service
has been discontinued after notice to the city administrator. No deduction
shall be made for the time that any service remains out of use. A flat rate shall
not be quoted nor allowed. All water sold shall be measured and disposed of to
consumers at the metered rates set forth. No water shall be furnished to any
consumer under any other rate than is provided by this section, except to consumers
using water service on premises outside the corporate limits, in which
case the water service shall be furnished to the consumer at such rates as the
City Council may uniformly fix. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-681, 16-682)
SECTION 7-115 LIEN
In addition to all other remedies, including contracting with a collection
agency, if a customer shall for any reason remain indebted to the City for
water service furnished, such amount due, together with any rents and
charges in arrears, may be considered a delinquent water rent which City
Council may declare to be a lien upon the real estate for which the same
was used. If a lien is to be filed against the real estate, the utilities superintendent
shall notify in writing or cause to be notified in writing, all owners
of premises or their agents whenever their tenants or lessees are 60 days
or more delinquent in the payment of water rent. It shall be the duty of the
city administrator to report to the City Council a list of all such unpaid accounts
due for water together with a description of the premises upon
which the same was used. Prior to the filing of any lien, a report shall be
examined, and if approved by the City Council, shall be certified by the city
clerk to the county treasurer to be collected as a special tax in the manner
provided by law. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-682)
SECTION 7-116 SINGLE PREMISES
No consumer shall supply water to other families, or allow them to take water
from his/her premises. After water is supplied into a building, no person shall
make or employ a plumber or other person to make a tap or connection with the
pipe upon the premises for alteration, extension or attachment without the written
permission of the city administrator or utilities superintendent. It shall further be
unlawful for any person to tamper with any water meter or by means of any contrivance
or device to divert the water from the service pipe so that the water will
not pass through the meter or, while passing through said meter, to cause it to
register inaccurately. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-681)
SECTION 7-117 RESTRICTED USE; LIABILITY OF CITY
The City Council or the utilities superintendent may order a reduction in the use
of water or shut off the water on any premises in the event of a water shortage
due to fire or other good and sufficient cause. The City shall not be liable for any
damages caused by shutting off the supply of water of any consumer while the
system or any part thereof is undergoing repairs or when there is a shortage of
water due to circumstances over which the City has no control. (Ref. Neb. Rev.
Stat. §16-681)
SECTION 7-118 FIRE HYDRANTS
All hydrants for the purpose of extinguishing fires are hereby declared to be public
hydrants, and it shall be unlawful for any person other than members of the
City Fire Department under the orders of the fire chief or the assistant fire chief,
or members of the Water Department, to open or attempt to open any of the hydrants
and draw water from the same, or in any manner to interfere with the hydrants
without permission of the city administrator. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-
681)
SECTION 7-119 MANDATORY HOOKUP
All persons with 300 feet of a water main shall be required, upon notice by the
city administrator, to hook up with the city water system. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat.
§16-667.03, 16-681)
SECTION 7-120 PROHIBITION OF LEAD PIPES, SOLDER AND FLUX
Any pipe, solders or flux used in the installation or repair of any residential or
non-residential facility which is connected to the public water supply system shall
be lead free.
For purposes of this section, lead free shall mean:
1. Solders and flux - not more than two-tenths (.2%) percent lead, and
2. Pipe and pipe fittings - not more than eight (8%) percent lead.
SECTION 7-121 INSPECTION
The utilities superintendent or his/her duly authorized agent(s) shall have free
access and entry at any reasonable time to all parts of each premises and building
to, or in which, water is delivered for the purposes of examining the pipes, fixtures
and other portions of the system to ascertain whether there is any disrepair
or unnecessary waste of water or to make any repairs or adjustments as necessary.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-681)
SECTION 7-122 POLICE REPORTS
It shall be the duty of the city police to report to the city administrator or utilities
superintendent all cases of leakage and waste in the use of water and all violations
of the Municipal Code relating to the Water Department. They shall have
the additional duty of enforcing the observance of all such regulations.
SECTION 7-123 DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break, injure or deface
any building, machinery, apparatus, fixture, attachment, or appurtenance of the
Water Department. No person may deposit anything in a stop box or commit any
act tending to obstruct or impair the intended use of any of the above-mentioned
property without the written permission of the city administrator or utilities superintendent.
SECTION 7-124 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE, NOTICE PROCEDURE
1. The City shall have the right to discontinue utility services and remove its
properties if the charges for such services are not paid within ten days after the
date that the charges become delinquent. Before any termination, the City shall
first give notice by first class mail, which shall be conspicuously marked as to its
importance. Service shall not be discontinued for at least seven days, weekends
and holidays excluded, after notice is sent or given. As to any subscriber who
previously has been identified to the City by the Department of Health and Human
Services as a welfare recipient, notice of such proposed termination shall be
given to the Department of Health and Human Services by certified mail.
2. The notice shall contain the following information:
(a) The reason for the proposed disconnection;
(b) A statement of the intention to disconnect unless the domestic subscriber
either pays the bill or reaches an agreement with the City regarding payment
of the bill;
(c) The date upon which service will be disconnected if the domestic subscriber
does not take appropriate action;
(d) The name, address and telephone number of the employee or department
to whom the domestic subscriber may address an inquiry or complaint;
(e) The domestic subscriber's right, prior to the disconnection date, to request
a conference regarding any dispute over such proposed disconnection;
(f) A statement that the City may not discontinue service pending the conclusion
of the conference;
(g) A statement to the effect that the disconnection may be postponed or
prevented upon presentation of a duly licensed physician's certificate certifying
that the domestic subscriber or a resident within such subscriber's household has
an existing illness or handicap which would cause such subscriber or resident to
suffer an immediate and serious health hazard upon the disconnection of the
City's service to that household. Such certificate shall be filed with the City within
five days of receiving notice under this section and will prevent the disconnection
of service for a period of 30 days from each such filing. Only one postponement
of disconnection shall be allowed under this subsection for each incidence of
nonpayment of any past-due account;
(h) The cost that will be borne by the domestic subscriber for restoration
of service;
(i) A statement that the domestic subscriber may arrange with the City for
an installment payment plan;
(j) A statement to the effect that those domestic subscribers who are welfare
recipients may qualify for assistance in paying their utility bill and that they
should contact their caseworker in that regard; and
(k) Any additional information not inconsistent with this section which has
received prior approval from the City Council.
3. A domestic subscriber may dispute the proposed discontinuance of service by
notifying the City with a written statement that sets forth the reasons for the dispute
and the relief requested. If a statement has been made by the subscriber, a
conference shall be held before the City may discontinue service.
4. The procedures adopted by the City Council for resolving utility bills, three
copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, are hereby incorporated
by reference in addition to any amendments thereto and are made a part of this
section as though set out in full.
5. This section shall not apply to any disconnections or interruptions made necessary
by the City for reasons of repair or maintenance or to protect the health or
safety of the domestic subscriber or of the general public. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat.
§16-681, 16-682)
SECTION 7-125 DIVERSION OF SERVICES, METER TAMPERING, UNAUTHORIZED
RE-CONNECTION, PROHIBITED; EVIDENCE
1. Any person who connects any pipe or conduit supplying water, without the
knowledge and consent of the City, in such manner that any portion thereof may
be supplied to any instrument by or at which water may be consumed without
passing through the meter provided for measuring or registering the amount or
quantity passing through it, and any person who knowingly uses or knowingly
permits the use of water obtained in the above-mentioned unauthorized ways,
shall be deemed guilty of an offense.
2. Any person who willfully injures, alters, or by any instrument, device or contrivance
in any manner interferes with or obstructs the action or operation of any
meter made or provided for measuring or registering the amount or quantity of
water passing through it without the knowledge and consent of the City, shall be
deemed guilty of an offense.
3. When water service has been disconnected pursuant to Section 7-123 of this
Code, any person who reconnects such service without the knowledge and consent
of the City shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
4. Proof of the existence of any pipe or conduit connection or reconnection or of
any injury, alteration or obstruction of a meter, as provided in this section, shall
be taken as prima facie evidence of the guilt of the person in possession of the
premises where such connection, reconnection, injury, alteration, or obstruction
is proved to exist. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §86-329 through 86-331)
SECTION 7-126 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION; POLICY
AND PURPOSE
1. The purpose of these backflow regulations is:
a. To protect the public potable water supply system of the City
from the possibility of contamination or pollution within the consumer’s
internal distribution system or from private water system contaminants
or pollutants which could backflow through the service
connection into the public potable water supply system.
b. To promote the elimination, containment, isolation or control of
existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the public
or consumer’s potable water systems and nonpotable water systems,
plumbing fixtures and industrial process systems.
c. To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of
cross-connection control which will systematically and effectively
prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems.
2. Application: These backflow/backsiphonage prevention regulations shall apply
to all premises served by the public potable water system of the City.
3. Policy: These backflow/backsiphonage prevention regulations will be reasonably
interpreted. It is the City’s intent to recognize the varying degrees of hazard
and to apply the principle that the degree of protection shall be commensurate
with the degree of hazard.
The City Water Department shall be primarily responsible for protection of the
public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to
backflow or contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection.
The cooperation of all consumers is required to implement and maintain the program
to control cross-connections. The consumer is responsible for preventing
contamination of the water system within his/her own premises.
If, in the judgment of either the Water Department or Health Department, crossconnection
is required through either piping modification or installation of an approved
backflow prevention device, 30 days' notice shall be given to the consumer.
The failure, refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to provide the
requested protection within 30 days shall make the consumer subject to discontinuance
of water service at the discretion of the Water Department, according to
the degree of hazard, without further notice.
SECTION 7-127 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION; DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
"Air gap separation" shall mean the unobstructed vertical distance through the
free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying
water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the overflow level rim of the
receptacle.
"Auxiliary water system" means any water source system that may be available
to the building or premises, other than the public water supply.
"Backflow" means the flow other than the intended direction of flow of any foreign
liquids, gases or substances into the water distribution system.
"Backflow prevention device” means any device, method or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system; provided, backflow
preventers have been tested and approved by a reputable testing laboratory.
"Consumer" means the owner or person in control of any premises supplied by or
in any manner connected to a public water supply system.
"Containment” means protection of the public water supply by installing a crossconnection
control device or air gap separation on the main service line to a facility,
or as an installation within equipment handling potentially hazardous materials.
"Contamination" means an impairment of the quality of the water by sewage,
process fluids or other wastes to a degree which could cause an actual hazard to
the public health through poisoning or through spread of disease by exposure.
"Cross-connection" means any physical link between a potable water supply and
any other substance, fluid or source which makes possible contamination of the
potable water supply due to the reversal of flow of the water in the piping or distribution
system.
"Degree of hazard" means an evaluation of the potential risk to the public health
and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system.
a. Hazard, health: any condition, device or practice in the water
supply system and its operation which could create or may create a
danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer.
b. Hazard, plumbing: a plumbing-type cross-connection in a consumer’s
potable water system that has not been properly protected
by a vacuum breaker, air gap separator or backflow prevention device.
c. Hazard, pollutional: an actual or potential threat to the physical
properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or
consumer’s potable water system which would constitute a nuisance
or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to
the system or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to
health.
d. Hazard, system: an actual or potential threat of severe damage
to the physical properties of the public potable water system or the
consumer’s potable water system, or of a pollution or contamination
which would have a protracted effect on the qualify of the potable
water in the system.
"Industrial process system" means any system containing a fluid or
solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated
or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute
a health, system, pollutional or plumbing hazard if introduced
into a potable water supply.
"Isolation” means protection of a facility service line by installing a
cross-connection control device or air gap separation on an individual
fixture, appurtenance or system.
"Pollution" means the presence in water of any foreign substances
(organic, inorganic or biological) that degrades its quality so as to
constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water to a degree
which does not create an actual hazard to the public health
but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for
domestic use.
"Public potable water system" means any publicly or privately
owned water system supplying water to the general public which is
satisfactory for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes and meets
the requirements of the Nebraska Department of Health.
"Service connection" means the terminal end of a service line from
the public water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the
service line, then the service connection means the downstream
end of the meter.
"Water department” means the Water Department of the City of
Plattsmouth, Nebraska.
SECTION 7-128 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION; CROSSCONNECTIONS
PROHIBITED
1. No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any premises
where actual or potential cross-connections to the public water supply system
may exist unless such actual or potential cross-connections are abated or controlled
to the satisfaction of the City and as required by the laws and regulations
of the Nebraska Department of Health or its authorized representative.
2. No connection shall be installed or maintained whereby an auxiliary water
supply may enter a public water supply system, unless such auxiliary water supply
and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved
by the City Water Department and the Nebraska Department of Health.
3. No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any premises
in which the plumbing system, facilities and fixtures have not been constructed
and installed using acceptable plumbing practices considered by the City Water
Department as necessary for the protection of health and safety.
SECTION 7-129 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION; SURVEY
AND INVESTIGATION
1. The consumer’s premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the City or
its authorized representative for the conduct of surveys and investigations of water
use practices within the consumer’s premises to determine whether there are
actual or potential cross-connections.
2. On request by the City or its authorized representative, the consumer shall
conduct periodic surveys and furnish requested information on water use practices
within the premises and in the consumer’s water system to determine whether
there are actual or potential cross-connections. The consumer shall provide the
survey results to the City or its authorized representative.
SECTION 7-130 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION; WHERE
PROTECTION IS REQUIRED
1. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed between the service
connection and the point of potential backflow into a consumer's water supply
system when, in the judgment of the superintendent, a health, plumbing, pollution
or system hazard exists. The type and degree of protection required shall
be commensurate with the degree of hazard.
2. An approved air gap separation or backflow prevention device shall be installed
at the service connection or within any premises where, in the judgment of
the Water Department, the nature and extent of activities on the premises, or the
materials used in connection with the activities, or materials stored on the premises,
would present an immediate and dangerous hazard to health should a
cross-connection occur, even though such cross-connection may not exist at the
time the backflow prevention device is required to be installed. This includes, but
is not limited to, the following:
3. Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless the quality of the auxiliary
supply is acceptable to the Water Department and the Nebraska Department of
Health.
4. Premises having internal cross-connections which are not correctable, or intricate
plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to determine whether or
not cross-connections exist.
5. Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross-connections
cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short notice to assure
the cross-connections do not exist.
6. Premises that, although not covered by code, are subject to frequent modification
which would change their status.
7. Premises that have had backflow code violations.
8. Premises on which any substance is handled under pressure so as to permit
entry into the public water supply system or where a cross-connection could reasonably
be expected to occur. This shall include the handling of process waters
and cooling waters.
9. Premises where toxic or hazardous materials are handled such that if a
backsiphonage or backpressure should occur, a serious health hazard may result.
10. The following types of facilities fall into one or more of the categories or
premises where an approved air gap separation or approved backflow prevention
device may be required by the City or its authorized representative or the Nebraska
Department of Health to protect the public water supply, and such must
be installed at these facilities unless all hazardous or potentially hazardous conditions
have been eliminated or corrected by other methods to the satisfaction of
the City or its authorized representative and the Nebraska Department of Health:
a. Auxiliary water systems
b. Beverage bottling plants
c. Canneries, packing houses, reduction plants
d. Car washing facilities
e. Cemetery sprinkler systems
f. Chemical manufacturing, processing, compounding or treatment plants
g. Chemically contaminated water systems
h. Cooling coil service lines (refrigeration, air conditioning, etc.)
i. Dairies and cold storage plants
j. Film laboratories
k. Fire protection systems
l. Hazardous waste storage and disposal facilities
m. Hospitals, mortuaries, dental clinics, nursing and convalescent homes,
medical buildings
n. Hot water and steam boiler heating systems
o. Sprinkler systems and hose connections directly injecting materials
of a toxic or hazardous nature
p. Laundries and dye works
q. Metal manufacturing, cleaning, processing and fabricating plants
r. Oil and gas production, storage or transmission properties
s. Pet grooming facilities and veterinary hospitals
t. Plating plants
u. Printing and publishing facilities
v. Research and analytical laboratories
w. Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, or storm water
pumping stations
x. Swimming pools, Class A, B and C
y. Zoological and horticultural gardens
SECTION 7-131 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION; TYPE OF
PROTECTION REQUIRED
1. The type of protection required under Sections 7-126 through 7-136 of this
article shall depend on the degree of hazard that exists as follows:
a. An approved air gap shall be installed where the potable water supply system
may be contaminated with any substance that could cause a severe health hazard.
b. An approved air gap separation or an approved backflow prevention device
shall be installed where the public potable water system may be contaminated
with a substance that could cause a health hazard.
c. An approved air gap separation or an approved backflow prevention device or
an approved double check valve assembly shall be installed where the public potable
water system may be polluted with substances that could cause a
pollutional hazard not dangerous to health.
SECTION 7-132 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION; BACKFLOW
PREVENTION DEVICES
1. Any approved backflow prevention device required by Sections 7-126 through
7-136 shall be of a model or construction approved by the City or its authorized
representative and the Nebraska Department of Health.
2. Air gap separation to be approved shall be at least twice the diameter of the
supply pipe, measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, but in no case
less than one inch.
3. Double check valve assemblies or reduced pressure principal backflow prevention
devices shall appear on the current list of approved backflow prevention
devices established by the Nebraska Department of Health, unless the device
was installed at the time this ordinance was passed and complies with required
inspection, maintenance and performance standards.
4. Any backflow preventer which does not meet current protection standards
shall be replaced with an approved backflow preventer at the customer’s expense.
SECTION 7-133 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION; INSTALLATION
1. Backflow prevention devices required by this policy shall be installed at a location
and in a manner approved by the City or its authorized representative. All
devices shall be installed at the expense of the consumer.
2. Backflow prevention devices installed on the service line to the consumer's
water system shall be located on the consumer’s side of the water meter, as
close to the meter as is reasonably practical and prior to any other connection.
3. Backflow prevention devices shall be conveniently accessible for maintenance
and testing, protected from freezing, and not submerged or subject to flooding by
any fluid. All devices shall be installed according to manufacturer’s recommendations.
4. Backflow prevention devices for underground sprinklers that have an opening
to the atmosphere shall be located at least six inches above the highest ground
served by the sprinkler system.
SECTION 7-134 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION; INSPECTION
AND MAINTENANCE
1. It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow prevention
devices required by this article are installed to have inspections, tests
and overhauls made in accordance with the following schedule or more often
where inspections indicate a need:
a. Air gap separations shall be inspected at the time of installation
and at least every 12 months thereafter.
b. Double-check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested
for tightness at the time of installation and at least every 12 months
thereafter. They shall be dismantled, inspected internally, cleaned
and repaired whenever needed and at least every three years.
c. Reduced pressure principal backflow prevention devices shall
be inspected and tested for tightness at the time of installation and
at least every 12 months thereafter. They shall be dismantled, inspected
internally, cleaned and repaired whenever needed and at
least every five years.
2. Overhauls of backflow prevention devices shall be made at the expense of the
water consumer and shall be performed by the Water Department or a State of
Nebraska certified backflow prevention device tester.
3. Backflow prevention devices designed with testing cocks shall be inspected
and tested each year. Tests performed by the Water Department will be at the
expense of said department and tests performed by others shall be at the expense
of the consumer.
Whenever backflow prevention devices required by this article are found to be
defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the consumer
without delay.
The water consumer must maintain a complete record of each backflow prevention
device that has test cocks from purchase to retirement. Records of inspections,
tests, repairs and overhauls performed by others shall be submitted to the
Water Department annually.
Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative, removed
or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the Water Department.
SECTION 7-135 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION;
VIOLATIONS
1. The City or its authorized representative, after 30 days' notice to the occupants
thereof, shall have the right to deny or discontinue the water service to any
premises or any consumer wherein any backflow prevention device required by
this policy is not installed, tested and maintained in a manner acceptable to the
City or its authorized representative, or if it is found that the backflow prevention
device has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists.
2. Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer is in
compliance with this article to the satisfaction of the City or its authorized representative.
3. The City Health Department shall be advised of inspection findings and the
violation abatement action pursued by the City Water Department, and shall be
consulted prior to any violation abatement action on items having to do with public
health significance.
SECTION 7-136 BACKFLOW/BACKSIPHONAGE PREVENTION; CONFLICTS
WITH OTHER APPLICABLE CODES
The provisions of this ordinance shall be read as concurrent provisions with the
most current edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code and the rules and regulations
of the Nebraska Department of Health. In the event of conflicting provisions, the
most restrictive shall apply.
SECTION 7-137 CITY WELLS; SAFE ZONE
A safe zone shall be established around each of the City's public wells following
the guidelines set by the State of Nebraska Department of Health. No changes
will be allowed in the area surrounding any public wells of the City that will bring
any public wells into violation of the guidelines set by the State of Nebraska Department
of Health for the drilling of public wells. While this ordinance will be
construed to include any guidelines set by the Department of Health and to allow
for any changes in the guidelines of the Department of Health, at this time the
guidelines include:
No private well within 1,000 feet
No sewage lagoon or sewage treatment plant within 1,000 feet
No absorption or disposal field for water within 500 feet
No dump site or sanitary landfill within 500 feet
No chemical product storage facility within 500 feet
No petroleum product storage facility within 500 feet
No corral or feedlot within 500 feet
No septic tank, cesspool, or other waste disposal facility within 500 feet
No sewer manhole or sewer connection within 100 feet
No sewer line within 50 feet
ARTICLE II - SEWER DEPARTMENT
SECTION 7-201: OPERATION AND FUNDING
The City owns and operates the city sewer system through the utilities superintendent.
For the purposes of defraying the cost of the operation, maintenance
and replacement (OM&R) of the sewer utilities in the City, the City Council may
establish a user charge based on actual use and revise the charges, if necessary,
to accomplish the following:
1. Maintain the proportional distribution of operation, maintenance and
replacement costs among users and user classes;
2. Generate adequate revenues to pay the costs of OM&R:
3. Apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the costs of
OM&R attributable to that class for the next year and adjust the rates
accordingly.
The revenue from the user charge system based on actual use shall be known
as the Sewer Maintenance Fund, and such revenue shall be used only for the
purpose of paying the reasonable expenses of the operation and maintenance of
the sanitary sewage system for the purpose of extending and improving the sanitary
sewage system and for the purpose of creating reserves for any of the aforesaid
purposes. The utilities superintendent shall have the direct management
and control of the Sewer Department and shall faithfully carry out the duties of
his/her office. He/she shall have the authority to adopt rules and regulations for
the sanitary and efficient management of the department subject to the supervision
and review of the City Council. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-501, 18-503, 18-
509)
SECTION 7-202: DEFINITIONS
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used
herein shall be as follows:
1. "BOD" (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20° degrees C. expressed in milligrams
per liter.
2. "Building drain” shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer,
the building sewer beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building
wall.
3. "Building sewer” shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.
4. "City" shall mean the City of Plattsmouth, Nebraska.
5. "Combined sewer" shall mean a public sewer receiving both surface run-off
and sewage.
6. "Garbage" shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage,
and sale of produce.
7. "Industrial wastes" shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trades or businesses as distinct from sanitary sewage.
8. "Local ventilating pipe" shall mean and include any pipe through which foul
air is removed from a room or fixture.
9. "Natural outlet” shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake,
or other body of surface or ground water.
10. "Normal sewage" shall mean sewage not exceeding maximum tolerance of
contamination of 300 milligrams per liter BOD or 350 milligrams per liter of
suspended solids.
11. "Person" shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation
or group.
12. "pH' shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution.
13. "Properly shredded garbage" shall mean the wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
14. "Public sewer" shall mean a sewer controlled by public authority in which all
owners of abutting properties have equal rights.
15. "Sanitary sewer" shall mean a public sewer that carries sewage and to
which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
16. "Sewage" shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from property,
together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be
present.
17. "Sewer" shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
18. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
19. "Slug" shall mean any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which
in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds, for
any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average
24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
20. "Soil pipe" shall mean and include any pipe which conveys the discharge of
water closets with or without the discharge from other fixtures to the house
or building drain.
21. "Standard methods" shall mean the examination and analytical procedures
set forth in the most recent editions of "Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water, Sewage and Industrial Waste," published jointly by the American
Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and
the Water Pollution Control Federation.
22. "Storm sewer" shall mean a public sewer which carries storm and surface
waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than
unpolluted cooling water.
23. "Suspended solids" (SS) shall mean solids that either float on the surface of,
or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable
by laboratory filtering.
24. "Utilities superintendent" shall mean the Public Works Director of the City of
Plattsmouth or his/her authorized representative, deputy or agent.
25. "Trap" shall mean and include a fitting or device so constructed as to prevent
the passage of air or gas through a pipe without materially affecting the
flow of sewage or waste through it.
26. "Trap seal" shall mean the vertical distance between the crown weir and the
dip of the trap.
27. "Unpolluted waters" is water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria
in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
28. "Vent pipe" shall mean any pipe provided to ventilate a house or building
drainage system and to prevent trap siphonage and back pressure.
29. "Waste pipe" shall mean any pipe which receives the discharge of any fixture,
except water closets, and conveys the same to the house drain, soil
pipe or waste stack.
30. "Watercourse" shall mean a natural or artificial channel for the passage of
water, either continuously or intermittently.
SECTION 7-203: SEWER CONTRACT
The City, through the Sewer Department, shall furnish sewer services to persons
within its corporate limits whose premises abut a street or alley in which a commercial
main is now or may hereafter be laid. The City may also furnish sewer
service to persons whose premises are situated outside the corporate limits of
the City, as and when, according to law, the City Council may see fit to do so.
The rules, regulations and sewer rental rates hereinafter named in this article
shall be considered a part of every application hereafter made for sewer service
and shall be a part of the contract between every customer now or hereafter
served. Without further formality, the making of the application on the part of any
applicant or the use of sewer service by present customers thereof shall constitute
a contract between the customer and the City, to which said contract both
parties are bound. If the customer shall violate any of the provisions of said contract
or any reasonable rules and regulations that the City Council may hereafter
adopt, the utilities superintendent or his/her agent may cut off or disconnect the
sewer service from the building or premises of such violation. No further connection
for sewer service to said building or premises shall again be made save or
except by order of the utilities superintendent or his/her agent. (Ref. Neb. Rev.
Stat. §18-503)
SECTION 7-204: SERVICE CONTRACTS
Contracts for sewer service are not transferable. Any person wishing to change
from one location to another shall set up a new account, make a new application
and sign a new contract. If any customer shall move from the premises where
service is furnished, or if the said premises is destroyed by fire or other casualty,
he/she shall at once inform the utilities superintendent, who shall cause the sewer
service to be shut off from the said premises. If the customer should fail to
give notice, he/she shall be charged for that period of time until the official in
charge of sewers is otherwise advised of such circumstances. (Ref. Neb. Rev.
Stat. §18-503, 18-508)
SECTION 7-205: RATE SETTING
Customers of the City Sewer Department shall be charged a flat rate based on
water usage for the use of sewer service. Rates shall be set from time to time by
resolution of the City Council. Such rates shall be on file at the offices of the utilities
superintendent and city clerk and available for public inspection at any reasonable
time. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-694, 18-509)
SECTION 7-206: SEWER FEES; BILLING
All sewer use charges provided for in this article shall be billed the first day of
each month for service during the preceding month and shall be due and payable
as of that time. Residential customers shall be billed once every other month
and commercial customers shall be billed monthly. If any user shall neglect or
refuse to pay such bill on or before the 15th day of the month succeeding the due
date, the bill shall be considered delinquent and the water service to the premises
of such consumer shall be discontinued. All sewer use charges prescribed by
this article shall be a lien upon the premises and the real estate for which the
sewer use service is supplied and used, and if not paid when due, such charge
shall be certified to the city treasurer and may be recovered by the City in an action
at law from the owner or person, firm or corporation using the service, or it
may be certified to the tax assessor and assessed against the premises served,
and collected or returned in the same manner as other city taxes are certified,
assessed, collected and returned. Users commencing or ending their use of the
sewage system after the first day of any month shall pay the sewer use charge
for the entire month remaining. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-694, 18-503, 18-509)
SECTION 7-207: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE, NOTICE PROCEDURE
The City shall have the right to discontinue service if the charges for such service
become delinquent pursuant to the delinquency provision heretofore set forth in
this chapter. Before any termination, the utilities superintendent shall first give
notice by first class mail or in person to any domestic subscriber whose service is
proposed to be terminated. If notice is given by first class mail, such mail shall
be conspicuously marked as to its importance. Service shall not be discontinued
for at least seven days. As to any subscriber who has previously been identified
to the City as a welfare recipient by the Department of Health and Human Services,
such notice shall be by certified mail and notice of such proposed termination
shall be given to the Department of Health and Human Services.
The notice shall contain the following information:
1. The reason for the proposed disconnection;
2. A statement of the intention to disconnect unless the domestic subscriber
either pays the bill or reaches an agreement with the City;
3. The date upon which service shall be disconnected if the domestic subscriber
does not take appropriate action;
4. The name, address and telephone number of the employee or department
to whom the domestic subscriber may address an inquiry or complaint;
5. The domestic subscriber's right, prior to the disconnection date, to request
a conference regarding any dispute over such proposed disconnection;
6. A statement that the City may not disconnect service pending the conclusion
of the conference;
7. A statement to the effect that disconnection may be postponed or prevented
upon presentation of a duly licensed physician's certificate which
shall certify that the domestic subscriber or resident within such subscriber's
household has an existing illness or handicap which would cause
such subscriber or resident to suffer an immediate and serious health hazard
by the disconnection of the utility's service to that household. Such
certificate shall be filed with the City within five days of receiving notice
under this section and will prevent the disconnection of the City's service
for a period of 30 days from such filing. Only one postponement of disconnection
shall be allowed under this subsection for each incidence of
nonpayment of any due account;
8. The cost that will be borne by the domestic subscriber for restoration of
service;
9. A statement that the domestic subscriber may arrange with the City for an
installment payment plan;
10. A statement to the effect that those domestic subscribers who are welfare
recipients may qualify for assistance in payment of their utility bills and
that they should contact their caseworker in that regard; and
11. Any additional information not inconsistent with this section which has
received prior approval from the City Council.
A domestic subscriber may dispute the proposed discontinuance of service by
notifying the utility with a written statement that sets forth the reasons for the dispute
and the relief requested. If a statement has been made by the subscriber, a
conference shall be held before the utility may discontinue service.
The procedures adopted by the City Council for resolving utility bills, three copies
of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, are hereby incorporated by reference
in addition to any amendments thereto and are made a part hereof as
though set out in full.
This section shall not apply to any disconnections or interruptions of service
made necessary by the utility for reasons of repair or maintenance or to protect
the health or safety of the domestic subscriber or of the general public. (Ref.
Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-2701 et seq.)
SECTION 7-208: LIEN
In addition to all other remedies, if a customer shall for any reason remain indebted
to the City for sewer service furnished, such amount due, together with
any rents and charges in arrears, shall be considered a delinquent sewer rent
which is hereby declared to be a lien upon the real estate for which the same
was used. The utilities superintendent shall notify in writing, or cause to be notified
in writing, all owners of premises or their agents whenever their tenants or
lessees are 30 days or more delinquent in the payment of sewer rent. It shall be
the duty of the utilities superintendent to report to the City Council a list of all unpaid
accounts due for sewer together with a description of the premises upon
which the same was used. The report shall be examined, and if approved by the
City Council, shall be certified by the city clerk to the county clerk to be collected
as a special tax in the manner provided by law.
SECTION 7-209: CLASSIFICATION
The City Council may classify the customers of the Sewer Department for the
purpose of rental fees; provided that such classifications are reasonable and do
not discriminate unlawfully against any consumer or group of consumers. The
classification must be approved by the Environmental Protection Agency, relative
to the user charge grant condition. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-503)
SECTION 7-210: DISCHARGE OF UNTREATED SEWAGE; UNLAWFUL
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City or within two
miles of the corporate limits thereof, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
City, any sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where suitable
treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of
this article.
SECTION 7-211: PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED; CESSPOOLS, PRIVIES AND
SEPTIC TANKS PROHIBITED
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any
privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of sewage.
SECTION 7-212: PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED; MANDATORY HOOKUP
The owner of any houses, buildings or properties used for human employment,
recreation or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting on any street,
alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located
a public sanitary or combined sewer of the City is hereby required at his/her expense
to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly
with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article
within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so; provided that said
public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line.
SECTION 7-213: BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; PERMIT REQUIRED,
TRANSFERABILITY
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a written permit from the utilities superintendent. When two or more
persons are copartners, the permit shall issue in the name of the firm or copartnership,
and no permit shall be transferable. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-249,
16-321, 16-694)
SECTION 7-214: BUILDING SEWER CONSTRUCTION; BOND REQUIRED AT
REQUEST OF CITY COUNCIL
Any licensed plumber with experience in laying drain, water or sewer pipes, upon
application to the City Council, may receive a permit to lay drain, water or sewer
pipes, or make connections thereto as specified in the permit; provided, no application
for such permit shall be considered unless accompanied by a non refundable
tap fee of $200.00 and a bond in an amount to be fixed by the City Council,
if, in its discretion, a bond is necessary. Such bond, if required, shall be subject
to the approval of the City Council, to secure the City and the public against
damages that may arise by reason of the carelessness or neglect of such person
or corporation to properly execute or protect his/its work, and to properly repair
all damages caused thereby, or for any penalties that may be imposed. (Ref.
Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-249, 16-321, 16-694)
SECTION 7-215: BUILDING SEWER CONSTRUCTION; PROTECTION OF
WORK
The contractor shall, at his/her expense, erect suitable barriers around all excavations
or obstructions on public thoroughfares to prevent accidents, and during
the night shall place and maintain sufficient lights for this purpose on or near the
work. The contractor will, at all times until its completion and final acceptance,
protect his/her work, apparatus and material from accidental or other damage,
and shall make good any damages thus occurring at his/her own expense.
SECTION 7-216: BUILDING SEWER CONSTRUCTION; ACCESS AND
DRAINAGE
The contractor shall keep unobstructed a sufficient area around fire hydrants to
permit their full and effective use in case of fire. He/she shall keep natural drainage
and watercourses unobstructed or provide equal courses effectively placed.
The contractor shall be held liable if negligent.
SECTION 7-217: BUILDING SEWER CONSTRUCTION; PROTECTION OF
PROPERTY
The contractor shall, at his/her expense, by the use of false work, braces, shoring
or other effective means, protect against damage all buildings, walls, fences and
other property along his/her line of work affected directly by such work and shall
repair or repay the injured owners for such damage.
The contractor shall exercise care to protect from injury all existing water pipes,
sewer lines, gas lines, telephone cables, electric cables, and other underground
structures which may be encountered during the progress of the work. Water
and other service pipes and fixtures, if damaged, shall be repaired by the contractor
without additional compensation.
The contractor shall give notice in writing at least 48 hours before breaking
ground to all persons, superintendents, inspectors, or those otherwise in charge
of property, streets, water pipes, sanitary sewer pipes or otherwise that may be
affected by their operation, in order that they may remove any obstructions for
which they are responsible or may have a representative on the ground to see
that their property is properly protected.
SECTION 7-218: BUILDING SEWER CONSTRUCTION; GUARANTEE
The contractor shall furnish a maintenance bond, subject to the City's approval,
guaranteeing to keep all work constructed under his/her contract in good repair
for a period of two years from the date of final acceptance. Good repair shall be
construed to mean that any functional or structural deterioration, except that from
ordinary and reasonable use, which appreciably reduces the effectiveness of the
improvement for the purpose intended or any serious departure from the standards
of original construction shall be remedied.
If, in the opinion of the City, such deterioration takes place, it shall so notify the
contractor by registered letter to the address given in the contractor's proposal,
and a copy of such notice will be sent to the bonding company, which notice is
mutually agreed to be sufficient and adequate. If the contractor shall not proceed
to remedy such defects as are called to his/her attention in the notice within ten
days, the City shall cause the repairs to be made as it deems best, and the entire
cost thereof shall be paid by the contractor or his/her sureties.
SECTION 7-219: BUILDING SEWER CONSTRUCTION; EXCAVATION AND
BACKFILL
Trenching shall be in open cut except with the written permission of the engineer.
Permission for tunnel work may be given for crossing under crosswalks, house
driveways or service pipes when such tunnels will not exceed ten feet in length.
The length of trench to be opened at one time may be limited when, in the opinion
of the engineer, such limitation is necessary. The amount of open or unfilled
trench shall not exceed 1,000 feet unless ordered by the engineer, and failure to
comply with this requirement shall be cause for shutdown of the entire job until
such backfilling is accomplished. Trenches shall be only of sufficient width to
provide a free working space on each side of the pipe of not less than four inches
nor more than the outside diameter of the pipe bells, plus 24 inches.
Trenches shall be kept free from water until the material in the joints has hardened.
Trenches shall be sheeted and braced as necessary. Such sheeting
shall not be removed until backfilling has progressed to such stage that no damage
to pipe lines or structures will result from its removal.
At street crossings, sidewalks and other points where the engineer deems it necessary,
the trenches shall be bridged in a secure manner so as to prevent serious
interruption of travel and to afford access to public and private premises.
Such bridges shall be approved by the engineer.
Backfilling of trenches shall be done in accordance with rules and regulations set
by the utilities superintendent.
SECTION 7-220: BUILDING SEWER CONSTRUCTION; PREPARATION OF
FOUNDATION FOR PIPE LAYING
When the excavation is in firm earth, care should be taken to avoid the removal
of material below the established grade. If the foundation is in rock, the excavation
shall be carried to an elevation which will provide for a bedding course not
less than 12 inches thick below the body of the pipe. This bedding course shall
be suitable earth or sand, free from rocks, roots, sod or vegetable matter and
shall be firmly tamped in place before shaping the bed to fit the pipe. Before
pipes are placed, the bottom of the trench shall be shaped to give full support to
the lower one-fourth of the pipe circumference. Adequate bell holes shall be
made at each joint. Where the excavation is in unstable earth or muck, the contractor
shall provide the necessary materials for stabilization so the pipe will be
laid on a firm foundation. If the foundation is in unstable soil, the excavation shall
be carried to a depth which will allow the placement of a six-inch thick layer of
crashed limestone as subgrade stabilization.
SECTION 7-221: BUILDING SEWER CONSTRUCTION; CONSTRUCTION
CODES
The size, slope, alignment and materials of constructing a building sewer and the
methods to be used in excavating, placing the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling
the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing
code or other applicable rules and regulations of the City. In the absence of code
provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9
shall apply.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation
below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too
low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such
building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building
sewer.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the City or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of
the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections
shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures
and materials must be approved by the utilities superintendent before installation.
SECTION 7-222: SEWER INSTALLATION/REPAIR EXPENSE
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building
sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from
any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation
of the building sewer.
SECTION 7-223: SINGLE PREMISE
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building,
except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and
no public sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an
adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building
may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building
sewer; but the City does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility
for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned.
SECTION 7-224: USE OF EXISTING SEWERS
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found to meet all requirements of this article upon examination and testing
by the utilities superintendent.
SECTION 7-225: UNLAWFUL CONNECTION
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, interior and exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater
to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly
to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by the utilities
superintendent for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage; provided
that if responsibility can be determined, the party responsible for disposal of polluted
surface drainage into the public sanitary sewer shall pay a user charge
equivalent to the cost of treating the polluted drainage.
SECTION 7-226: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES; STORM, SURFACE, GROUND,
COOLING AND PROCESS WATERS
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface
water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage including interior and exterior
foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial waters
to any sanitary sewer.
Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers
as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a
natural outlet approved by the city engineer or the utilities superintendent. Industrial
cooling water or unpolluted process waters shall be discharged, at the
request of the city engineer or the utilities superintendent, to a combined sewer,
storm sewer or natural outlet. The contributor of any identifiable discharge of polluted
water to the sanitary sewer system shall be held responsible for reimbursing
the City for such costs. The costs shall be determined by the utilities superintendent
with the approval of the City Council.
SECTION 7-227: HAZARDOUS AND PROHIBITED DISCHARGES;
FLAMMABLE, TOXIC, CORROSIVE AND OBSTRUCTIVE
SUBSTANCES; PRELIMINARY TREATMENT
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described
waters or wastes to any public sewer:
A. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
B. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases
in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure
or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of
the sewage treatment plant.
C. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works.
D. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing
obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation
of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud,
straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage,
whole blood, paunch manure, hair, fleshings, entrails and paper dishes,
cups, towels, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
E. Any waters or wastes having:
1. A 5-day BOD greater than 300 parts per million by weight, or
2. More than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids, or
3. An average daily flow greater than 2% of the average sewage flow
of the City.
4. A chlorine requirement greater than demanded by normal sewage
as evaluated by the City's consulting engineer shall be subject to
the review of the utilities superintendent.
Where necessary, in the opinion of the utilities superintendent, the owner shall
provide, at his/her expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to:
1. Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million by
weight, or
2. Reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight, or
3. Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such water or
wastes, or
4. Reduce the chlorine requirement to conform with normal sewage.
Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed
preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the utilities
superintendent, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until
said approvals are obtained in writing.
SECTION 7-228: HAZARDOUS AND PROHIBITED DISCHARGES; SPECIFIC
PROHIBITIONS AS DETERMINED BY SUPERINTENDENT
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any public sewer the following-
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in
the opinion of the utilities superintendent, that such wastes can harm the public
sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream or otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming his/her opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
utilities superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials or construction
of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the
sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited
are:
A. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher 150° Fahrenheit or 65°
Centigrade.
B. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified
or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between 32° Fahrenheit and 150° Fahrenheit or
0° and 65° Centigrade.
C. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4)
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval
of the utilities superintendent.
D. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or concentrated
plating solutions.
E. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar
objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement
to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage
at the treatment works exceeds the limits established by the utilities superintendent
for such materials.
F. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing
substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established
by the utilities superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage,
to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
G. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as
may exceed limits established by the utilities superintendent in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations.
H. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
I. Materials which exert or cause:
1. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues), or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate).
2. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
3. Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load of the sewage
treatment works.
4. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
slugs.
J. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent
cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to receiving waters.
SECTION 7-229: DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS AND PROHIBITED
SUBSTANCES; NATURE OF; SUPERINTENDENT'S
DISCRETION WITH RESPECT TO
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the
public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics
enumerated in the above section and which in the judgment of the utilities
superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works,
processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to
life to constitute a public nuisance, the utilities superintendent may:
A. Reject the wastes,
B. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public
sewers,
C. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or
D. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of
this article.
If the utilities superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to
the review and approval of the utilities superintendent, and subject to the requirements
of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
SECTION 7-230: HAZARDOUS AND PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES; SPECIAL
EXCEPTIONS PERMITTED
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing a special
agreement or arrangement between the City and the owner of any property whereby
an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the
City for treatment, subject to payment therefore by the owner.
SECTION 7-231: GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS; WHEN
REQUIRED
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided by the owner of all restaurant
property and other businesses when, in the opinion of the utilities superintendent,
they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in
excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients;
except that such interceptors shall not be required for residences. All interceptors
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the utilities superintendent and
shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner(s) shall be responsible
for the proper removal and disposal of the captured material by appropriate
means and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which are
subject to review by the utilities superintendent. Any removal and hauling of the
collected materials not performed by personnel of the owner(s) must be performed
by currently licensed waste disposal firms.
SECTION 7-232: PRELIMINARY TREATMENT OR FLOW-EQUALIZING
FACILITIES; MAINTENANCE BY OWNER
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters
or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his/her expense.
SECTION 7-233: CONTROL MANHOLES
When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building
sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such
manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The
manhole shall be installed by the owner at his/her expense and shall be maintained
by him/her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
SECTION 7-234: SAMPLING OF WATERS AND WASTES; METHOD OF
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes
to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance
with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be
determined at the sampling station provided or upon suitable samples taken at
said sampling station. One copy of the latest edition of said volume shall be kept
on file in the office of the city clerk for use and examination by the public. In the
event no special sampling station has been required, the sampling station shall
be considered to be the nearest manhole in the public sewer downstream from
the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out
by approved methods to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and
property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour
composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample
should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses
are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined
from periodic grab samples.)
SECTION 7-235: COMPLIANCE; INSPECTIONS, INJURY, LIABILITY
The utilities superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties
for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and
testing systems in accordance with the provisions of this article. The city engineer
and the utilities superintendent shall have no authority to inquire into any
processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other
industries, nor shall they have the right to enter into areas where methods and/or
processes are entitled to protection as trade secrets of the property owner
beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to
the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
While performing the necessary work on the property referred to in this section,
the utilities superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City shall
observe all applicable safety rules established by the company. The company
shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees, and the City shall
indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees
and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation,
except as such may be caused by negligence or failure to the company
to maintain safe conditions as required in Section 7-233 and 7-234.
SECTION 7-236: UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY OR UNAUTHORIZED DAMAGING
OF EQUIPMENT; UNLAWFUL
Entrance into a manhole or opening for any purpose except by authorized persons
is hereby prohibited. No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance
or equipment which is part of the sewage works. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest and may be prosecuted to the full
extent of the law.
SECTION 7-237: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions
of Section 7-211, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this article.
1. Before commencing construction of a private sewage disposal system, the
owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the utilities superintendent.
The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the City,
which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information
as deemed necessary by the utilities superintendent.
2. A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until
the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the utilities superintendent, who
shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and in any
event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the utilities superintendent when
the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are
covered. The inspection shall be made within 24 hours of the receipt of notice by
the utilities superintendent.
3. The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system
shall comply with the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality’s Title 124
Rules and Regulations for the Design, Operation and Maintenance of Septic
Tank Systems. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system
employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lost is
less than 10,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to
discharge to any natural outlet.
4. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public
sewer within 90 days in compliance with this article, and any septic tank, cesspool
and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned in accordance
with the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality’s Title 124 Rules
and Regulations for the Design, Operation and Maintenance of Septic Tank Systems,
at the expense of the owner.
5. Wherever the city sewage system exists or is extended, all private sewage
disposal systems are hereby declared to be a nuisance; and every person, firm
or corporation that owns, controls or is in possession of said premises on which
said private sewage disposal system is located shall be deemed guilty of maintaining
a nuisance.
6. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in
a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the City.
7. No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any
additional requirements that may be imposed by state or federal law.
SECTION 7-238: LICENSED PLUMBERS
Only licensed plumbers who have a current license issued by the City of
Plattsmouth may connect any house drain with any sewer or lateral of the public
sewer system, and then only after having notified the utilities superintendent and
submitting to his/her supervision in accordance with such rules and regulations
as are then in effect with respect thereto.
SECTION 7-239: PENALTIES
Any person upon whom a duty is placed by the provisions of this article, who
shall fail, neglect or refuse to perform such duty, or who shall violate any of the
provisions of this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation,
together with the costs of prosecution. Each day that a violation of this
article continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable
as such; provided, however, that any such person upon whom a duty is
placed by the provisions of this article who shall fail, neglect or refuse to perform
such duty, or who shall violate any of the provisions of said sections, may be
served by the City with written notice stating the nature of such negligent duty or
of such violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction
of such negligent duty or violation. Such person shall, within such period of
time, perform such duty or cease such violation; otherwise, for each day after
such period of time that such person fails, neglects, or refuses to perform such
duty or violates such provision, he/she shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as above provided.
In addition to, or in lieu of, other remedies provided to the City by this article to
correct or abate a failure, neglect or refusal to perform a duty imposed by this article
or a violation of a provision of this article, the city engineer or the utilities superintendent
may revoke any permit issued under the provisions of this article,
and may effect the discontinuation of such services to the owner of the property.
The City may also institute an injunction or other appropriate action or proceeding.
Any person upon whom a duty is placed by the provisions of this article, who
shall fail, neglect or refuse to perform such duty, or who shall violate any of the
provisions of this article, or who is responsible for an accidental discharge as aforesaid,
may be held liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned
the City by reason thereof.
ARTICLE III – LICENSED PLUMBERS
SECTION 7-301: LICENSED PLUMBER DEFINED
The term "licensed plumber" as used in the ordinances of this city is hereby defined
to denote any person to whom a plumber's license has been duly issued or
renewed, as hereinafter provided, which has not been revoked or terminated by
lapse of time.
SECTION 7-302: PROCEDURE TO OBTAIN LICENSE
Any person wishing to perform plumbing services within the City or the City’s
zoning jurisdiction shall register with the City Clerk and state his/her willingness
to be governed in all respects by the City’s ordinances now in effect or hereafter
adopted by the City concerning its utility systems. Such registration shall be accompanied
by documentation that the person is licensed as a plumber in another
jurisdiction of the State of Nebraska. The fee for registration shall be $25.00 and
must accompany the registration form, together with a bond with corporate surety
in the penal sum of $5,000.00. The registration is conditioned upon applicant’s
indemnifying and keeping harmless the City of Plattsmouth from all liability for
any damage arising from any negligence or unskilled act in doing or protecting
his/her work, or from any unfaithful or inadequate work done in pursuance of
his/her license, and conditioned upon his/her restoring the streets, alleys, sidewalks,
and pavements over the pipes he/she may lay, and filling all excavations
made by him/her so as to leave said streets, alleys, sidewalks and pavements in
as good condition as he/she found them, and keeping and maintaining the same
in good order to the satisfaction of the City Council for a period of one year next
thereafter and that he/she will pay all fines that may be imposed upon him/her for
a violation of any of the ordinances, rules and regulations adopted by this city
and in force during the term of his/her license. Said license and bond shall cover
all employees of the applicant.(Amended April 2004, Ordinance No. 1705)
SECTION 7-303: RENEWAL OF LICENSES
Any registration may be renewed from year to year pursuant to 7-302 upon payment
of the registration fee for the year and the renewal of applicant’s bond.
(Amended April 19, 2004, Ord. No. 1705)
SECTION 7-304: TERM OF LICENSE
The registration or renewal may be revoked if the license hold violates any terms
of the International Plumbing Code or for cause after notice and hearing by the
City Council. Such revocation may be appealed to the District Court of Cass
County, Nebraska. (Amended April 19, 2004, Ord. No. 1705)
SECTION 7-305: FEES TO BE PAID TO CITY TREASURER
The city clerk shall pay over to the city treasurer all license fees collected pursuant
to this article.
ARTICLE IV – GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION
SECTION 7-401: DEFINITIONS
"Garbage" shall mean rejected food wastes, including waste accumulation of animal,
fruit or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that is intended for the
preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable,
and dead animals rejected by rendering plants.
"Hazardous waste” shall mean a solid waste, or combination of solid wastes
which, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious
characteristics, may (a) cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality
or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible, illness, or (b)
pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human or animal health or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise
managed.
"Junk” shall mean old scrap, copper, brass, iron, steel, rope, rags, batteries, paper,
trash, rubber, debris, waste, dismantled or wrecked automobiles or parts
thereof, and other old and scrap ferrous or nonferrous material.
"Refuse" shall mean putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body
wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator residue,
street cleanings, and solid market and industrial wastes.
“Rubbish” shall mean nonputrescible solid wastes, excluding ashes, consisting of
both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery or litter of any kind that will
be a detriment to the public health and safety.
“Waste” shall mean sewage, industrial waste, and all other liquid, gaseous, solid,
radioactive or other substances which may pollute or tend to pollute any air, land
or waters.
SECTION 7-402: GARBAGE; TRASH AND WASTE
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep in, on or about any dwelling, building
or premises, or any other place in the City, decayed vegetable or animal substance,
garbage or refuse of any kind that may be injurious to the public health or
offensive to the residents of the City unless the same is kept in receptacles not
exceeding a 55 gallon capacity, sacked in durable bags of such a nature that
they can be easily placed in trucks or placed in a dumpster or similar container.
All persons shall have their garbage removed at least once a week by the regular
city solid waste system. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-2106)
SECTION 7-403: DEAD ANIMALS
All dead animals shall be immediately removed by the owner of such animals. If
the owner of any such animal cannot be found within two hours after discovering
the same, then such animal shall be removed by and at the expense of the City.
Dead animals shall not be buried within the corporate limits of the City, nor within
two miles thereof, nor in or above the course of groundwater that is used for
drinking purposes by the City or its inhabitants
SECTION 7-404: HAZARDOUS WASTE
The City and the contractor for hauling and disposing of solid waste for the City
shall not be responsible for removal of hazardous waste. Hazardous waste shall
not be placed in the regular disposal system. If any resident or business in the
City has hazardous waste, the hazardous waste must be disposed of by a person
or organization that is authorized and equipped to dispose of the same and must
be disposed of in an area where hazardous waste is authorized by federal and
state laws, rules or regulations. The following items are not to be disposed of in
the regular disposal system or commingled with any of the items mentioned
above: oil, paint, lead acid batteries, tires, fertilizer, chemicals, animal manure,
household appliances, and oil waste.
SECTION 7-405: GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND WASTE; DEPOSIT ON OTHER
PREMISES
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously or negligently place or
throw any garbage, rubbish, waste or other matter upon the premises of another.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-2106, 28-523)
SECTION 7-406: HAULING PERMIT REQUIRED
Before any person engages in the business of hauling garbage in the City, such
person shall first make application for a permit to do so and submit the equipment
he/she proposes to use to inspection by the City Council. Such applicant
shall also file with the city clerk a schedule of rates he/she shall charge for such
services. If the City Council shall find that such equipment consists of a vehicle
suited to the purpose, and of containers which are watertight and a method of
covering the same, such permit shall be issued without costs by the city clerk and
be in force for one year. In the event the City Council or Board of Health shall
afterward determine that such person is using leaky containers or failing to keep
the same clean, or hauling garbage in such a manner as to constitute a menace
to health, such permit shall be revoked.
SECTION 7-407: VEHICLE SPECIFICATIONS
Before making application for a permit as hereinbefore provided, the applicant
shall have his/her vehicles inspected by the City Council as provided in Section
7-407 to determine compliance with the specifications of this section. If such vehicles
comply in all respects with the specifications set forth below, the City
Council shall issue a certificate of approval for such vehicles, describing and
identifying the vehicles so approved.
Any vehicle used by any licensed garbage collector in collecting and hauling
refuse over the streets of the City shall comply with the following specifications:
1. The vehicle shall have a watertight, metal body, fully enclosed. Watertight, as
used herein, shall mean so constructed that liquid materials will not spill or be
discharged therefrom between point of loading and the designated disposal
ground. This shall not prohibit permit holders from having an open truck for the
transporting of refuse other than garbage; provided, said truck is covered by tarpaulin
or other cover approved by the Board of Health;
2. The vehicle shall be so constructed as to be readily cleaned; and
3. The vehicle shall be so constructed as to enclose materials carried in it to
prevent them from falling therefrom while moving through and upon the streets of
the City and to the dumping ground.
All vehicles licensed hereunder shall be kept clean and presentable as possible,
both inside and outside, at all times.
SECTION 7-408: PERMIT REVOCATION
The permit of any garbage collector permitted to collect, haul or convey refuse or
garbage for hire within the City may be revoked by the City Council upon good
cause and upon failure of such permitted garbage collector for hire to comply
with the garbage and health and sanitation ordinances of the City. No revocation
of permit shall be made except after public hearing before the City Council with
proper notice of such hearing given, stating the reasons therefor, to the permitted
garbage collector of the time and date of said hearing by certified or registered
mail.
SECTION 7-409: LOCATION OF GARBAGE CONTAINERS
The garbage containers required by this article shall be kept in the rear of the
premises or in passageways most accessible to the collector. If a container is
not easily accessible to the collector, it shall be promptly delivered to him/her
upon request. In residential districts, no garbage container shall be located forward
of the main dwelling structure except for a 24-hour period before and after
the time scheduled for regular pickup or actual pickup by the collector. Such
containers shall not be used for the reception of garbage by more than one family,
householder, hotel, restaurant, store, wholesale business or retail business of
any kind. All garbage created upon the premises shall be deposited in the garbage
containers required by this article.
SECTION 7-410: GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION; AUTHORITY
The City Council may provide for the collection and removal of garbage or refuse
found upon any lot or land within its corporate roads or alleys abutting such lot or
land which constitutes a public nuisance. The City may require the owner, duly
authorized agent, or tenant of such lot or land to remove the garbage or refuse
from such lot or land and streets, road or alleys. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-230,
16-231, 16-246, 16-901)
SECTION 7-411: GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION; NOTICE,
REMOVAL
Notice that removal of garbage or refuse is necessary shall be given to each
owner’s duly authorized agent and to the tenant, if any. Such notice shall be
provided by personal service or by certified mail. After providing such notice, the
City through its proper offices shall, in addition to other proper remedies, remove
the garbage or refuse, or cause it to be removed, from such lot or land and
streets, roads or alleys. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-230, 16-231, 16-246, 16-901)
SECTION 7-412: GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION; NUISANCE
If the mayor declares that the accumulation of such garbage or refuse upon any
lot or land constitutes an immediate nuisance and hazard to public health and
safety, the City shall remove the garbage or refuse, or cause it to be removed,
from such lot or land within 48 hours after notice by personal service or following
receipt of a certified letter in accordance with Section 7-412 if such garbage or
refuse has not been removed. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-230, 16-231, 16-246,
16-901)
SECTION 7-413: GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION; LIEN
Whenever the City removes any garbage or refuse, or causes it to be removed,
from any lot or land pursuant to this article, it shall, after a hearing conducted by
the City Council, assess the cost of the removal against such lot or land. (Ref.
Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-230, 16-231, 16-246, 16-901)
ARTICLE V – NATURAL GAS RATE REGULATION
SECTION 7-501: ADOPTION OF NATURAL GAS REGULATION ACT
The provisions of Article 46, Chapter 19 of the Municipal Natural Gas Regulation
Act as set forth in R.R.S. Neb. 1943, 1987 Supplement thereto and any amendments,
except as otherwise provided for in this ordinance, are hereby adopted by
this reference thereto and made a part hereof as fully as if set forth at length
herein, except as otherwise hereinafter provided.
SECTION 7-502: GAS RATE COLLECTION FEE
A fee of $300.00 shall be imposed for each rate filing by the city gas supplier.

ARTICLE VI - PENAL PROVISION
SECTION 7-601: VIOLATION; PENALTY
Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this chapter set forth at full length herein or incorporated by reference
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not more than $500.00 for each offense. A new violation shall be
deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of such failure to comply.
CHAPTER VIII FIRE DEPARTMENT
ARTICLE I – FIRE DEPARTMENT
8-101: CREATION, OPERATION AND FUNDING
8-102: OFFICERS GENERALLY; APPOINTMENT
8-103: FIRE CHIEF; POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY
8-104: ASSISTANT FIRE CHIEFS
8-105: MEMBERSHIP
8-106: SUSPENSION AND EXPULSION OF MEMBERS
8-107: SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS RESTRICTED
8-108: CONTRACTS FOR SERVICE
8-109: RULES AND REGULATIONS
8-110: APPROVED MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS
8-111: WATCHING PREMISES AFTER FIRES
8-112: INTERFERENCE WITH FIREFIGHTERS AND FIRE
EQUIPMENT
8-113: DEPARTMENTAL EXPENDITURES
8-114: FAILURE TO RESPOND TO A CALL FOR ASSISTANCE
AT FIRES
8-115: DRIVING OVER HOSE
8-116: EQUIPMENT
8-117: INTERFERENCE
8-118: FALSE ALARM
8-119: DONATIONS TRUST FUND
ARTICLE II – FIRE PREVENTION
8-201 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
8-202 FIRE CODE ENFORCEMENT
8-203 LAWFUL ENTRY
8-204 VIOLATION NOTICE
8-205 STREET FIRES PROHIBITED
8-206 FIRES PROHIBITED
8-207 OPEN BURNING BAN; WAIVER
8-208 POISONOUS AND FLAMMABLE GASES
8-209 FIRE LIMITS; DEFINED
8-210 FIRE LIMITS; MATERIALS
8-211 FIRE LIMITS; REMOVAL OR REPAIR REQUIRED
ARTICLE III – EXPLOSIVES
8-301 STORAGE
8-302 BULLETS
8-303 BLASTING PERMITS
8-304 TRANSPORTATION
ARTICLE IV – FIREWORKS
8-401 FIREWORKS; DEFINITIONS
8-402 FIREWORKS; LIMITATION ON HOURS FOR DISPLAY;
EXCEPTIONS
8-402.01 APPLICATIONS FOR THE SALE OF FIREWORKS
ARTICLE V EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT
8-501 CREATION, DUTIES, OPERATION AND FUNDING
8-502 OFFICERS GENERALLY; APPOINTMENT
8-503 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES DIRECTOR;
POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY
8-504 MEMBERSHIP
8-505 SUSPENSION AND EXPULSION OF VOLUNTEER
MEMBERS
8-506 DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE OF PAID STAFF
8-507 SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS RESTRICTED
8-508 CONTRACTS FOR SERVICE
8-509 APPROVED MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS
8-510 INTERFERENCE WITH PRE-HOSPITAL
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE PROVIDERS
AND MEDICAL EQUIPMENT
8-511 DEPARTMENTAL EXPENDITURES
8-512 EQUIPMENT
8-513 FALSE CALL
8-514 DONATIONS TRUST FUND
ARTICLE VI – PENAL PROVISIONS
8-601 VIOLATION; PENALTY

CHAPTER VIII FIRE DEPARTMENT
ARTICLE I – FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION 8-101: CREATION, OPERATION AND FUNDING.
The City shall provide fire protection by and through the City Fire
Department, the direct management and control of which shall be
vested in the Fire Chief. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the
Mayor, subject to the approval of the City Council.
The Fire Department shall be composed of such volunteer firefighters
approved from time to time by the City Council. Prior to responding
to a fire call, all proposed new members shall be added to
a list for approval, and approved by, the City Council.
The City Council, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the management,
maintenance, and improvement of the Fire Department
may levy a tax each year not exceeding the maximum limits prescribed
by state law on the actual valuation of all real estate and
personal property within the City that is subject to taxation. The
revenue from the said tax shall be placed in the General Fund,
which shall be in the possession of the city treasurer. Said monies
so levied and collected shall be set aside in the city budget as the
Fire Department budget for defraying the cost of the department.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-222, 16-309 and 19-1302)
SECTION 8-102: OFFICERS GENERALLY; APPOINTMENT.
There is hereby created the Office of Fire Chief who shall be appointed
by the mayor for his or her term, subject to the approval of
the city council.
SECTION 8-103: FIRE CHIEF; POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
The fire chief shall have such powers and authority and shall perform
such duties as are provided by this Code and by state law, together
with any rules and regulations approved by the City Council.
The general duties hereunder are, at the direction of the City Administrator,
to command the department and control the property,
implements and apparatus used by the department. The Fire Chief
shall:
1. have the immediate superintendence of the volunteer firefighters.
2. maintain the Fire Department in a state of readiness to promptly
respond to any emergency, manmade or natural disaster, traffic or
other accident, or other calls for service or assistance.
3. ensure that the volunteer firefighters are well-informed and
trained in the modern methods of fire prevention, fire suppression,
fire safety education and emergency medical service.
4. ensure that the fire department provides community relations
programs from time to time as are necessary or appropriate to develop
or maintain positive relationships between the fire department
and the community.
5. enforce the rules and regulations of the Fire Department, which
have been approved by the City Council, to ensure a high level of
discipline within the Department.
6. execute orders of the City Administrator.
7. act as a member of the Board of Health.
8. ensure that all fire hoses are pressure tested not less than once
each year.
9. cause the repair, improvement or maintenance of the equipment
and personally supervise and approve of the same.
10. report to the City Council on a quarterly basis beginning with
the first regular meeting in July 2010.
11. inspect or cause to be inspected by Fire Department officers,
members, or some other official, as often as may be necessary, all
buildings, premises and public thoroughfares, except the interiors of
private dwellings, for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be
corrected any conditions liable to create a fire hazard. The inspection
shall be of the storage, sale and use of flammable liquids,
combustibles and explosives; electric wiring and heating; and the
means and adequacy of exits in case of fire in schools, churches,
hotels, halls, theatres, factories, hospitals and all other buildings in
which numbers of persons congregate from time to time for any
purpose, whether publicly or privately owned; the design, construction,
location, installation, and operation of equipment for storing,
handling, and utilizing of liquefied petroleum gases, specifying the
odorization of said gases and the degree thereof; and chemicals,
prozylin plastics, nitrocellulose films, or any other hazardous material
that may now or hereafter exist. Upon finding that a municipal
ordinance has been violated, notify, or cause to be notified, the
owner, occupant or manager of the premises where a violation has
occurred. Notice may be made personally or by delivering a copy
to the premises and affixing it to the door of the main entrance of
the said premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such
an order upon the owner, such order may be served personally or
by mailing a copy to the owner’s last known post office address if
the said owner is absent from the jurisdiction. Any such order shall
be immediately complied with by the owner, occupant or manager
of the premises or building. The owner, occupant or manager may,
within five days after such order by the chief of the Fire Department
or his/her agent, appeal the order with the City Council requesting a
review, and it shall be the duty of the City Council to hear the same
within not less than five days nor more than ten days from the time
when the request was filed in writing with the city clerk. The City
Council shall then affirm, modify or rescind the said order as safety
and justice may require and the decision shall then be final, subject
only to any remedy which the aggrieved person may have at law or
equity. The said order shall be modified or rescinded only where it
is evident that reasonable safety exists and that conditions necessitate
a variance due to the probable hardship in complying literally
with the order of the fire chief. A copy of any decision so made
shall be sent to both the fire chief and the owner, occupant or manager
making the appeal.
12. investigate or charge an assistant chief with the duty to investigate,
within two days, the cause, origin and circumstances of fires
arising within his/her jurisdiction.
13. on or before the first day in April and October of each year
cause to be filed with the Office of the Clerk of the District Court of
Cass County a certified copy of the rolls of all members in good
standing in their respective companies in order to obtain the exemptions
provided by law.
14. have the power during the time of a fire and for a period of 36
hours thereafter to arrest any suspected arsonist, or any person for
hindering the department’s efforts, conducting himself/herself in a
noisy and disorderly manner at the scene of a call, or who shall refuse
to obey any lawful order by the fire chief or assistant fire chief.
15. have charge of operations at a fire and command the services
of any person present at any fire in extinguishing the same or in the
removal and protection of property.
16. have the right to enter into buildings at all reasonable hours
and upon all premises within his/her jurisdiction for the purpose of
examining the same for fire hazards and related dangers.
17. have the power to cause the removal of any property whenever
it shall become necessary for the preservation of such property
from fire, or to prevent the spreading of fire, or to protect adjoining
property.
18. direct the removal of any building or fence for the purpose of
checking the progress or fighting of any fire.
19. require teachers of public, private and parochial schools and
educational institutions to have one fire drill each month and to
keep all doors and exits unlocked during school hours.
20. review and approve, subject to section 1-510, all expenditures
of the Fire Department.
21. keep, or cause to be kept, in books for these purposes, a record
of all meetings of the Fire Department; an attendance record of
all members at said meetings; a record of all fire training sessions
and a list of attendees; a record of all fires together which includes
the cause, origin, circumstances, property involved, notation of valuable
property thought to be covered by a policy of insurance and
in what amount and a list of all volunteers who responded to the
call thereof; a full report of all transactions of the department; a detailed
report of all complaints against members and the judgment of
the chief thereupon; and such other books and records as the fire
chief deems necessary and advisable to keep related to the business
of the department, all of which shall be placed on file with the
City Clerk on a monthly basis.
22. establish and regularly update performance based criteria for
use in considering the advancement of an applicant for membership
to the City Council, which such proposed member shall have
satisfied prior to advancement to the City Council such applicant’s
name for membership. Such criteria shall be subject to City Council
approval.
23. examine and investigate charges against any member of the
Fire Department and request the assistance of law enforcement in
the investigation.
24. create offices of the assistant chief, captain, and lieutenant as
is necessary for the proper management and command of the Department.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-222, 16-246, 16-309, 18-1902,
35-101, 35-102, 35-108, 79-4,123, 81-506, 81-512, 81-527)
SECTION 8-104: ASSISTANT FIRE CHIEFS.
The Fire Chief shall have the authority to appoint his or her assistant
Fire Chiefs who shall at all times assist the Fire Chief in the
performance of his or her duties, and shall in the absence of the
Fire Chief succeed to the office of the Fire Chief.
SECTION 8-105: MEMBERSHIP.
The Fire Department shall consist of as many members as may be
decided by the City Council. Proposed members shall be identified
by the Fire Chief and approved by the City Council prior to gaining
member status. To remain in active membership, members must
actively and faithfully perform the duties of their position.
Members shall be considered employees of the City for the purpose
of worker’s compensation once membership is approved by the
City Council.
The City shall purchase a life insurance policy (or group policy) to
cover each active volunteer firefighter in the amount and with terms
required by state law.
The members may hold meetings and engage in social activities
with the approval of the City Council. A record of all meetings shall
be kept and filed on a monthly basis with the City Clerk.
Members shall be subject to such rules and regulations and shall
perform such duties as may be prescribed or required of them by
this Code.
Members of the Fire Department when testifying as a witness in
connection with his or her officially assigned duties in that capacity
alone shall not be deemed an employee of the State of Nebraska or
of the City.
Prior to membership, applicants shall have passed satisfactorily the
criteria for membership established by the Fire Chief.
All members of the fire department may be required to submit to a
physical examination and/or random drug testing at any time as required
by the fire chief or by the city council.
All members of the fire department shall, in compliance with the
rules and regulations adopted by the City Council, wear appropriate
uniform by which they may be known to the public during the performance
of their duties. The City shall furnish said uniforms; provided,
however, that any member who shall lose or destroy the
same shall be required to pay the cost of replacing it; and when any
member shall leave the department, he or she shall immediately
deliver all property belonging to the City, to an officer of the fire department.
SECTION 8-106: SUSPENSION AND EXPULSION OF MEMBERS.
During the pendency of any charges against any member of the
department, the Fire Chief may suspend from duty any such member
until such charges can be examined and investigated.
Following the examination and investigation of any such charges,
any member may be removed by the City Council from membership
in the Fire Department upon recommendation of the Fire Chief. If
the Fire Chief does not recommend removal, upon the recommendation
of the Mayor and a vote of 3/4 of the City Council as a
whole, the City Council may remove a member from membership
following such examination and investigation. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat.
§§ 33-139.01, 35-101 through 35-103, 35-108, 48-126.01)
SECTION 8-107: SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS RESTRICTED.
1. The Fire Department is authorized to remove equipment from
the City limits to provide mutual aid to fire districts with whom the
City has a mutual aid agreement.
2. The fire department may move its fire and other emergency
equipment and personnel outside the limits of the city in order to
render aid in the event of a disaster or civil defense emergency or
in connection with any program of practice or training for such disaster
or civil defense emergency when such program is conducted
or participated in by the civil defense agency of this state. Such
movement may be to any point in this state, or may be into any adjoining
state when mutual aid arrangements have been entered into
on behalf of this state and such other state as authorized by statute.
3. The fire department may move its fire and other emergency
equipment and personnel outside the limits of the city for limited periods
of time for the purpose of honoring fallen fire fighters from
other fire districts and for the purpose of participating in parades
and similar events in other cities. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 81-
829.39; 81-829.48)
SECTION 8-108: CONTRACTS FOR SERVICE.
1. The fire department may move its fire and other emergency
equipment and personnel outside the limits of the city in accordance
with contracts entered into between the city and business establishments,
industries, other political subdivisions or government
agencies.
2. The mayor and council are authorized to enter into contracts
with business establishments, industries, other political subdivisions
or government agencies for the purpose of providing fire protection
and other emergency services outside the limits of the city.
SECTION 8-109: RULES AND REGULATIONS.
The fire chief may propose from time to time to the Mayor and City
Council such rules and regulations as he or she may deem advisable
and necessary for the proper control and command of all persons
connected with the fire department. Upon approval of said
rules and regulations by the city council, the fire chief shall have the
authority and the duty to implement such rules and regulations.
Each member of the fire department shall be furnished with a copy
of the rules and regulations and sign an acknowledgment of the receipt
thereof, and shall thereafter comply with said rules and regulations
in the fire chief’s governance of the fire department.
SECTION 8-110: APPROVED MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.
The City previously has, and hereby affirms, an agreement with the
Plattsmouth Rural Fire District to provide fire protection thereunder
with equipment provided by the Rural Fire District. The City previously
has, and hereby affirms, its current mutual aid agreements.
All such agreements shall be placed on file at the office of the City
Clerk for inspection at any reasonable time during normal business
hours. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-222, 18-1706 et seq.)
SECTION 8-111: WATCHING PREMISES AFTER FIRES.
Upon the determination of the Fire Chief that public safety requires
it, one or more members of the Fire Department shall have the duty,
after the engines are withdrawn and the firefighters dismissed
from any fire, to have and keep charge of the premises for twentyfour
(24) hours thereafter or until the probable danger of smolder
fire is past and a reasonable time had for the investigation of the
cause of the fire; and, during this time, the Fire Chief or his/her
subordinate officer(s) shall cause strict watch to be kept and guard
the premises of the fire.
SECTION 8-112: INTERFERENCE WITH FIREFIGHTERS AND
FIRE EQUIPMENT.
Any person who shall willfully offer any hindrance to, or interfere
with, any firefighter in the performance of his/her duty at a fire, or
while going to a fire, or shall in any manner willfully injure any fire
engine, apparatus or other equipment for putting out fires, or shall
give any false fire alarm shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 8-113: DEPARTMENTAL EXPENDITURES.
No obligations, except in emergencies and with regard to minor expenditures,
shall be incurred on behalf of the Fire Department unless
authorized pursuant to ordinance 1-510.
SECTION 8-114: FAILURE TO RESPOND TO A CALL FOR
ASSISTANCE AT FIRES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to respond to a request
from a member of the Fire Department for assistance in performing
his or her duties and upon conviction shall be a guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 8-115: DRIVING OVER HOSE..
It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of a member
of the Fire Department, to drive any vehicle over unprotected hose
of the Fire Department and upon conviction shall be a guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,184)
SECTION 8-116: EQUIPMENT.
Except pursuant to a request for assistance pursuant to section 8-
114, it shall be unlawful for any person except for members of the
Fire Department to molest, destroy, handle or in any other way to
interfere with the use and storage of any of the fire trucks and other
apparatus belonging to the City and upon conviction shall be a
guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-519)
SECTION 8-117: INTERFERENCE.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to hinder or obstruct a
member of the Fire Department in the performance of their duties
and upon conviction shall be a guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat. §28-908)
SECTION 8-118: FALSE ALARM.
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally and without good
and reasonable cause raise any false alarm of fire and upon conviction
shall be a guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat.
§28-907 and 35-520)
SECTION 8-119: DONATIONS TRUST FUND.
The Department may maintain a trust fund pursuant to Neb. Rev.
Stat. § 35-901. If the Department maintains such a fund, it shall:
1. Except as provided in subsection 3 of this section, deposit all
general donations or contributions, bequests, or annuities made to
the Volunteer Department and all money raised by or for the Volunteer
Department in the trust fund. The trust fund shall be under the
control of the Volunteer Department, and the Volunteer Department
may make expenditures from the trust fund as it deems necessary.
The Volunteer Department shall appoint a treasurer of the Volunteer
Department who shall be the custodian of the trust fund.
2. The trust fund shall not be considered public funds or funds of
the City of Plattsmouth for any purpose, including the Nebraska
Budget Act, nor shall the City incur any liability solely by reason of
any expenditure from such fund except liability for property when
the City receives title to property acquired with money from such
fund.
3. (a) If the total amount of expenditures and receipts in the trust
fund exceeds one hundred thousand dollars in any twelve-month
period, the Volunteer Department shall inform the City and the City
may examine or cause to be examined all books, accounts, vouchers,
records, and expenditures with regard to the trust fund.
(b) Funds, fees, or charges solicited, collected, or received by the
Volunteer Department that are (i) in consequence of the performance
of fire or rescue services by the Volunteer Department at a
given place and time, (ii) accomplished through the use by the Volunteer
Department of equipment owned by the City and provided to
the Volunteer Department for that purpose, and (iii) paid by or on
behalf of the recipient of those services shall not be deposited in a
trust fund authorized by this section. Such funds are public funds
of the City supporting the Volunteer Department and are deemed to
have been collected by the Volunteer Department as the agent of
the City and are held by the Volunteer Department on the City’s
behalf. If such funds are in the possession of a Volunteer Department,
the City shall cause all the books, accounts, records, vouchers,
expenditures, and statements regarding such funds to be examined
and independently audited at the City’s expense by a qualified
professional auditor or the Auditor of Public Accounts for the
immediately preceding five years.
4. Nothing in this section shall be construed or deemed to permit a
violation of the Nebraska Liquor Control Act.
5. All expenditures of public funds as defined in the Nebraska
Budget Act for support of the Volunteer Department or its purposes
shall be submitted as claims, and approved by the City and published
as required by law. All such claims shall be properly itemized
for proposed expenditure or reimbursement for costs already
incurred and paid except as may be otherwise permitted pursuant
to section 35-106.
6. All money raised pursuant to the Nebraska Bingo Act, the Nebraska
Lottery and Raffle Act, the Nebraska Pickle Card Lottery
Act, and the Nebraska Small Lottery and Raffle Act shall be subject
to such acts with respect to the deposit and expenditure of such
money.
7. The Volunteer Department shall not solicit, charge, or collect
any funds, fees, or charges as described in subdivision 3(b) of this
section without the express authorization of the City Council supporting
the Volunteer Department by vote of a majority of the members
of the City Council. Such authorization shall not extend beyond
a twelve-month period but may be renewed at the City council’s
discretion in the same manner in which it was initially granted.
Upon collection or receipt, such funds, fees, or charges shall be
remitted to the designated officer of the City for deposit to the City’s
account. The City Council may appropriate and expend some or all
of such funds for the support of a service award benefit program
adopted and conducted pursuant to the Volunteer Emergency Responders
Recruitment and Retention Act.
ARTICLE II - FIRE PREVENTION
SECTION 8-201: FIRE PREVENTION CODE
Incorporated by reference into this code are the standards recommended by the
American Insurance Association, Engineering and Safety Department, known as
the Fire Prevention Code, 1970 Edition, and all subsequent amendments. This
code shall have the same force and effect as if set out verbatim herein. One
copy of the Fire Prevention Code is on file with the city clerk and shall be available
for public inspection at any reasonable time. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-132,
19-902, 19-922, 81-502)
SECTION 8-202: FIRE CODE ENFORCEMENT
It shall be the duty of all city officials to enforce the incorporated fire code provisions
and all infractions shall be immediately brought to the attention of the fire
chief.
SECTION 8-203: LAWFUL ENTRY
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee or occupant of any building or structure,
except the interiors of private dwellings, to allow the fire chief to inspect or cause
to be inspected as often as necessary the said structure for the purpose of ascertaining
and enumerating all conditions therein that are likely to cause fire, or any
other violations of the provisions of the city ordinances affecting the hazard of
fire. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §81-512)
SECTION 8-204: VIOLATION NOTICE
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee or occupant of any building or structure
that was lawfully inspected as hereinbefore prescribed, and who receives written
or verbal notice of a violation of any of the provisions of the city ordinances, to
correct the condition that violates the said ordinance or ordinances within five
days from the date of receipt of such notice.
SECTION 8-205: STREET FIRES PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any person to set out a fire on the pavement or near any
curb now built or hereafter to be built within the City.
SECTION 8-206: FIRES PROHIBITED
All outside burning of any substance be and hereby is determined unlawful unless
the same is burned in a state-approved incinerator or approved by the state
fire marshal or his/her agent. This prohibition shall not apply to the burning of
wood or other substances in a home heating system or fireplace, nor shall it apply
to charcoal or gas grills normally used in outdoor cooking activities.
SECTION 8-207: OPEN BURNING BAN, WAIVER
1. There shall be a statewide open burning ban on all bonfires, outdoor rubbish
fires, and fires for the purpose of clearing land.
2. The fire chief of the City Fire Department or his/her designee may waive an
open burning ban under subsection (1) of this section for an area under
his/her jurisdiction by issuing an open burning permit to a person requesting
permission to conduct open burning. The permit issued by the fire chief or
his/her designee to a person desiring to conduct open burning shall be in writing,
signed by the fire chief or his/her designee, and on a form provided by
the state fire marshal.
3. The fire chief or his/her designee may waive the open burning ban in his/her
jurisdiction when conditions are acceptable to the chief or his/her designee.
Anyone burning in such jurisdiction when the open burning ban has been
waived shall notify the Fire Department of his/her intention to burn.
4. The fire chief may adopt and promulgate rules and regulations listing the conditions
acceptable for issuing a permit to conduct open burning under subsection
(2) of this section.
5. The Fire Department may charge a fee not to exceed $10.00 for each such
permit issued. This fee shall be remitted to the City Council for inclusion in
the general funds allocated to the Fire Department. Such funds shall not reduce
the tax requirements for the Fire Department. No such fee shall be collected
from any state or political subdivision to which such a permit is issued
to conduct open burning under subsection (2) of this section in the course of
such state’s or political subdivision’s official duties. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §81-
520.01)
SECTION 8-208: POISONOUS AND FLAMMABLE GASES
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to store or keep in the City any form of
poisonous or flammable gas or liquefied petroleum gas in an amount over five
gallons for any period of time, or add to, enlarge or replace any facility used for
the storage of such gases, must first get permission from the fire chief in accordance
with federal, state and local regulations as may be enacted from time to
time. The applicant shall provide the name of the gas, place of storage, amount
of gas stored and other information as may be required by the fire chief.
For any application where permission is granted, the City Council may prescribe
such rules, regulations and precautionary actions as it may deem necessary.
Permit requirement for the initial construction or location of storage facilities shall
not apply to those facilities in existence on the effective date of this section; provided,
any such present use that is discontinued for a period of 60 days shall not
be revived without a permit. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-222)
SECTION 8-209: FIRE LIMITS; DEFINED
The following-described territory in the City shall be and constitute the fire limits:
All lots and blocks lying between Pearl and Vine Streets east of 7th Street and
containing Blocks 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35 and 36, and all subdivisions
thereof.
SECTION 8-210: FIRE LIMITS; MATERIALS
Within the aforesaid fire limits, no structure shall be built, altered, moved or enlarged
unless such structure will be enclosed with walls constructed wholly of
stone, well-burned brick, terra cotta, concrete or other such noncombustible materials
as will satisfy the fire chief that the said structure will be reasonably fireproof.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-222)
SECTION 8-211: FIRE LIMITS; REMOVAL OR REPAIR REQUIRED
In the event that a building within the fire limits becomes damaged by fire, wind,
flood, vandalism or any other cause to the extent of less than 50% of its value,
exclusive of the foundation, it shall be the duty of the owner, lessee or occupant
to remove or repair the said building in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Any such building shall be removed or repaired within 60 days from the
date of such fire or other casualty. It shall be unlawful for any person to repair or
rebuild any such damaged building or structure or for any owner thereof to fail to
remove any such damaged building or structure.
It shall also be unlawful for the owner to fail to protect and guard the public from
injury or damage arising out of such excavation or open basement remaining, if
any. If such owner fails or neglects to remove such building or structure and to
protect and guard the public from injury or damage arising out of any excavation
or open basement remaining, the City may cause the removal of such building or
structure and the installation of a proper device for protection against injury or
damage. Such costs shall be reported to the owner, who shall be responsible for
the payment thereof together with interest thereon from the date of such report,
and the building and land shall be subject to sale in satisfaction of such claim.

ARTICLE III - EXPLOSIVES
SECTION 8-301: STORAGE
Any person desiring to store or keep explosive materials for any period of time
shall notify the Fire Department and register such information with the city clerk
at least 24 hours prior to such storage. The transfer of explosive materials to another
person within the City shall require the person receiving the explosive materials
to register the transfer and the new location of the explosive materials with
the city clerk.
All explosive materials shall be stored in a proper receptacle made of concrete,
metal or stone and be closed at all times except when in actual use. Such receptacles
shall not be located in any room where there are flames or flammable materials.
The area surrounding storage facilities shall be kept clear of rubbish,
brush, dry grass or trees not less than 25 feet in all directions. Any other combustible
materials shall be kept a distance of not less than 50 feet from outdoor
storage facilities. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-227)
SECTION 8-302: BULLETS
Cartridges, shells and percussion caps shall be kept in their original containers
away from flame, flammable materials and high explosives.
SECTION 8-303: BLASTING PERMITS
Any person wishing to discharge high explosives within the City must secure a
permit from the City Council and shall discharge such explosives in conformance
with its direction and under its supervision; and in no case shall any person perform
blasting operations unless operating under the direct supervision of a person
in possession of a valid user’s permit issued by the Nebraska State Patrol.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-1229)
SECTION 8-304: TRANSPORTATION
Any person wishing to transport high explosives in the City shall first acquire a
permit from the City Police Department and shall take such precautions and use
such route as the department may prescribe. Nothing herein shall be construed
to apply to the Police Department or any of the Armed Services of the United
States. No vehicle transporting explosives shall make an unscheduled stop for
longer than five minutes within the City, and in the event of mechanical failure,
immediate notice of such breakdown shall be given the police chief, who shall
then prescribe such precautions as may be necessary to protect the residents of
the City and a reasonable time for removal of the vehicle from the City. (Ref.
Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-227, 28-1235)

ARTICLE IV – FIREWORKS
SECTION 8-401: FIREWORKS; DEFINITIONS.
Unless the context otherwise requires:
(1) Distributor means any person engaged in the business of making
sales of fireworks at wholesale in this state to any person engaged
in the business of making sales of fireworks either as a jobber
or as a retailer or both;
(2) Jobber means any person engaged in the business of making
sales of fireworks at wholesale to any other person engaged in the
business of making sales at retail;
(3) Retailer means any person engaged in the business of making
sales of fireworks at retail to consumers or to persons other than
distributors or jobbers;
(4) Sale includes barter, exchange, or gift or offer therefor and
each such transaction made by any person, whether as principal,
proprietor, agent, servant, or employee;
(5) Fireworks means any composition or device designed for the
purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration,
or detonation and which meets the definition of common
or special fireworks set forth by the United States Department of
Transportation in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations;
(6) Common fireworks means any small firework device designed
to produce visible effects by combustion and which is required to
comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling
regulations of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission
set forth in 16 C.F.R., small devices designed to produce
audible effects such as whistling devices, ground devices containing
fifty milligrams or less of explosive composition, and aerial devices
and firecrackers containing one hundred thirty milligrams or
less of explosive composition. Class C explosives as classified by
the United States Department of Transportation shall be considered
common fireworks;
(7) Permissible fireworks means only sparklers, vesuvius fountains,
spray fountains, torches, color fire cones, star and comet type
color aerial shells without explosive charge for the purpose of making
a noise, lady fingers, not to exceed seven-eighths of an inch in
length or one-eighth inch in diameter, total explosive composition
not to exceed fifty milligrams in weight, color wheels, and any other
fireworks approved under section Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-1247; and
(8) Display fireworks means those materials manufactured exclusively
for use in public exhibitions or displays of fireworks designed
to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or
detonation. Display fireworks includes, but is not limited to, firecrackers
containing more than one hundred thirty milligrams of explosive
composition, aerial shells containing more than forty grams
of explosive composition, and other display pieces which exceed
the limits for classification as common fireworks. Class B explosives
as classified by the United States Department of Transportation
shall be considered display fireworks. Display fireworks shall
be considered an explosive as defined in section Neb. Rev. Stat. §
28-1213 and shall be subject to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-1213 to § 28-
1239, except that display fireworks may be purchased, received,
and discharged by the holder of an approved display permit issued
pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-1239.01. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §
28-1241)
SECTION 8-402: APPLICATIONS FOR THE SALE OF FIREWORKS.
1. Vendors applying with the City for a license to sell fireworks
shall secure and complete an application for fireworks license
from the City Clerk’s office and submit the application, together
with the other items required in this Section, to the City Clerk’s
office. Applications will not be accepted prior to April 1st of the
year for which vendor is seeking a license, and applications will
not be accepted after June 1st of the year for which vendor is
seeking a license. Applications must be submitted by United
States Postal Service regular First Class Mail or in person at
the City Clerk’s office; emailed or faxed applications will be rejected
without notice to the vendor.
2. In addition to the application, each vendor must:
a. submit a copy of their State license;
b. pay a non-refundable application fee set by the fee ordinance;
c. provide the requisite occupation tax;
d. provide a certificate of insurance;
e. provide a copy of their state sales tax permit;
f. provide a bond in an amount set by the fee ordinance
g. provide a site plan which illustrates the facilities at which
the fireworks will be sold; and
h. if the vendor is other than the record owner of the property
on which the fireworks will be sold, provide evidence satisfactory
to the City that the vendor has obtained the record
owner’s authorization for vendor to sell fireworks on the
property.
3. Before the City Council considers the application, the City Clerk
shall submit the application to the Fire Chief who shall inspect the
site proposed and make a recommendation regarding the potential
fire hazard to the City Council, with the application. The Fire Chief
shall recommend denial when the fireworks location is a moveable
vehicle, a gasoline or filling station, a trailer, a premises holding a
liquor or beer license, or a temporary structure for which a duly authorized
and issued building permit has not been properly secured.
4. If the City Council grants the license, the City Council shall direct
the City Clerk to issue the license. Such license shall authorize
the sale of permissible fireworks only between June 24 and July 5
of each year.
4. The City Council may revoke a license at any time after proper
notice and a hearing if one is requested. No license is transferable
and separate licenses are required for each location. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat. §§ 28-1246; 28-1249)
5. The vendor’s bond will not be returned after expiration or revocation
of a license until the Fire Chief and Police Chief have inspected
the property for which the license was granted and determined
that the vendor complied with the terms of the license and
applicable local and state law.
ARTICLE V: EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT
SECTION 8-501: CREATION, DUTIES, OPERATION AND
FUNDING.
There is hereby created the City of Plattsmouth Emergency Medical
Services Department. It shall be the duty of the Emergency Medical
Services Department to provide for the transportation of sick, injured,
wounded or otherwise incapacitated persons needing emergency
medical attention. The Emergency Medical Services Department
shall perform its duties subject to the requirements of
state statutes regarding an emergency medical service and shall
not carry out any of its duties until such requirements are met. The
direct management and control of the Emergency Medical Services
Department shall be vested in the Emergency Medical Services Director.
The Emergency Medical Services Director shall be appointed
by the Mayor for his or her term, subject to the approval of the
City Council.
The Emergency Medical Services Department shall be composed
of such paid and volunteer pre-hospital emergency medical service
providers approved from time to time by the City Council. Prior to
responding to a medical call, all proposed new volunteer members
of the department shall be added to a list for approval, and approved
by, the City Council. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 16-217, 16-
253, and 16-309)
SECTION 8-502: OFFICERS GENERALLY; APPOINTMENT.
There is hereby created the office of the Emergency Medical Services
Director.
SECTION 8-503: EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES DIRECTOR;
POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
The Emergency Medical Services Director shall have such powers
and authority and shall perform such duties as are provided by this
Code and by state law. The general duties hereunder are, at the
direction of the City Administrator, to command the department and
control the property, implements and apparatus used by the department.
The Emergency Medical Services Director shall:
1. have the immediate superintendence of all pre-hospital emergency
medical service providers.
2. develop merit based standards, subject to the approval of the
City Council, for all volunteer positions within the Department to ensure
the ability to perform the essential functions of the position.
3. establish and regularly update, in cooperation with the City’s
Physician Medical Director, rules and regulations for qualification as
a volunteer member of the Department. Each member of the
Emergency Medical Services Department shall be furnished with a
copy of the rules and regulations and sign an acknowledgment of
the receipt thereof, and shall thereafter comply with said rules and
regulations in the Emergency Medical Services Director’s management
of the Emergency Medical Services Department.
4. make recommendations to the City Administrator for hiring and
removal of additional paid staff.
5. maintain the Emergency Medical Services Department in a state
of readiness to promptly respond to any emergency, manmade or
natural disaster, traffic or other accident, or other calls for service or
assistance.
6. ensure that the emergency medical service providers are competent
and maintain currency with their level of licensing, and that
they are well-informed and trained in the modern methods of emergency
medical services.
7. ensure that the Emergency Medical Services Department provides
community relations programs from time to time as are necessary
or appropriate to develop or maintain positive relationships
between the Emergency Medical Services Department and the
community.
8. execute orders of the City Administrator.
9. act as a member of the Board of Health.
10. cause the repair, improvement or maintenance of the equipment
and personally supervise and approve of the same.
11. report to the City Council at the first regular meeting in January
of each year.
12. on or before the first day in April and October of each year
cause to be filed with the city clerk and the clerk of the District
Court of Cass County a certified copy of the rolls of all members in
good standing in their respective companies in order to obtain the
exemptions provided by law.
13. review and approve, subject to section 1-510, all expenditures
of the Emergency Medical Services Department.
14. keep, or cause to be kept, in books for these purposes, a record
of all meetings of the Emergency Medical Services Department;
an attendance record of all members at said meetings; a record of
all training sessions and a list of attendees; a record of all calls
which shall include the name of the party transported, the location
of the place where the squad responded, the address and location
where the party was taken, why such transportation was needed all
other information the Director deems relevant and necessary for the
good and protection of the Department and the City; a full report of
all transactions of the department; a detailed report of all complaints
against members and the judgment of the Emergency Medical
Services Director thereupon; and such other books and records
as the Emergency Medical Services Director deems necessary and
advisable to keep related to the business of the department, all of
which shall be placed on file with the City Clerk on a monthly basis.
All non-medical records shall be available to the public at all reasonable
times.
15. examine and investigate charges against any member of the
Emergency Medical Services Department and request the assistance
of law enforcement in the investigation.
16. establish a management and command structure for the Department
to assure proper supervision of the Department. (Ref.
Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-246 and 16-309)
SECTION 8-504: MEMBERSHIP.
The Emergency Medical Services Department shall consist of as
many paid and volunteer members as may be decided by the City
Council. All proposed volunteer members shall be identified by the
Emergency Medical Services Director and approved by the City
Council prior to gaining membership status. To qualify for such
recommendation by the Director, proposed members shall have
satisfied prior to advancement to the City Council the criteria for
qualification as a volunteer member. To remain in active volunteer
membership status, members must actively and faithfully perform
the duties of their position and continue to meet the criterai for qualification
as a volunteer member.
Members shall be considered employees of the City for the purpose
of worker’s compensation.
The City shall purchase a life insurance policy (or group policy) to
cover each active volunteer emergency medical service providers
in the amount and with terms required by state law.
The members may hold meetings and engage in social activities
with the approval of the City Council. A record of all meetings shall
be kept and filed on a monthly basis with the City Clerk.
Members shall be subject to such rules and regulations and shall
perform such duties as may be prescribed or required of them by
this Code.
Volunteer members of the Emergency Medical Services Department
when testifying as a witness in connection with his or her officially
assigned duties in that capacity alone shall not be deemed an
employee of the State of Nebraska or of the City.
All members of the Emergency Medical Services Department may
be required to submit to a physical examination and/or random drug
testing at any time as required by the Emergency Medical Services
Director or by the city council.
All members of the Emergency Medical Services Department shall,
when possible, wear an appropriate uniform by which they may be
known to the public during the performance of their duties. The
City shall furnish said uniforms; provided, however, that any member
who shall lose or destroy the same shall be required to pay the
cost of replacing it; and when any member shall leave the department,
he or she shall immediately deliver the all property belonging
to the City, to an officer of the Emergency Medical Services Department.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 35-108 and 48-115)
SECTION 8-505: SUSPENSION AND EXPULSION OF VOLUNTEER
MEMBERS.
During the pendency of any charges against any volunteer member
of the department, the Emergency Medical Services Director may
suspend from duty any such volunteer member until such charges
can be examined and investigated.
Following the examination and investigation of any such charges,
any volunteer member may be removed by the City Council from
membership in the Emergency Medical Services Department upon
recommendation of the Emergency Medical Services Director. If
the Emergency Medical Services Director does not recommend
removal, upon the recommendation of the Mayor and a vote of 3/4
of the City Council as a whole, the City Council may remove any
such volunteer member from membership following such examination
and investigation.
SECTION 8-506: DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE OF PAID
STAFF.
All paid staff are subject to the City’s Employee Handbook.
SECTION 8-507: SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS RESTRICTED.
1. The Emergency Medical Services Department is authorized to
remove equipment from the City limits to provide mutual aid to fire
and medical districts with whom the City has a mutual aid agreement.
2. The Emergency Medical Services Department may move its
emergency equipment and personnel outside the limits of the city in
order to render aid in the event of a disaster or civil defense emergency
or in connection with any program of practice or training for
such disaster or civil defense emergency when such program is
conducted or participated in by the civil defense agency of this
state. Such movement may be to any point in this state, or may be
into any adjoining state when mutual aid arrangements have been
entered into on behalf of this state and such other state as authorized
by statute.
3. The Emergency Medical Services Department may move its
emergency equipment and personnel outside the limits of the city
for limited periods of time for the purpose of honoring fallen firefighters
and emergency medical service providers from other fire
and medical districts and for the purpose of participating in parades
and similar events in other cities. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 81-
829.39 and 81-829.48)
SECTION 8-508: CONTRACTS FOR SERVICE.
1. The Emergency Medical Services Department may move its
emergency equipment and personnel outside the limits of the city in
accordance with contracts entered into between the city and business
establishments, industries, other political subdivisions or government
agencies.
2. The mayor and council are authorized to enter into contracts
with business establishments, industries, other political subdivisions
or government agencies for the purpose of providing emergency
medical services outside the limits of the city.
SECTION 8-509: APPROVED MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.
The City previously has, and hereby affirms, an agreement with the
Plattsmouth Rural Fire District to provide emergency medical services
thereunder. The City previously has, and hereby affirms, its
current mutual aid agreements. All such agreements shall be approved
by the City Council and thereafter placed on file at the office
of the City Clerk for inspection at any reasonable time during normal
business hours. (Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 18-1706 et seq., 81-
829.39 and 81-829.48)
SECTION 8-510: INTERFERENCE WITH PRE-HOSPITAL
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE PROVIDERS
AND MEDICAL EQUIPMENT.
Any person who shall willfully offer any hindrance to, or interfere
with, any emergency medical services provider in the performance
of his/her duty, or shall in any manner willfully injure any medical
squad, apparatus or other equipment for providing medical services,
or shall give any false medical alarm shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 8-511: DEPARTMENTAL EXPENDITURES.
No obligations, except in emergencies and with regard to minor expenditures,
shall be incurred on behalf of the Emergency Medical
Services Department unless authorized pursuant to ordinance 1-
510.
SECTION 8-512: EQUIPMENT.
It shall be unlawful for any person, except for members of the
Emergency Medical Services Department, to molest, destroy, handle
or in any other way to interfere with the use and storage of any
of the medical squads and other apparatus belonging to the City
and upon conviction shall be a guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ref. Neb.
Rev. Stat. § 28-519)
SECTION 8-513: FALSE CALL.
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally and without good
and reasonable cause raise any false alarm for emergency medical
services and upon conviction shall be a guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ref. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-907)
SECTION 8-514: DONATIONS TRUST FUND.
The Department may maintain a trust fund pursuant to Neb. Rev.
Stat. § 35-901. If the Department maintains such a fund, it shall:
1. Except as provided in subsection 3 of this section, deposit all
general donations or contributions, bequests, or annuities made to
the Volunteer Department and all money raised by or for the Volunteer
Department in the trust fund. The trust fund shall be under the
control of the Volunteer Department, and the Volunteer Department
may make expenditures from the trust fund as it deems necessary.
The Volunteer Department shall appoint a treasurer of the Volunteer
Department who shall be the custodian of the trust fund.
2. The trust fund shall not be considered public funds or funds of
the City of Plattsmouth for any purpose, including the Nebraska
Budget Act, nor shall the City incur any liability solely by reason of
any expenditure from such fund except liability for property when
the City receives title to property acquired with money from such
fund.
3. (a) If the total amount of expenditures and receipts in the trust
fund exceeds one hundred thousand dollars in any twelve-month
period, the Volunteer Department shall inform the City and the City
may examine or cause to be examined all books, accounts, vouchers,
records, and expenditures with regard to the trust fund.
(b) Funds, fees, or charges solicited, collected, or received by the
Volunteer Department that are (i) in consequence of the performance
of fire or rescue services by the Volunteer Department at a
given place and time, (ii) accomplished through the use by the Volunteer
Department of equipment owned by the City and provided to
the Volunteer Department for that purpose, and (iii) paid by or on
behalf of the recipient of those services shall not be deposited in a
trust fund authorized by this section. Such funds are public funds
of the City supporting the Volunteer Department and are deemed to
have been collected by the Volunteer Department as the agent of
the City and are held by the Volunteer Department on the City’s
behalf. If such funds are in the possession of a Volunteer Department,
the City shall cause all the books, accounts, records, vouchers,
expenditures, and statements regarding such funds to be examined
and independently audited at the City’s expense by a qualified
professional auditor or the Auditor of Public Accounts for the
immediately preceding five years.
4. Nothing in this section shall be construed or deemed to permit a
violation of the Nebraska Liquor Control Act.
5. All expenditures of public funds as defined in the Nebraska
Budget Act for support of the Volunteer Department or its purposes
shall be submitted as claims, and approved by the City and published
as required by law. All such claims shall be properly itemized
for proposed expenditure or reimbursement for costs already
incurred and paid except as may be otherwise permitted pursuant
to section 35-106.
6. All money raised pursuant to the Nebraska Bingo Act, the Nebraska
Lottery and Raffle Act, the Nebraska Pickle Card Lottery
Act, and the Nebraska Small Lottery and Raffle Act shall be subject
to such acts with respect to the deposit and expenditure of such
money.
7. The Volunteer Department shall not solicit, charge, or collect
any funds, fees, or charges as described in subdivision 3(b) of this
section without the express authorization of the City Council supporting
the Volunteer Department by vote of a majority of the members
of the City Council. Such authorization shall not extend beyond
a twelve-month period but may be renewed at the City council’s
discretion in the same manner in which it was initially granted.
Upon collection or receipt, such funds, fees, or charges shall be
remitted to the designated officer of the City for deposit to the City’s
account. The City Council may appropriate and expend some or all
of such funds for the support of a service award benefit program
adopted and conducted pursuant to the Volunteer Emergency Responders
Recruitment and Retention Act.
ARTICLE VI - PENAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 8-601: VIOLATION; PENALTY
Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this chapter set forth at full length herein or incorporated by reference
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not more than $500.00 for each offense. A new violation shall be
deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of such failure to comply.
CHAPTER IX BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE I – INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODES
9-101 ADOPTION OF CODES
9-102 ENFORCEMENT
9-103 VIOLATION OF BUILDING CODES
ARTICLE II - BUILDING INSPECTOR
9-201 POWER AND AUTHORITY
9-202 RIGHT OF ENTRY
9-203 TIME OF INSPECTION
9-204 APPEAL FROM DECISION
9-205 BARRICADES AND LIGHTS
ARTICLE III – BUILDING PERMITS
9-301 APPLICATION; FEES
9-302 LIMITATION
9-303 DISPLAY OF PERMIT
9-304 NEW CONSTRUCTION, SIDEWALKS REQUIRED
9-305 LANDMARK HERITAGE PRESERVATION
ARTICLE IV – MOVING BUILDINGS
9-401 REGULATIONS
9-402 FEE AND DEPOSIT
9-403 EXEMPTION
ARTICLE V – DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS
9-501 REGULATIONS
9-502 FEE AND DEPOSIT
9-503 EXEMPTION
ARTICLE VI – PENAL PROVISION
9-601 VIOLATION; PENALTY
CHAPTER IX BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE I - INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODES
SECTION 9-101 ADOPTION OF CODES
The current editions, and the latest additions published hereafter, of the following
building codes are hereby adopted by the City of Plattsmouth, Nebraska for all
construction within the City and its zoning jurisdiction:
(1) The International Building Code (IBC), 2000 edition, published
by the International Code Council, and all incorporated codes including:
International Electrical Code;
International Mechanical Code;
International Plumbing Code;
International Fuel Gas Code;
International Fire Code;
International Private Sewage Disposal Code; and
International Property Maintenance Code.
(2) The International Residential Code (IRC), 2000 edition, published
by the International Code Council; and
(3) The International Existing Building Code, 2009 Edition, published
by the International Code Council;
Whenever a new edition of a code adopted above is published, such new edition
shall be considered the applicable building code.
SECTION 9-102: ENFORCEMENT
Hereafter all city officials shall be governed by the provisions of the above codes
and no building permit shall be issued nor construction approved unless such
building permit and construction conforms to such codes.
SECTION 9-103: VIOLATION OF BUILDING CODES
Any violation of the building codes adopted shall result in the immediate disconnection
of all utilities from any building or structure not conforming to the code
provisions, and the construction of any building or structure in violation of such
codes shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00,
with each day's violation a separate offense.


ARTICLE II - BUILDING INSPECTOR
SECTION 9-201: POWER AND AUTHORITY
The building inspector shall be the city official who shall have the duty of enforcing
all building and housing regulations as herein prescribed. He/she shall inspect
all buildings repaired, altered, built or moved in the corporate limits of the
City and the county area within one mile of the corporate limits, as often as necessary
to insure compliance with all city ordinances. The building inspector shall
have the power and authority to order all work stopped on any construction, alteration
or relocation which violates any provisions prescribed herein. He/she
shall issue permission to continue any construction, alteration or relocation when
he/she is satisfied that no provision will be violated.
SECTION 9-202: RIGHT OF ENTRY
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to allow the building inspector entry
into any building or structure where the work of construction, alteration, repair or
relocation is taking place for the purpose of making official inspections at any
reasonable hour.
SECTION 9-203: TIME OF INSPECTION
The building inspector, upon notification from the permit holder or his/her agent,
shall make the following inspections of the building or structure and shall either
approve that portion of the construction as completed, or shall notify the permit
holder or his/her agent that the work fails to comply with the requirements of the
Municipal Code: foundation inspection shall be made after trenches are excavated
and the necessary forms erected; frame inspection shall be made after the
roof, framing, fire-blocking and backing is in place and all pipes, chimneys and
vents are complete; and final inspection shall be made after the building is completed
and ready for occupancy. It shall be unlawful for any person to do work or
cause work to be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection
without the written approval of the building inspector.
SECTION 9-204 APPEAL FROM DECISION
In the event it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of this chapter has
been wrongly interpreted by the building inspector; that the time allowed for compliance
with any order of the building inspector is too short; or that conditions peculiar
to a particular building make it unreasonably difficult to meet the literal requirements
prescribed by this chapter and the building inspector; then the owner,
his/her agent or the occupant may file a notice of appeal within ten days after the
decision or order of the building inspector has been made. The Board of Adjustment
shall have the power and authority, when appealed to, to modify the decision
or order of the building inspector. Such a decision shall be final, subject only
to any remedy which the aggrieved person may have at law or equity. Applications
for review shall be in writing and shall state the reasons why the variance
should be made. A variance shall be granted only where it is evident that reasonable
safety and sanitation is assured and may include conditions not generally
specified by this code to achieve that end. A copy of any variance so granted
shall be sent to both the building inspector and the applicant.
SECTION 9-205: BARRICADES AND LIGHTS
It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant or lessee causing the construction,
demolition or moving of any building or improvement within the City to have during
such work suitable guards or barricades protecting all excavations, open
basements, building materials and debris. The failure, neglect or refusal of said
persons to erect such guards shall constitute a violation of this section, and the
City police or the building inspector shall stop all work until guards are erected
and maintained as required.
ARTICLE III - BUILDING PERMITS
SECTION 9-301: APPLICATION; FEES
Any person desiring to commence or proceed to erect, construct, repair, enlarge,
change the dimensions, demolish or relocate any building or dwelling, or cause
the same to be done within the city limits or in the county area within one mile of
the city limits, shall file with the city clerk an application for a building permit. No
building permit shall be required for any structure that is 10 feet by 15 feet or
less. The application shall be in writing on a form to be furnished by the city clerk
for that purpose. Each applicant shall set forth the legal description of the land
upon which the construction or relocation is to take place, the nature of the use
or occupancy, the principal dimensions, the estimated cost, the names of the
owner, architect and contractor, a sketch, picture or blueprint of the proposed
construction, and such other information as may be requested thereon. In addition,
the applicant shall cause the boundaries of the land and location of the proposed
project to be accurately staked out. The application, plans and specifications
so filed with the city clerk shall be checked and examined by the building
inspector, who shall make an on-site inspection of the land involved in the proposed
project, and if they are found to be in conformity with the requirements of
this chapter and all other ordinances applicable thereto, the building inspector
shall issue the said applicant a permit upon the payment of a fee, the amount of
such fee to be set from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
SECTION 9-302: LIMITATION
If the work for which a permit has been issued shall not have begun within six
months of the date thereof, or if the construction shall be discontinued for a period
of six months, the permit shall be void. Before work can be resumed, a new
permit shall be obtained in the same manner and form as an original permit.
SECTION 9-303: DISPLAY OF PERMIT
All building permits issued in accordance with the foregoing provisions of Sections
9-201 and 9-202 shall be prominently displayed in plain view and protected
from weather within the front 20 feet of the lot or parcel of land upon which work
is to be done in accordance with the terms of the permit, from the time of issuance
of said permit until completion of all work being done in accordance with the
terms of said permit.
SECTION 9-304: NEW CONSTRUCTION, SIDEWALKS REQUIRED
If the building permit application is for new construction, including moving in any
type of previously constructed or modular home, except the following:
1. garages;
2. additions less than 1/2 the size of the original structure;
3. allowed outbuildings;
4. on real estate outside the city limits, but within the one mile jurisdiction
of the City, and which is not subdivided for development or suitable for
sale of additional tracts;
sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with sidewalk standards and specifications
set forth by the city engineer and approved by resolution of the City
Council on all lots fronting a street, including both street sides of a corner lot, by
the owner prior to the time of completion of the main structure(s) on said lot(s).
Prior to the issuance of a building permit, if a variance/exemption from the immediate
construction of a sidewalk has been granted by the Council or building inspector,
the owner shall execute an agreement to construct the required sidewalk
later pursuant to the agreement.
SECTION 9-305 LANDMARK HERITAGE PRESERVATION
1. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the words and phrases below shall have
the following definitions:
a. Board: The Historic Preservation Board of the City of
Plattsmouth.
b. Planning Commission: The Planning Commission of the City of
Plattsmouth.
c. Cumulative Effect: This Ordinance shall be cumulative to all
other provisions of adopted Codes and including Codified Ordinances
relating to building, electricity, plumbing or any other technical
requirements or provisions; and once work has been approved
on a landmark or in a an historic district, all other appropriate
permits and inspections shall be obtained, and fees therefore
shall be paid in accordance with the Land Development Ordinance
of the City of Plattsmouth.
d. Design Guidelines: Design criteria for new construction, alterations
and renovations of properties designated as landmarks and in
historic districts.
e. Landmark: An individual structure, or an integrated group of
structures on a single lot or site, or a site having a special character
or special historical, cultural, educational, architectural, engineering
or geographic interest of value.
f. Historic District: An area or section of the City of Plattsmouth
containing a number of structures having a special character of historical,
cultural, educational, architectural, engineering or geographic
interest or value.
g. Owner: A real estate owner or owner’s authorized agent, officer
of a corporation which owns real estate, partner of a partnership
owning real estate, or member of an LLC or other similar organization
owning real estate.
h. Private: All bodies, groups, organizations, associations, corporations,
clubs and individuals of whatever nature which are not included
in the definition of “public”.
i. Public: The state, or any agency thereof; a municipality; a county
or any board appointed by or acting for same; a township; a commission
or other authority established by law; any district, or other
political subdivision of the state or public body recognized by law.
j. Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attached to something having location
on the ground.
k. Work: Work shall mean and include any alteration, demolition,
construction, reconstruction, restoration, remodeling or other material
change in the external appearance of the structure. Nothing in
this Section 9-305 may be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance
or repair where such maintenance or repair does not involve
a material change of appearance.
2. The City Council finds that the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use
of structures, districts and elements of historical, cultural, educational, architectural,
engineering or geographic significance, located within the City of
Plattsmouth, contribute to the prosperity, civic pride and general welfare of the
people; and further finds that the economic, cultural and aesthetic interests of the
City of Plattsmouth cannot be maintained or enhanced by disregarding the heritage
of the City of Plattsmouth and that people of the City of Plattsmouth have an
interest in the maintenance, preservation, demolition or other action regarding
such cultural assets.
Therefore, the City Council finds that the purposes of this Ordinance are, among
other things, to:
a. designate, preserve, protect, enhance and perpetuate those
structures and districts which reflect significant elements of the
City’s heritage;
b. foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past;
c. stabilize or improve the aesthetic and economic vitality and values
of such structures and districts;
d. protect and enhance the City’s attraction to tourists and visitors;
e. promote the use of historic structures or districts for education;
and
f. promote and encourage continued private ownership and utilization
of such buildings and other structures now owned and used, to
the extent that the objectives listed above can be promoted.
3. There is hereby created the Historic Preservation Board of the City of
Plattsmouth.
a. The Board shall be composed of seven (7) members, consisting
of citizens who have a demonstrated interest in preservation, architecture,
engineering, interior design, historical or cultural matters or
are owners of real estate within the historic district. The Board shall
consist of residents or property owners of Plattsmouth, Nebraska.
b. The members of the Board shall be appointed by the Mayor,
subject to confirmation by the City Council.
c. Initially, three (3) members of the Board shall be appointed for a
one (1) year term, two (2) members shall be appointed for a two (2)
year term, and two (2) members shall be appointed for a three (3)
year term. Members shall serve until their successors are appointed
and qualified, and may be appointed to successive terms.
d. In the event of a vacancy occurring in the membership of the
Board for any reason, an appointment shall be made to fill the vacancy
in the same manner as the original appointments for the unexpired
term.
e. The members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
f. The Board shall elect its chairperson from among its members.
g. The Board shall establish its own rules of procedure.
h. Four (4) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
i. Except as otherwise provided herein, four (4) affirmative votes
shall be required for final action on any matter acted upon by the
Board.
j. The Board shall meet at minimum quarterly or at times and in
such places as it may determine, or upon the call of the chairperson.
If a member has 3 consecutive unexcused absences, the position
will become vacant and the Mayor with the consent of the
City Council shall fill the vacancy.
k. The Board shall adopt design guidelines based on the Secretary
of the Interior’s Guidelines for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating
Historic Buildings and other appropriate sources. In doing
so, the ordinances recommended by the Board shall provide for
the consideration of economic factors and provide for the recognition
of weighing potential economic detriments against preservationist
objectives and shall strive to effect a fair balance in all instances.
4. All plans, projects, proposals, evaluations, specifications, and sketches and
other information necessary for the review of the Board, or colors, building materials,
signs, or other features subject to public view, shall be made available to
the Board by the applicant or appropriate department of the City of Plattsmouth,
along with a copy of the application for the building or demolition permit.
5. The City Administrator shall be the Director of the Board, without the right to
vote, and he/she or members of staff shall be the custodian of records, conduct
official correspondence and generally to supervise the clerical and technical work
of the Board as required to administer this Ordinance. In addition, the Director,
for and on behalf of the Board and with the approval and direction of the Board,
shall:
a. Carry out, assist and collaborate in studies and programs designed
to identify and evaluate structures, sites and areas worthy of
preservation;
b. Consult with and consider the ideas and recommendations of
civic groups, public agencies and citizens interested in historic
preservation;
c. Inspect and investigate structures, sites and areas which are believed
worthy of preservation;
d. Disseminate information to the public concerning those structures,
sites and areas deemed worthy of preservation and encourage
and advise property owners in the protection, enhancement,
perpetuation and use of property of historical interest; and
e. Make recommendations and do such other acts pursuant to this
Ordinance as the Board shall direct.
6. The duties of the Board shall include:
a. Submit to the Planning Commission for public hearing and approval,
for further submission to the Mayor and City Council for
public hearing and approval, and subsequently maintain (and resubmit
as required) a list of structures and other features deemed
deserving of official recognition although not designated as landmarks
or historic districts and take appropriate measures of recognition,
and maintain a documentary inventory;
b. Consider methods other than those provided for in this Ordinance
for encouraging and achieving historical preservation, and
make appropriate recommendations to the Planning Commission,
City Council, and other bodies and agencies, both public and private;
c. Taking into consideration the Cass County Nebraska Historic
Building Survey and similar such surveys, make an inventory of all
sites, structures, and districts within the zoning jurisdiction of the
City of Plattsmouth which are designated as, or which it deems deserving
of designation as, historic landmarks on or before December
31, 2005, and from this inventory make recommendations of
such sites, structures and districts for such designation by Ordinance;
d. Upon request of the property owner or nomination by the Board
and with approval of property owner, any property nominated to the
National register must be reviewed by Board and forwarded with
comments to the Chief elected official (Mayor) for review and comment
prior to consideration by the State Historic Preservation Office
(SHPO); and
e. Upon request of the property owner, assist with paperwork for
consideration for National Register nomination.
7. Properties may be designated as Landmarks and Historic Districts may be
created as set forth below, and when so designated, the same shall be subject to
this ordinance.
a. All landmarks and property within a historic district shall be subject
to the controls, standards and procedures set forth in this ordinance.
b. A particular site, structure or area may be designated for preservation
as a landmark or historic district if it has:
(1) Historic importance or cultural significance, interest
or value as part of the development, history, heritage
or culture of the City, state or nation or is associated
with the life of a person significant in the past; or
is the site of an historic event, or exemplifies the cultural,
political, economic, educational, social or historic
heritage of the community;
(2) Architectural and engineering importance, portraying
the historical setting or environment of a distinctive
characteristic of an architectural or engineering
type, period, style, or method of construction; or is
the work of a resident, builder or designer whose individual
work is significant in the development of the
City; or contains elements of design, detail, materials
or craftsmanship of distinctive quality, or which represents
a significant innovation;
(3) Geographic importance, by being a part of or related
to a city center, park or other distinctive area,
which should be developed or preserved according to
a plan based on a historic, cultural or architectural
motif; or owing to its unique location or singular physical
characteristic, represents an established and familiar
visual feature of a neighborhood, community, or
the City of Plattsmouth; or
(4) Archeological importance has yielded or is likely
to yield information important regarding the history of
the area prior to the establishment of the City of
Plattsmouth.
c. A landmark or historic district may be proposed by the City
Council, the Board or upon petition of the owner. Any such proposal
shall be filed with the Director on forms prescribed by the
Board.
d. Designation of a potential historic district may be proposed on
the application of the owners of fifty-one (51%) percent of the front
footage of the real property in the proposed district.
e. Each proposal of a landmark or an historic district shall first be
considered by the Board at a public hearing.
f. Notice of the time, place and purpose of the public hearing to be
held upon the proposal of a landmark or an historic district shall be
given by the Board in the official newspaper of the City of
Plattsmouth not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the
hearing and by mail to the owners of all property included in the
proposed designation, using for that purpose the names and addresses
of the last-known owners as shown by the county real
property tax records. Failure to send notice by mail to any such
property owner where the address of the owner is not so recorded
shall not invalidate any proceedings in connection with the proposed
designation. The Board may also give such other notice as
may be deemed desirable and practicable.
g. A record of the pertinent information presented at the hearing
upon the proposal of a proposed landmark or an historic district
shall be made and maintained as a permanent public record.
h. The Board may approve, disapprove or modify the proposal of a
landmark or an historic district and shall notify the applicant of the
action taken within sixty (60) days of the referral thereof to the
Board.
i. The recommendation of the Board for approval of a proposal for
a proposed landmark or historic district shall state the particular
standards for such designation, as set out in this section, which are
applied in each designation.
j. In the case of a proposed landmark, recommendation for designation
shall require six (6) affirmative votes if the owner or owners
thereof do not concur in the designation or a simple majority if the
owner or owners of a landmark site concur in the designation.
k. In the case of a proposed historic district, recommendation for
designation shall require the concurrence in such designation by
the owners of fifty-one (51%) percent of the front footage of the real
property within the proposed district.
8. The Board shall transmit the proposal for the designation of a landmark or an
historic district to the Planning Commission for recommendation to the Mayor
and City Council. The Board shall consider the degree of conformity or nonconformity
with the comprehensive development plan of the City.
9. The Mayor and City Council shall consider the designation of property as a
Landmark or the designation of an historic district as follows:
a. When a proposal for the designation of a landmark or an historic
district is presented to the City Council, it shall take into consideration
the recommendation of the Board, and shall further give consideration
to the economic consequences to the City and the affected
property owners.
b. Objection by the owners of twenty (20%) percent of the front
footage of the property within a proposed historic district shall require
five (5) affirmative votes by City Council for approval of such
district.
c. Objection by the owner or owners of a proposed landmark shall
require five (5) affirmative votes for approval of such landmark.
d. Objections as to a landmark or an historic district designation
must be acknowledged on a form available in the office of the Director
and any such objections must be filed with the City Clerk no
later than the first reading of the proposed designation ordinance.
e. In order for the owners of a particular parcel of land to validly object
to the designation, such objection shall be executed by all
those owners who are otherwise required to execute a valid conveyance
of a fee simple interest in such parcel and whose names
appear in the records of the County Register of Deeds.
f. Pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance, and the procedures
set forth herein, the City Council may, by ordinance, designate a
“Landmark”, or an “Historic District.”
g. An historic district may be designated as such only if the owners
of at least fifty-one (51%) percent of the front footage of property
within the district concur in such designation, not to include any
public right-of-way located in such district.
h. Each ordinance designating a landmark or an historic district
shall include a description and statement of the significance of the
real property or district to justify its designation as such and a description
of the particular features that should be preserved, and
shall include the legal description of the landmark or an historic district.
i. Within ten (10) days after the effective date of an ordinance designating
property as a landmark or an historic district, the Director
shall send a copy of such ordinance and a letter prepared by the
Director outlining the basis of such designation and the obligations
and restrictions which result from such designation to the owner of
record of each property so designated or each property within the
designated district by registered or certified mail.
10. The City Council may, by ordinance, amend or rescind the designation of a
landmark or an historic district at any time pursuant to the same procedures set
forth in this article for the original designation.
11. All properties owned by government entities and/or public agencies shall be
subject to the provisions of this Ordinance in the same manner as private persons.
All visible modifications or additions to public areas within a landmark or
an historic district, including street furniture, lighting fixtures, and paving materials
shall be subject to review by the Board.
12. The Board shall, in the administration of the provisions of this Ordinance,
take into account all economic factors presented to it. The Board shall recognize
the necessity of weighing potential economic detriments against preservationist
objectives and shall strive to effect a fair balance in all instances.
13. No person shall carry out or cause to be carried out any Work on a landmark
or structure in a an historic district without a certificate of approval first being issued
by the Board. For the purposes of this section, any alteration, new or infill
construction, restoration, remodeling or other changes shall be deemed to require
a certificate of approval where such Work affects any of the characteristics
of the landmark or an historic district which were deemed to be significant and
intended to be preserved as recited in the ordinance designating such landmark
or district.
14. Building permits must be obtained prior to any Work being done. A board
approved certificate of approval must be presented to the building official prior to
any building permit being issued.
15. Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of the Code for
which no penalty is otherwise provided, shall be, upon conviction, subject to fine
of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance
occurs or continues.
16. Applications for certificates of approval shall be processed as follows:
a. All applications for a certificate of approval will be made on
forms available at the Director’s office and shall be forwarded immediately
to the Board.
b. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Building Inspector
shall not permit any work except as pursuant to a certificate of
approval issued by the Board as authorized by the City Council.
c. The Board shall hold a public hearing on applications to it for a
certificate of approval.
d. The determination by the Board on an application for a certificate
of approval, or report of any action taken, shall be forwarded to
the Director for appropriate action not later than forty-five (45) days
after receipt of the application by the Board.
e. The Board, in considering the appropriateness of any work, shall
consider, among other things, the purposes of this article, the historical
and architectural value and significance of the landmark or
an historic district, the texture, material and color of the building or
structure in question or its appurtenant fixtures, including signs, and
the relationship of such features to similar features of other buildings
within a an historic district, and the position of such building or
structure in relation to the street or public way and to other buildings
and structures.
f. If, after considering the application for a certificate of approval
required by this Section, the Board determines that the proposed
changes are consistent with the criteria for historic preservation established
by this section, the Board shall recommend to the Director
the issuance of the certificate of approval.
g. In the event of determination to deny a certificate of approval,
the Board shall request consultation with the owner for a period not
to exceed ninety (90) days for the purpose of considering alternatives
which achieve preservation in keeping with the criteria. If
within that time, an acceptable solution has been achieved, the decision
may be amended to approve issuance of a certificate. If at
the end of ninety (90) days, an acceptable solution has not been
achieved, the certificate of approval shall be deemed finally denied
and the applicant so notified by letter and the applicant may appeal
to the Council within twenty (20) days of the date of the letter finally
denying the application. The Council may, after a public hearing,
reverse or modify the recommendation of the Board but only if it
finds that owing to special conditions pertaining to the specific piece
of property, denial of the certificate of approval will cause undue
and unnecessary hardship.
17. The Director, or one acting in his absence or at his direction, may issue a
temporary certificate of approval upon a showing of extreme hardship on the applicant
or for the public safety in cases where there is a delay during the interim
between hearings by the commission, provided that such temporary certificate of
approval shall be ratified or revoked, in whole or in part, by the commission at its
next meeting. The director, or one acting in his absence or at his direction, may,
upon application of the owner seeking the permit, issue a certificate of approval if
the director deems the application not to be for work as defined in this division.
18. The Planning Commission shall review all Board recommendations, and forward
its recommendation on the same to the Mayor and City Council.
19. The Board may hold public hearings on City of Plattsmouth projects and undertakings
affecting landmark sites, structures or historic districts and make recommendations
to the City Council concerning same.
20. The Board may, upon request of the property owner, render advice and
guidance with respect to any proposed work on a landmark or an historic district.
ARTICLE IV – MOVING BUILDING
SECTION 9-401: REGULATIONS
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to move any building or
structure within the City without first obtaining a written permit to do so. Application
shall be made in writing to the city clerk and shall include the present and
future location of the building to be moved, the proposed route, the equipment to
be used, the number of rooms therein and such other information as the City
Council may require. The application shall be accompanied by a certificate issued
by the county treasurer to the effect that all provisions regulating the moving
of buildings have been complied with on the part of the owner of the real estate
upon which the said building is presently located, including the payment of
all taxes or special assessments and the payment of the pro rata share of bonded
indebtedness of the City, including for school districts therein, pursuant to Nebraska
statutes governing collection of taxes; a photograph accurately depicting
the present condition of said building; a termite inspection certificate covering the
building and its present location; and a detailed plan showing proposed exterior
remodeling of the building and future location subsequent to moving. The applicant,
if other than the owner, shall also furnish good and sufficient evidence of
his/her authority to move said building. The city clerk shall refer the said application
to the building inspector for inspection and report to the City Council. Upon
approval of the City Council, the city clerk shall then issue the said permit; provided
that all fees and deposits as set forth below have been paid or provided.
The permit issued shall expire six months from its date of issuance. In the event
that the building has not been moved within such six month period, a new application
must be made with the city clerk and all of the terms set forth above complied
with before issuance of a new permit.
SECTION 9-402: FEE AND DEPOSIT
Prior to the granting of any permit, the applicant shall have paid to the City a fee
in an amount set from time to time by resolution of the City Council and shall
have provided to the City a good and sufficient corporate surety bond, check or
cash in an amount set by motion of the City Council and conditioned upon moving
said building without doing damage to any private or municipal property. At
such time as the building moving has been completed, the building inspector
shall inspect the premises and report to the city clerk as to the extent of damages,
if any, resulting from the said relocation and whether any city laws have been
violated during the said operation. Upon a satisfactory report from the building
inspector, the city clerk shall return the corporate surety bond, cash or check deposited
by the applicant. In the event the basement, foundation or portion thereof
is not properly filled, covered, or in a clean and sanitary condition, the City
Council may apply the money deposited for the purpose of defraying the expense
of correcting the said conditions. If the expense of correcting the hazardous
condition is greater than the amount of the deposit set by resolution of the City
Council, as required herein, the Council may recover such excess expense by
civil suit or otherwise as prescribed by law.
SECTION 9-403: EXEMPTION
No moving permit shall be required to move a building that is 10 feet wide or less
and 20 feet long or less and, when in a position to move, 15 feet high or less.
ARTICLE V - DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS
SECTION 9-501: REGULATIONS
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity to
tear down or demolish any building or structure within the City without first obtaining
a written permit to do so. Application shall be made in writing to the city clerk
and shall include:
1. the present location of the building to be torn down or demolished;
2. how it will be torn down or demolished;
3. how materials and debris will be removed from the premises and dispensed
of;
4. a photograph accurately depicting the present condition of said building;
5. a termite inspection certificate covering the building at its present location;
6. good and sufficient evidence of his/her authority to tear down or demolish
said building, if applicant is not the owner; and
7. such other information as the City Council may require.
The city clerk shall refer the said application to the building inspector for inspection
and then report to the City Council. Upon approval of the City Council, the
city clerk shall issue the permit; provided that all fees and deposits as set forth
below have been paid or provided. Tearing down, demolition, removal of debris
and filling of excavations will be completed within six months of issuance of the
permit. If not completed within said time, a new permit, fee and deposit (if needed)
must be obtained and paid.
SECTION 9-502: FEE AND DEPOSIT
Prior to the granting of any permit, the applicant shall have paid to the City a fee
in an amount set from time to time by resolution of the City Council and shall
have provided to the City a good and sufficient corporate surety bond, check or
cash in an amount set by motion of the City Council and conditioned upon tearing
down or demolishing such building without doing damage to any private or municipal
property. At such time as the building tear down or demolition has been
completed, the building inspector shall inspect the premises and report to the city
clerk as to the extent of damages, if any, resulting from the said relocation and
whether any city laws have been violated during the said operation. Upon a satisfactory
report from the building inspector, the city clerk shall return the corporate
surety bond, cash or check deposited by the applicant. In the event the
basement, foundation or portion thereof is not properly filled, covered or in a
clean and sanitary condition, the City Council may apply the money deposited for
the purpose of defraying the expense of correcting the said conditions. If the expense
of correcting the hazardous condition is greater than the amount of the
deposit set by resolution of the City Council, as required herein, the Council may
recover such excess expense by civil suit or otherwise as prescribed by law.
SECTION 9-503: EXEMPTION
No permit shall be required to tear down or demolish a building that is 10 feet
wide or less and 20 feet long or less.
ARTICLE VI - PENAL PROVISION
SECTION 9-601: VIOLATION; PENALTY
Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement of any of
the provisions of any article or section of this chapter set forth at full length herein
or incorporated by reference shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500.00 for each offense. A new
violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of such failure
to comply.
CHAPTER X FINE/WAIVER SCHEDULE
Code Penalty
Section Section Description of Offense Fine
2-206 2-1301 Parks, Curfew Violation $50
2-609 2-609 Cemetery, Curfew Violation $25
3-105 3-701 Misdemeanors, Trash – Dumping on Property
of Another $50
3-109 3-701 Misdemeanors, Discharge of Firearms $100
3-111 3-701 Misdemeanors, Discharging BB Guns, Etc. $25
3-114 3-701 Misdemeanors, Disorderly Conduct $100
3-121 3-701 Misdemeanors, Public Urination / Indecent
Exposure $100
3-302 3-701 Dogs/Cats, Failure to License $30
3-304 3-701 Dogs/Cats, Wrongful Licensing $30
3-305 3-701 Dogs/Cats, Unauthorized Removal of Tags $50
3-306 3-701 Dog/Cats, Dog Running at Large $50
3-306.01 3-701 Dogs/Cats, Cat Running at Large $50
3-308 3-701 Dogs/Cats, Failure to Vaccinate for Rabies $25
3-314 3-701 Dogs/Cats, Failure to Control Offensive Barking $35
3-402 3-701 Kennels, Failure to License $50
3-501 3-701 Animals, Keeping Prohibited Animals in City $50
3-507 3-701 Animals, Fowl Running at Large $25
3-513(2) 3-701 Animals, Failure to Remove Waste $25
4-114 4-501 Motor Vehicles, Funeral Processions $50
4-114 4-501 Motor Vehicles, Engine Breaking $50
4-135 4-501 Other Vehicles, Off-roading in Parks $25
4-144.01 4-501 Motor Vehicles, Operating Trucks Off Routes $100
4-146 4-501 Motor Vehicles, Screeching Tires $50
4-402(1) 4-501 Other Vehicles, Bicycle Violations $25
4-402(2) 4-501 Other Vehicles, Skateboarding on Sidewalk $25
4-407 4-501 Other Vehicles, Unauthorized Use of Minibike $25
4-424 4-501 Other Vehicles, Failure to License Moped $50
4-426 4-501 Other Vehicles, Unauthorized Use of Moped $25
4-431 4-501 Other Vehicles, Unauthorized Use of Miniature
Vehicles $25
8-402 8-601 Fireworks, Unauthorized Use $50
UPDATED:
12/18/2017 ORDINANCE NO. 1931
GENERAL INDEX
* see main Index entry
A
ABANDONED VEHICLES
Definitions 4-201
Disposition 4-204
Enforcement 4-202
Notice 4-203
Penal Provisions 4-206
Transfer of Title 4-205
ADMINISTRATION
Bonds; Form 1-301
Elections * 1-701 through 1-714
Employee Regulations and Pension
Programs * 1-601 through 1-608
Fiscal Management * 1-501 through 1-522
Meetings * 1-304 through 1-320
Oath of Office; City Officials 1-302
Officials, Appointed * 1-201 through 1-226
Officials, Elected * 1-101 through 1-111
Ordinances * 1-401 through 1-410
Penal Provision 1-801
Seal, Official Corporate 1-303
AIRPORT AUTHORITY
Duties 2-904
Jurisdiction 2-901
Members; Term; Compensation 2-902
Removal from Office 2-903
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Acquisition and Possession 5-121
Catering License 5-127
Citizen Complaints 5-124
Credit Sales 5-114
Definitions 5-101
Dwellings 5-104
Employer 5-111
Hours of Sale 5-117
Inspections 5-123
License Displayed 5-105
License Required 5-102
Licensee Requirements 5-106
Liquor Application; Municipal
Examination 5-107
Liquor Application; Notice;
Procedure 5-125
Liquor Application; Retail Licensing
Standards; Binding Recommendations
5-126
Liquor License Renewal 5-108
Minors and Incompetents 5-113
Minors, Hiring 5-119
Municipal Powers and Duties 5-109
Nude Entertainment 5-122
Original Package 5-116
Owner of Premises 5-110
Public Entrances Required 5-112
Public Places, Consumption in 5-120
Removal of Intoxicated Persons from
Public or Quasi-Public Property 5-128
Right of Entry to Police 5-103
Sanitary Conditions 5-118
Spiking Beer 5-115
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
Accident Report 4-421
Competition 4-420
Defined 4-415
Equipment, Requirement 4-418
Headlights 4-417
Modifications Prohibited 4-419
Operation 4-416
Penalty 4-422
ANIMALS GENERALLY
Apiaries; Keeping of Beehives or
Boxes; Rules and Regulations 3-512
Banned from City 3-501
Cruelty; Definitions 3-502
Cruelty to Animals 3-503
Cruelty to Animals; Law Enforcement
Officer; Powers, Immunity 3-504
Enclosures 3-505
Fowl; Running at Large 3-507
Owners; Liabilities, Duties 3-513
Pitting; Definitions 3-509
Pitting; Prohibited 3-510
Pitting; Spectators Prohibited 3-511
Running at Large 3-506
Wild Animals 3-508
B
BACKFLOW REGULATIONS
Backflow Prevention Devices 7-132
Conflicts with Other Applicable
Codes 7-136
Cross Connections Prohibited 7-128
Definitions 7-127
Inspection and Maintenance 7-134
Installation 7-133
Policy and Purpose 7-126
Survey and Investigation 7-129
Type of Protection Required 7-131
Violations 7-135
Where Protection is Required 7-130
BICYCLES
Clinging to Motor Vehicle 4-403
Defined 4-401
Impounding 4-404
Operation 4-402
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Appointment of Members 2-1404
Created 2-1401
Duties 2-1408
Meetings 2-1407
Oath, Compensation 2-1405
Organizations and Officers 2-1406
Qualifications of Members 2-1402
Term of Office and Removal 2-1403
BOARD OF HEALTH
Members; Officers; Duties 2-101
BUILDING CODES, INTERNATIONAL
Adoption of Codes 9-101
Enforcement 9-102
Violation of 9-103
BUILDING INSPECTOR
Appeal from Decision 9-204
Barricades and Lights 9-205
Power and Authority 9-201
Right of Entry 9-202
Time of Inspection 9-203
BUILDING PERMITS
Application; Fees 9-301
Display of Permit 9-303
Landmark Heritage Preservation 9-305
Limitation 9-302
New Construction, Sidewalks
Required 9-304
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Building Codes, International * 9-101 through 9-103
Building Inspector * 9-201 through 9-205
Building Permits * 9-301 through 9-305
Landmark Heritage Preservation 9-305
Buildings, Demolition of * 9-501 through 9-503
Buildings, Moving * 9-401 through 9-403
Penal Provision 9-601
BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF
Exemption 9-503
Fee and Deposit 9-502
Regulations 9-501
BUILDINGS, MOVING
Exemption 9-403
Fee and Deposit 9-402
Regulations 9-401
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Alcoholic Beverages * 5-101 through 5-128
Fair Housing Regulations * 5-401 through 5-408
Lottery * 5-901 through 5-902
Minimum Rental Housing Standards* 5-501 through 5-507
Non-Resident Salesmen * 5-201 through 5-506
Occupation Taxes * 5-301 through 5-305
Penal Provision 5-1101
Railroad Companies * 5-701 through 5-705
Salvage Yards * 5-801 through 5-808
Tobacco; tobacco Product Sales 5-1001 through 5-1003
Trailer Regulations * 5-601 through 5-616
C
CATS
See DOGS AND CATS
CEMETERY BOARD
Control and Custody of Funds and
Property 2-606
Curfew 2-609
Duties 2-604
Lot Book 2-608
Meetings 2-603
Members; Term of Office; Oath;
Compensation 2-601
Organization; Officers 2-602
Potters Field 2-607
Reports 2-605
Speed Limit 2-610
CITIZEN ADVISORY REVIEW COMMITTEE
Disclosure of Confidential Information 2-1203
Economic Development Program 2-1201
Mayor; Duties 2-1204
Members; Vacancies; Meetings 2-1202
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
Concurrence by Majority 2-307
Duties 2-306
Hearings 2-310
Investigations 2-309
Meetings 2-305
Members; Oath; Compensation 2-301
Organization; Officers 2-303
Records 2-304
Rules and Regulations 2-308
Term of Office; Removal 2-302
COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
Adjustment, Board of* 2-1401 through 2-1408
Airport Authority * 2-901 through 2-904
Cemetery Board * 2-601 through 2-610
Citizen Advisory Review Committee* 2-1201 through 2-1204
Civil Service Commission * 2-301 through 2-310
Health, Board of * 2-101
Housing Authority * 2-401 through 2-406
Library Board * 2-701 through 2-707
Park Commissioners, Board of * 2-201 through 2-206
Penal Provision 2-1301
Personnel Board * 2-1101, 2-1102
Planning Commission * 2-1001 through 2-1007
Police Department * 2-801 through 2-805
CURFEW
Enforcement; Police Authorization 3-204
Hours 3-201
Hours Extended 3-202
Penalties 3-205
Violation; Parental Liability 3-203
D
DOGS AND CATS
Additional Regulations 3-324
Barking and Offensive 3-314
Dangerous Dogs * 3-319 through 3-323
Fighting 3-315
Impounding 3-318
Interference with Humane Officer 3-312
Killing 3-313
Liability of Owner 3-316
License 3-302
License Tags 3-303
Licensing, Wrongful 3-304
Owner Defined 3-301
Poisoning 3-313
Rabid Animals; Capture Impossible 3-310
Rabid Animals; Proclamation 3-311
Rabies Suspected; Impoundment 3-309
Rabies Vaccination 3-308
Running at Large-Dogs, Fees 3-306
Running at Large-Cats, Fees 3-306.1
Strays 3-317
Tags, Removal of 3-305
Uncollared-Dogs 3-307
DOGS, DANGEROUS
Actions in Defense 3-323
Confined 3-321
Definitions 3-319
Failure to Comply 3-322
Restrained 3-320
E
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 2-1201
ELECTIONS
Ballots 1-712
Candidates 1-706
Certificate of Nomination or Election 1-709
Election of Officers; Certification 1-701
Exit Polls 1-714
Filing Fee 1-704
Inability to Assume Office 1-710
Nomination by Write-in Votes 1-707
Primary Election; Number of
Candidates Filing 1-702
Recall Procedure 1-711
Special Joint Elections 1-708
Tie Votes 1-703
Voter Qualifications 1-705
Wards and Precincts 1-713
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT
Contracts for Service 8-508
Creation, Duties, Operation,Funding 8-501
Discipline/Discharge of Paid Staff 8-506
Director-EMS;Powers and Duties 8-503
Donations Trust Fund 8-514
Equipment 8-512
Expenditures-Departmental 8-511
False Call 8-513
Interference-EMS Provider/Equipment 8-510
Membership 8-504
Mutual Aid Agreements-Approved 8-509
Officers Generally; Appointment 8-502
Service-Outside City Limits 8-507
Suspension-Volunteer Members 8-505
EMPLOYEE REGULATIONS AND PENSION PROGRAMS
Manual, Employee 1-601
Pension Program; Administration 1-603
Pension Program; Funding 1-605
Pension Program; Powers and
Duties of Council 1-604
Pension Program; Reservation of
Rights 1-607
Pension Program; Transfer of
Assignment 1-606
Police Pension Program 1-608
Prohibitions 1-602
EXPLOSIVES
Blasting Permits 8-303
Bullets 8-302
Storage 8-301
Transportation 8-304
F
FAIR HOUSING REGULATIONS
Definitions 5-402
Handicapped Person; Discriminatory
Practices Prohibited; Design and
Construction Standards 5-404
Information 5-408
Multiple Listing Service; Other
Service; Discriminatory Practices
Prohibited 5-406
Purpose 5-401
Religious Organization, Private Home,
Private Club, or Housing for Older
Persons; Restricting Use not
Prohibited 5-407
Residential Real Estate, Transaction
Related to; Discriminatory Practices
Prohibited 5-405
Unlawful Acts 5-403
FINE AND WAIVER SCHEDULE 10
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Assistant Fire Chief 8-104
Chief, Fire 8-103
Contracts for Service 8-108
Creation, Operation and Funding 8-101
Donations Trust Fund 8-119
Driving Over Hose 8-115
Emergency Medical Services Dept* 8-501 through 8-514
Equipment 8-116
Expenditures, Departmental 8-113
Explosives* 8-301 through 8-304
Failure to Respond 8-114
False Alarm 8-118
Fire Prevention* 8-201 through 8-211
Interference 8-117
Interference-Firefighters/Equipment 8-112
Membership 8-105
Mutual Aid Agreements-Approved 8-110
Officers Generally; Appointment 8-102
Rules and Regulations 8-109
Service Outside City Limits 8-107
Suspension/Expulsion of Members 8-106
Watching Premises After Fires 8-111
FIRE PREVENTION
Code 8-201
Enforcement 8-202
Fire Limits; Defined 8-209
Fire Limits; Materials 8-210
Fire Limits; Removal or Repair 8-211
Fires Prohibited 8-206
Lawful Entry 8-203
Open Burning Ban; Waiver 8-207
Poisonous and Flammable Gases 8-208
Street Fires Prohibited 8-205
Violation Notice 8-204
FIREWORKS
Definitions 8-401
Hours for Display 8-402
Applications for the sale of 8-402.01
FISCAL MANAGEMENT
Appropriations 1-507
Audit, Annual 1-511
Bond Issues 1-520
Budget Hearing 1-503
Budget Procedure 1-506
Budget Statement, Adopted;
Filing 1-504
Budget Statement, Proposed;
Filing 1-502
Certificates of Deposit; Security
Required 1-519
Claims 1-512
Collection of Special Assessments;
Procedure 1-522
Contracts 1-510
Debt Collection; Authority to
Contract with Collection Agency 1-521
Expenditures 1-509
Expenditures Prior to Adoption of
Budget 1-505
Fiscal Year 1-501
Funds, Deposit of 1-518
Funds, Transfer of 1-514
General Fund 1-517
General Property Tax 1-508
Sinking Funds 1-516
Special Assessment Fund 1-515
Warrants 1-513
FOWL
See ANIMALS GENERALLY
G
GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION
Dead Animals 7-403
Definitions 7-401
Garbage and Refuse Collection;
Authority 7-410
Garbage and Refuse Collection;
Lien 7-413
Garbage and Refuse Collection;
Notice, Removal 7-411
Garbage and Refuse Collection;
Nuisance 7-412
Garbage Containers, Location of 7-409
Garbage, Rubbish and Waste;
Deposit on Other Premises 7-405
Garbage; Trash and Waste 7-402
Hauling Permit Required 7-406
Hazardous Waste 7-404
Permit Revocation 7-408
Vehicle Specifications 7-407
H
HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSONS PARKING
Citation-Issuance of; Trial;Dismissal 4-324
Definitions 4-322
Off-Street Parking Stalls/Spaces 4-321
On-Street Parking Stalls/Spaces;
Display of Permit 4-320
Permit Issuance 4-323
Removal of Unauthorized Vehicle;
Penalty 4-325
HEALTH, BOARD OF 2-101
HOUSING AUTHORITY
Definitions 2-405
Housing Authority Board 2-401
Misconduct in Office 2-402
Operation and Management 2-406
Ownership 2-404
Reports 2-403
K
KENNELS
Definitions 3-401
Licensing Provisions, Violation of 3-404
Licensing Required 3-402
Regulations 3-403
L
LIBRARY BOARD
Discrimination Prohibited 2-706
Establishment of a Public Library 2-701
Funding, Custody of Funds and
Donations 2-703
Library Advisory Board 2-704
Operation 2-702
Penalties; Recovery; Disposition 2-707
Use of the Library 2-705
LIQUOR
See ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
LOTTERY
Participation; Restrictions 5-901
Sales Outlet Locations; Approval
Required;Qualification Standards 5-902
M
MEETINGS
Change in Office 1-316
City Council 1-314
Closed Sessions 1-308
Defined 1-304
Emergency Meetings 1-309
Minutes 1-310
Notice to News Media 1-312
Order of Business 1-315
Organizational 1-317
Public 1-306
Public Body Defined 1-305
Public Participation 1-313
Quorum 1-319
Robert's Rules of Order 1-307
Special Meetings 1-318
Videoconferencing; When Allowed 1-320
Votes 1-311
MINIBIKES
Defined 4-405
Emergencies and Parades 4-406
Public Lands 4-407
MINIMUM RENTAL HOUSING STANDARDS
Inspection 5-502
Inspection; Exemption, Fee 5-503
Inspection Ordered by Housing
Inspector 5-506
Rental Housing Standards Code 5-501
Time Limit to Bring Occupancy into
Compliance; Extension, Fee 5-504
Violation 5-505
Violation, Continuous; Nuisance,
Abatement 5-507
MISDEMEANORS
Animal Traps 3-133
Animals Generally * 3-501 through 3-513
Appliances in Yard 3-125
Curfew * 3-201 through 3-205
Destruction of Property 3-130
Dirt, Removing 3-123
Disorderly Conduct 3-114
Disturbing the Peace 3-113
Dogs and Cats * 3-301 through 3-324
Drinking in Public 3-106
Failing to Appear 3-136
Fences, Prohibited 3-124
Firearms, Discharge of 3-109
Gambling Devices or Lottery,
Operating; Prohibited 3-117
Gambling Prohibited 3-118
Graffiti; Prohibited 3-135
Indecent Exposure of Person;
Public Urination; Indecent Book,
Picture, Play, Design 3-121
Kennels * 3-401 through 3-404
Littering 3-122
Loud Music, Recordings, Radios
and Similar Devices; Exceptions 3-132
Malicious Mischief 3-107
Nuisances * 3-601 through 3-615
Obstruction of Public Ways 3-126
Obstructing Water Flow 3-127
Pandering, Prostitution, and Illicit
Sexual Intercourse; Prohibited 3-119
Parade, Distribution of Material 3-131
Penal Provision 3-701, 3-702
Police Officer, Impersonating 3-102
Police Officer, Resisting or Failing
to Assist 3-101
Prostitution, House of; Disorderly
House; Prohibited 3-120
Slingshots, Airguns, BB Guns 3-111
Stalking 3-116
Tobacco, Possession of by Minors 3-129
Tobacco Sale Prohibited 3-128
Trailers, Using for Storage Purposes 3-134
Trash 3-105
Trees, Injury to 3-104
Trespassing 3-103
Weapons, Concealed 3-110
Window Peeping 3-115
MOPEDS
Defined 4-423
Equipment 4-428
Operation 4-426
Operator's License Required 4-424
Traffic Lanes, Use of 4-427
Traffic Regulations Applicable 4-425
MOTOR VEHICLES AND BICYCLES
Abandoned Vehicles * 4-201 through 4-206
All-Terrain Vehicles * 4-415 through 4-422
Bicycles * 4-401 through 4-404
Miniature Motorized Vehicles;
Definitions 4-430
Miniature Motorized Vehicles;
Enforcement 4-432
Miniature Motorized Vehicles;
Operation on Public Property
Prohibited; Exception 4-431
Minibikes * 4-405 through 4-407
Mopeds * 4-423 through 4-428
Motorcycles * 4-413, 4-414
Parking * 4-301 through 4-319; 4-326 through 4-328
Penal Provision 4-501
Skateboards, Scooters and Other
Miniature Unpowered Vehicles;
Unlawful Operation, Impoundment 4-429
Snowmobiles * 4-408 through 4-412
Traffic Regulations * 4-101 through 4-152
MOTORCYCLES
Lights 4-413
Riding Tandem 4-414
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY
Acquisition of Real Property 6-110
Acquisition of Real Property;
Appraisal 6-109
Council Approval for Improvements,
Parking 6-106
Definitions 6-101
Destruction or Damage to Property 6-111
Maintenance and Control 6-102
Obstructions 6-103
Obstructions Near Utilities, Removal 6-104
Obstructions, Permitted 6-105
Sale and Conveyance 6-108
Unlawful Storage or Business Use 6-107
N
NATURAL GAS RATE REGULATION
Adoption of Natural Gas Regulation
Act 7-501
Gas Rate Collection Fee 7-502
NOISE
Disturbing an Assembly 3-909
Exemptions 3-910
Glossary of Terms 3-911
Indusxtrial Machinery, Mufflers,
Fans and Engines 3-902
Measurement Standards 3-907
Motor Vehicle Noise Control 3-904
Penalties 3-912
Policy 3-901
Sound Level Meters 3-906
Standards 3-905
Use of Noise Measurement as
Evidence of Vehicle Noise 3-908
NON-RESIDENT SALESMEN
Application for Permit 5-201
Duty to Carry and Display Permit 5-504
Failure to Obtain Permit; Violation 5-206
Hours of Solicitation 5-205
Issuance of Permit 5-203
Registration, Exceptions 5-202
NUISANCES
Abatement 3-603
Adjoining Landowners; Intervention
Before Trial 3-607
Air Pollution; Prohibited 3-608
Cost of Removal 3-605
Defined, Generally 3-601
Defined, Specifically 3-602
Failure to Correct 3-604
Jurisdiction 3-606
Penal Provision 3-701, 3-702
Rodent and Insect Control;
Definitions 3-610
Rodents and Insects; Extermination 3-611
Rodents and Insects; Occupant 3-612
Rodents and Insects; Owner 3-613
Rodents and Insects; Ratproofing 3-614
Rodents and Insects; Standards 3-615
Summary Abatement Procedure 3-603.01
Water Pollution; Prohibited 3-609
O
OCCUPATION TAXES
Certificates 5-304
Failure to Pay 5-305
Fire Insurance Companies 5-302
Liquor, Retail Licensees and Craft
Brewery Licensees 5-303
Telecommunications Services 5-301
OFFICIALS, APPOINTED
Administrator 1-216
Appointment 1-201
Attorney 1-208
Building Inspector 1-218
Clerk 1-204
Clerk-Treasurer Position Created 1-203
Electrical Inspector 1-219
Engineer, City 1-211
Engineer, Special 1-212
Inspector Position Created 1-223
Merger of Offices 1-202
Plumbing Inspector 1-220
Police Chief 1-209
Policemen 1-210
Public Works Director 1-225
Recreation Director 1-213
Removal 1-201
Street Commissioner 1-226
Treasurer 1-205
Treasurer's Annual Report 1-207
Treasurer's Monthly Report 1-206
Utilities Superintendent 1-217
Zoning Director 1-222
Zoning Inspector 1-221
OFFICIALS, ELECTED
City Council; Acting President 1-103
City Council; Organization 1-105
City Council; Selection and Duties 1-104
Compensation 1-110
Conflict of Interest 1-111
Enumerated 1-101
Mayor; Selection and Duties 1-102
Qualifications, Restrictions on
Other Employment or Elective
Office 1-109
Resignations 1-106
Vacancy 1-107
Vacancy, Mayor 1-108
ORDINANCES
Amendments 1-410
Effective Date 1-409
Emergency Ordinances 1-409
Grant of Power 1-401
Introduction 1-402
Publication or Posting 1-407
Publication or Posting, Certificate 1-408
Reading, Passage 1-406
Resolutions and Motions;
Procedure 1-403
Revisions 1-410
Style 1-404
Title 1-405
P
PARK COMMISSIONERS, BOARD OF
Curfew in City Parks 2-206
Duties 2-203
Injury to Park Property 2-205
Members; Term; Oath of Office;
Compensation 2-201
Operation and Funding 2-204
Organization; Meetings 2-202
PARKING
Alley, Obstructing 4-304
Alleys 4-305
Areas 4-303
Churches 4-308
Curb 4-309
Curbs, Painted 4-310
Designation 4-302
Display of Vehicles 4-311
Emergency Vehicles 4-306
Fire Hydrants and Stations 4-307
Flood and Snow Zones;
Exemptions, Conditions 4-314, 4-315
Generally 4-301
Handicapped or Disabled Persons * 4-320 through 4-329
Obstructing Alley 4-304
Owner-Operator 4-326
Parking Lot, City-Owned;
Regulations 4-327
Repair of Vehicles 4-311
Removal of Illegally Parked Vehicles 4-328
Schools 4-308
Snow Zones; Exemptions,
Conditions 4-314, 4-315
Theaters 4-308
Time Limit 4-312
Time Limit, Maximum 4-313
Trucks; Loading or Unloading 4-317
Trucks; Motor Carriers and
Livestock Trucks 4-318
Trucks; Prohibited Parking Area;
Parking Lots 4-316
Trucks; Tankers and Transports 4-319
PENSION PROGRAMS
See EMPLOYEE REGULATIONS AND PENSION PROGRAMS
PLANNING COMMISSION
Actions by City Council; Recommendation
of Commission 2-1007
Duties 2-1004
Funds, Limit upon Expenditures 2-1005
Meetings 2-1003
Members; Term of Office; Oath;
Compensation 2-1001
Organization; Officers 2-1002
Reports 2-1006
PLUMBERS, LICENSED
Defined 7-301
Fees to be Paid to City Treasurer 7-305
License, Procedure to Obtain 7-302
License, Renewal of 7-303
License, Term of 7-304
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Arrest Jurisdiction 2-804
Chief of Police; Appointment 2-801
Duties 2-802
Reserve Officer Bond 2-803
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Municipal Property * 6-101 through 6-111
Penal Provision 6-401
Sidewalks * 6-201 through 6-210
Streets * 6-301 through 6-318
R
RAILROAD COMPANIES
Drainage 5-701
Obstructing Traffic 5-704
Obstructing View at Crossing
Prohibited 5-705
Safe Crossings 5-702
Speed 5-703
RESCUE SQUAD DIVISION
See EMERGENCY MEDICAL
SERVICES DEPARTMENT
RODENTS
See NUISANCES
S
SALVAGE YARDS
Additional Junkyards Prohibited 5-808
Definitions 5-801
Inspections; Notice of Health
Hazard 5-804
Nuisance 5-805
Owner's Responsibility 5-803
Records 5-806
Regulations 5-802
Rodents 5-807
SEWER DEPARTMENT
Building Sewer Construction;
Access and Drainage 7-216
Building Sewer Construction; Bond
Required at Request of
City Council 7-214
Building Sewer Construction;
Construction Codes 7-221
Building Sewer Construction;
Excavation and Backfill 7-219
Building Sewer Construction;
Guarantee 7-218
Building Sewer Construction;
Preparation of Foundation for
Pipe Laying 7-220
Building Sewer Construction;
Protection of Property 7-217
Building Sewer Construction;
Protection of Work 7-215
Building Sewer Installation; Permit
Required, Transferability 7-213
Classification 7-209
Compliance with Article; Inspections,
Injury, Liability 7-235
Contract, Sewer 7-203
Contracts, Service 7-204
Control Manholes 7-233
Definitions 7-202
Discharge of Untreated Sewage;
Unlawful 7-210
Discontinuance of Service; Notice 7-207
Existing Sewers, Use of 7-224
Fees, Billing 7-206
Grease, Oil and Sand Interceptors 7-231
Hazardous and Prohibited Discharges;
Flammable, Toxic, Corrosive and
Obstructive Substances;
Preliminary Treatment 7-227
Hazardous and Prohibited Discharges;
Nature of; Superintendent's
Discretion with Respect to 7-229
Hazardous and Prohibited Discharges;
Specific Prohibitions as Determined
by Superintendent 7-228
Hazardous and Prohibited Substances;
Special Exceptions 7-230
Lien 7-208
Operation and Funding 7-201
Penalties 7-239
Plumbers, Licensed 7-238
Preliminary Treatment or Flow-
Equalizing Facilities; Maintenance
by Owner 7-232
Private Sewage Disposal Systems 7-237
Prohibited Discharges; Storm Water,
Surface Water, Groundwater,
Cooling Water, Process Water 7-226
Public Sewers Required; Cesspools,
Privies, Septic Tanks Prohibited 7-211
Public Sewers Required; Mandatory
Hookup 7-212
Rate Setting 7-205
Sampling of Waters and Wastes;
Method of 7-234
Sewer Installation Expense 7-222
Single Premise 7-223
Unauthorized Entry or Damaging of
Equipment; Unlawful 7-236
Unlawful Connection 7-225
SEX OFFENDERS
Approaching, Contacting, or
Communicating with a Child 3-804
Definitions 3-802
Dissemination of Information 3-806
Findings and Intent 3-801
Presence within School Zone 3-803
Residency Restrictions 3-805
Severability 3-807
Violation; Penalty 3-808
SIDEWALK CAFÉ
Application Requirements 5-1204
Conditions of Operation 5-1206
Definitions 5-1202
Denial; Revocation; Suspension 5-1207
Operation Without Permit Prohibited 5-1201
Permit Fee; Disposition of Funds 5-1203
Review of Applicaiotns 5-1205
SIDEWALKS
Construction Bids 6-207
Construction by Owner 6-205
Construction, Municipal 6-206
Construction Standards and
Specifications 6-208
Dangerous Stairway or Open Grate 6-209
Kept Clean 6-202
Maintenance 6-203
Overhanging Branches 6-201
Repair 6-204
Tree Planting 6-210
SNOWMOBILES
Defined 4-408
Equipment 4-409
Registration 4-412
Streets 4-411
Unlawful Acts 4-410
STREETS
Accumulation of Dirt or Other
Material 6-320
Construction Assessment 6-310
Construction Notice 6-308
Cutting Paving; Curb or Sidewalk 6-317
Deferral from Special Assessment 6-312
Driving Stakes 6-303
Eave and Gutter Spouts 6-306
Excavation and Backfill; Bond 6-324
Excavation and Backfill; Compliance 6-323
Excavation and Backfill; Permit 6-327
Excavation and Backfill; Safety 6-325
Excavation and Backfill; Supervision 6-322
Excavation and Backfill; Time 6-326
Limitations
Harmful Liquids 6-305
Heavy Equipment 6-307
Improvements; Acceptance by 6-316
Engineer
Intersection Improvements 6-315
Mixing Concrete 6-304
Names and Numbers 6-301
Paving, Protection of 6-318
Penal Provisions 6-401
Petition for Improvements 6-311
Pipelines and Wires 6-309
Removal of Markers, Unauthorized 6-319
Vacating Public Ways; Definitions 6-313
Vacating Public Ways; Procedure 6-314
Washing Vehicles on Streets 6-321
Widening and Opening 6-302
T
TOBACCO AND TOBACCO PRODUCT SALES
Definitions 5-1001
Duties 5-1003
Prohibited Acts; Exception 5-1002
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Abandoned Vehicles * 4-201 through 4-206
All-Terrain Vehicles * 4-415 through 4-422
Arterial Streets; Designation 4-105
Backing 4-128
Bicycles * 4-401 through 4-404
Bus Stops 4-147
Careless Driving 4-127
Crowding; Front Seat 4-121
Definitions 4-101
Display of Merchandise in Parking
Zone 4-150
Dragging; Rope, Chain 4-130
Driving Abreast 4-132
Driving in Sidewalk Space 4-134
Driving off Roads in Park Grounds;
Prohibited 4-135
Emergency Regulations 4-137
Following; Distance 4-133
Funeral Processions 4-114
Glass; Pointed Objects 4-115
Littering 4-120
Livestock Waste, Spilling of 4-143
Loads; Projecting 4-141
Loads; Spilling 4-142
Miniature Motorized Vehicles * 4-430 through 4-432
Minibikes * 4-405 through 4-407
Mopeds * 4-423 through 4-428
Motorcycles * 4-413, 4-414
Negligent Driving 4-126
One-Way Traffic 4-103
Parking * 4-301 through 4-319; 4-326 through 4-328
Passing 4-131
Pavement, New; Driving Over 4-151
Penal Provision 4-501
Police; Enforcement 4-138
Police; Refusal to Obey 4-139
Police; Traffic Officers 4-140
Position of Vehicle on Highway 4-112, 4-113
Railroad Crossing Watchman;
Authority 4-149
Riding Outside Vehicle 4-145
Right of Way; Emergency Vehicles 4-111
Right of Way; Generally 4-110
Screeching of Tires; Prohibited 4-146
Signs, Signals 4-116
Signs, Traffic Control Devices, Traffic
Surveillance Devices; Defacing
or Interfering with 4-118
Signs; Unauthorized Display 4-119
Skateboards, Scooters and Other
Miniature Unpowered Vehicles;
Unlawful Operation, Impoundment 4-429
Snow Routes, Emergency;
Designation 4-122
Snowmobiles * 4-408 through 4-412
Speed; Electronic Detection 4-125
Speed Limits 4-123
Speed Near Schools 4-124
Stop Signs 4-117
Taxi Stands 4-148
Traffic Lanes; Designation 4-104
Truck Routes 4-102
Truck Routes 4-144.01
Turning; Cautious 4-109
Turning; Generally 4-108
Turning; Hand Signals 4-106
Turning; U Turns 4-107
Unnecessary Stopping 4-129
Unobstructed View 4-152
TRAILER REGULATIONS
Compliance with Nuisance 5-616
Ordinances
Conversion 5-612
Courts Limited 5-613
Courts; Permit Required 5-602
Definitions 5-601
Drainage 5-607
Electrical Supply 5-610
Inspections 5-615
Liability 5-614
Penalty 5-1101
Permit, Assigning; Prohibited 5-604
Permit Renewal 5-603
Permit Revocation 5-605
Plumbing Facilities 5-608
Unit Spaces 5-606
Unlawful Parking 5-611
Waste Disposal 5-609
U
UTILITIES, PUBLIC
Garbage and Refuse Collection * 7-401 through 7-413
Natural Gas Rate Regulation * 7-501, 7-502
Penal Provision 7-601
Plumbers * 7-301 through 7-305
Sewer Department * 7-201 through 7-239
Water Department * 7-101 through 7-137
W
Waiver Schedule and Fines 10
WATER DEPARTMENT
Account Set Up Fee 7-104
Application 7-103
Backflow Regulations * 7-126 through 7-136
Definitions 7-102
Destruction of Property 7-123
Discontinuance of Service; Notice 7-124
Diversion of Services, Meter
Tampering, Unauthorized Connection,
Prohibited; Evidence 7-125
Fees and Collections 7-113
Fire Hydrants 7-118
Inspection 7-121
Installation Expense 7-108
Installation Procedure 7-107
Lead Pipes, Solder, and Flux;
Prohibited 7-120
Lien 7-115
Mandatory Hookup 7-119
Meters 7-109
Meters; Inability to Repair 7-112
Multiple Meter Headers 7-110
Minimum Rates 7-114
Nonresidents, Service to 7-105
Operation and Funding 7-101
Police Reports 7-122
Repairs 7-111
Restricted Use 7-117
Single Premise 7-116
Water Contract 7-106
Wells, City; Safe Zone 7-137
PLATTSMOUTH-UPDATED DECEMBER 2017

C I T Y O F P L A T T S M O U T H Z O N I N G O R D I N A N C E
Contents-1
ARTICLE ONE - BASIC PROVISIONS
1-1 Title
1-2 Jurisdiction
1-3 Purpose
1-4 Consistency with Comprehensive Development Plan
1-5 Conflicting Provisions
1-6 Relief from Other Provisions
1-7 Severability of Provisions
ARTICLE TWO - DEFINITIONS
2-1 Purpose
2-2 General Construction Language
2-3 Definition of Terms
2-4 A
2-5 B
2-6 C
2-7 D
2-8 E
2-9 F
2-10 G
2-11 H
2-12 I
2-13 J
2-14 K
2-15 L
2-16 M
2-17 N
2-18 O
2-19 P
2-20 Q
2-21 R
2-22 S
2-23 T
2-24 U
2-25 V
2-26 W
2-27 X
2-28 Y
2-29 Z
ARTICLE THREE – USE TYPES
3-1 Purpose
3-2 Determinations
3-3 Residential Use Types
3-4 Office Use Types
3-5 Commercial Use Types
3-6 Civic Use Types
3-7 Parking Use Types
3-8 Industrial Use Types
3-9 Transportations Use Types
3-10 Agricultural Use Types
3-11 Miscellaneous Use Types
C I T Y O F P L A T T S M O U T H Z O N I N G O R D I N A N C E
Contents-2
ARTICLE FOUR – ZONING DISTRICTS
4-1 General Purpose
4-2 Establishment of Districts
4-3 Application of Districts
4-4 Hierarchy
4-5 Development Regulations
4-6 Zoning Map
4-7 Interpretation of District Boundaries
4-8 Vacation of Streets and Alleys
4-9 Zoning on Additions to the Extra-Territorial Jurisdiction
4-10 Required Conformance
4-11 Required Frontage
4-12 Use Matrix: Level of Permitted Uses
4-13 Guide to Site Development Regulators
4-14 AG – Agricultural District
4-15 RR – Rural Residential District
4-16 R-1 – Urban Residential Low-Density District
4-17 R-2 – Urban Residential Medium-Density District
4-18 R-3 – Urban Residential High-Density District
4-19 MH – Mobile Home Park Planned District
4-20 LC – Limited Commercial and Office District
4-21 UC – Urban Corridor District
4-22 GC – General Commercial District
4-23 CB – Central Business District
4-24 BP – Business Park District
4-25 GI – General Industrial District
4-26 HI – Heavy Industrial District
4-27 Concordance between Comprehensive Development Plan Land Use Categories and Zoning Districts
4-28 Large Project Special Use Permit
Table 4.1: Permitted Uses by Zoning District ...........................................................Page 4-5 though 4-7
Table 4.2: AG Site Development Regulations ............................................................................ Page 4-8
Table 4.3: RR Site Development Regulations ............................................................................ Page 4-9
Table 4.4: R-1 Site Development Regulations.......................................................................... Page 4-10
Table 4.5: R-2 Site Development Regulations.......................................................................... Page 4-11
Table 4.6: R-3 Site Development Regulations.......................................................................... Page 4-12
Table 4.7: MH Site Development Regulations .......................................................................... Page 4-13
Table 4.8: LC Site Development Regulations for Regular LC Districts...................................... Page 4-14
Table 4.9: UC Site Development Regulations ..................................................... Page 4-15 through 4-16
Table 4.10: GC Site Development Regulations .......................................................................... Page 4-17
Table 4.11: CB Site Development Regulations........................................................................... Page 4-18
Table 4.12: BP Site Development Regulations........................................................................... Page 4-19
Table 4.13: GI Site Development Regulations............................................................................ Page 4-20
Table 4.14: HI Site Development Regulations............................................................................ Page 4-21
Table 4.15: Future Land Use ................................................................................ Page 4-21 through 4-22
Table 4.16: Minimum Threshold Requiring L District and
Special Use Permit Approval................................................................................... Page 4-22
C I T Y O F P L A T T S M O U T H Z O N I N G O R D I N A N C E
Contents-3
ARTICLE FIVE – OVERLAY DISTRICTS
5-1 General Purpose
5-2 MU – Mixed Use District
5-3 CCD – Civic Corridor Design Overlay District
5-4 PUD – Planned Unit Development Overlay District
5-5 ED – Environmental Resources Overlay District
5-6 HD – Historic Overlay District
5-7 FP/FW – Floodplain/Floodway Overlay District
5-8 AV – Aviation Overlay District
Table 5.1: PUD Application Requirements............................................................ Page 5-18 through 5-19
ARTICLE SIX – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
6-1 Purpose
6-2 Supplemental Use Regulations: Agricultural Uses
6-3 Supplemental Use Regulations: Residential Uses
6-4 Supplemental Use Regulations: Civic Uses
6-5 Supplemental Use Regulations: Commercial Uses
6-6 Supplemental Use Regulations: Industrial Uses
6-7 Supplemental Use Regulations: Miscellaneous Uses
6-8 Supplemental Use Regulations: Accessory Uses
6-9 Supplemental Use Regulations: Outdoor Storage
6-10 Supplemental Use Regulations: Temporary Uses
ARTICLE SEVEN – SUPPLEMENTAL SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
7-1 Purpose
7-2 Setback Adjustments
7-3 Height Exceptions
7-4 Exceptions to Site Development Regulations for Cluster and Conservation Subdivisions
7-5 Fence Regulations
7-6 Appeals
ARTICLE EIGHT – LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING REGULATIONS
8-1 Purpose
8-2 Applicability
8-3 Landscaping Plan Review Procedure
8-4 Landscaping Requirements
8-5 Landscaping Materials and Installation Standards
8-6 Maintenance Responsibility
8-7 Performance Guaranties and Surety
8-8 Bufferyard Provisions
8-9 Screening Standards
8-10 Parking Facility Landscaping
8-11 Planting Requirements
8-12 Tree Replacement
8-13 General Landscape Provisions
Table 8.1: Required Landscaped Areas in Streetyards................................................................. Page 8-2
Table 8.2: Bufferyard Requirements (Feet)................................................................................... Page 8-5
ARTICLE NINE – OFF-STREET PARKING
9-1 Purpose
9-2 Applicability
C I T Y O F P L A T T S M O U T H Z O N I N G O R D I N A N C E
Contents-4
9-3 Landscaping Plan Review Procedure
9-4 Adjustment for Special Permit Uses and Planned Mixed Use Projects
9-5 Parking Facility Location
9-6 Parking for People with Disabilities
9-7 Bicycle Parking
9-8 Off-Street Parking Design Standards
9-9 Off-Street Loading
9-10 Stacking Requirements for Drive-Through Services
9-11 Parking for Personal and Recreational Vehicles
Table 9.1: Off-Street Parking Requirements .............................................................. Page 9-1 through 9-2
Table 9.2: Off-Street Parking Requirements – Schedule A ........................................................... Page 9-2
Table 9.3: Accessible Parking Requirements................................................................................ Page 9-4
Table 9.4: Bicycle Parking Requirements ..................................................................................... Page 9-4
Table 9.5: Off-Site Loading Requirements.................................................................................... Page 9-5
Table 9.6: Stacking Requirements................................................................................................ Page 9-6
ARTICLE TEN – SIGN REGULATIONS
10-1 Purpose
10-2 Definition of Terms
10-3 General Sign and Street Graphics Regulations
10-4 General Regulations: Basic Design Elements for On-Premise Signs
10-5 General Regulations: Other Design Elements
10-6 Specific Regulations for Zoning Districts
10-7 Measurement of Regulators
10-8 Permitted Sign Types by Zoning Districts
10-9 Maximum Permitted Sign Area
10-10 Permitted Signs by Numbers, Dimensions, and Location
10-11 General Permit Procedures
10-12 Repair or Modification of Nonconforming Signs
10-13 Discontinuance of Nonconforming Signs
Table 10.1: Permitted Signs by Type and Zoning District............................................................ Page 10-6
Table 10.2: Maximum Permitted Sign Area for Zone Lot by Zoning District ................................ Page 10-6
Table 10.3: Permitted Signs by Numbers, Dimensions, and Location ......................................... Page 10-7
ARTICLE ELEVEN – NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT
11-1 Purpose
11-2 Regulations Additive
11-3 Nonconforming Lots
11-4 Nonconforming Structures
11-5 Nonconforming Uses
C I T Y O F P L A T T S M O U T H Z O N I N G O R D I N A N C E
Contents-5
ARTICLE TWELVE – ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
12-1 Purpose
12-2 Zoning Enforcement Officer
12-3 Site Plan Review Procedure
12-4 Special Use Permit Procedure
12-5 Amendment Procedure
12-6 Extension of the Extra-Territorial Jurisdiction
12-7 Building Permits and Certificates of Zoning Compliance
12-8 Schedule of Fees, Charges, and Expenses
12-9 Board of Adjustment
12-10 Powers and Duties of the Board of Adjustment
12-11 Appeals from the Board of Adjustment
12-12 Duties of Building Official, Board of Adjustment, City Council, and Courts on Matters of Appeal
12-13 Severability Clause
12-14 Complaints Regarding Violations
12-15 Penalties for Violation
Table 12.1: Criteria for Site Plan Review and Special Use Permits.......................Pages 12-4 through 12-5

S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
1
01 ARTICLE ONE
SUBDIVISIONS: BASIC CONDITIONS
1.0 Purpose
The purposes of this section is to:
a. Serve the public health, safety, and general welfare of the city and residents of Plattsmouth and its surrounding
jurisdiction.
b. Provide for the orderly development and growth of the city by prescribing rules and standards insuring the functional
arrangement of streets, public improvements, open spaces, community facilities, and utilities.
c. Promote the creation of well-planned and attractive residential, commercial, and industrial developments within the city
and its jurisdiction.
d. Avoid excessive costs to the taxpayers of Plattsmouth or the residents of the jurisdiction of the city for the provision of
public services and utilities, while maintaining high standards for these services.
e. Protect the unique environment of the City of Plattsmouth by avoiding environmental damage whenever feasible and
appropriate; and by encouraging flexibility in the design of subdivisions.
f. Provide the City of Plattsmouth with the ability to grow incrementally through the eventual annexation of new
developments.
1.1 Jurisdiction and Applicability
a. The provisions of this section shall be applicable to all property within the corporate limits of the City of Plattsmouth
and its two-mile extraterritorial jurisdiction.
b. No owner of real property within the City of Plattsmouth and its jurisdiction may subdivide or plat such property into
lots for buildings or any other use, streets, or other forms of dedication for public use without gaining approval pursuant to
this Ordinance. In addition, no individual may sell, offer to sell, or construct buildings on any lots or parts of real property
that are not subdivided as required by State law or this section.
c. The provisions of this ordinance apply to all zoning districts. However, specific standards and requirements may be
modified for developments in Planned Unit Developments.
1.2 Interpretation, Conflict, and Severability
a. These regulations shall be held to provide the minimum requirements necessary for the promotion of the public
health, safety, and welfare. If any provision conflicts with any other provision of the Subdivision Ordinance, any other
Ordinance of the City of Plattsmouth, or any applicable State or Federal law, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
b. Nothing in these provisions shall relieve any property owner or user from satisfying any condition or requirement
associated with a previous approval, special permit, variance, development permit, or other permit issued under any local,
State, or Federal ordinance or statute.
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
2
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
3
02 ARTICLE TWO
SUBDIVISIONS APPROVALS AND PROCEDURES
2.1 Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to establish procedures for subdivision applications and for review and action on applications
by the Planning Commission and the City Council. The procedures are designed to assure adequate review and
consideration of subdivision applications, while providing for an orderly and expeditious approval process. The Section
provides procedures for the approval of three types of subdivisions: Administrative Subdivisions, Minor Subdivisions, and
Major Subdivisions.
2.2 Administrative Subdivisions
a. Scope
The Administrative Subdivision procedure may be used to adjust an interior lot line, to create no more than two lots, or to
combine two or more lots without replatting providing the following conditions are met:
1. In the case of an Administrative Lot Line Adjustment:
(a) The lots involved must be designated within the same zoning district and the proposed adjustment will not
create or result in a violation of the Subdivision Ordinance.
(b) The lots involved must be existing platted lots.
(c) The adjustment alters lot lines of no more than four lots.
2. In the case of an Administrative Platting or Lot Consolidation:
(a) The lots involved must be designated within the same zoning district and the proposed platting or lot
consolidation will not create or result in a violation of the Subdivision Ordinance.
(b) The lots involved must be existing platted lots.
(c) The lots must be under unified ownership.
(d) The proposed platting creates no more than two lots, or the proposed consolidation consolidates no more
than two lots.
3. A lot is limited to only one instance of an administrative adjustment, platting and/or consolidation.
4. The subdivision is served by existing utilities and does not require the extension of streets, utilities, or public
improvements.
5. Each lot resulting from the subdivision procedure will conform fully to all requirements of the zoning district that
pertain to the lots; and each lot is developable according to the site development regulations of the Subdivision
Ordinance.
6. No lot resulting from an Administrative Subdivision shall be smaller than 60% of the size of the smallest lot on the
block containing the subdivision.
b. Application and Approval Procedure
An application for an Administrative Subdivision may be approved under the following procedure:
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
4
1. The applicant submits an application on a form provided by the City of Plattsmouth and including the supporting
documents required for Administrative Subdivisions in Table 2.1. These documents shall include a plat of all lots and
parcels that are affected by the action, prepared by a Licensed Surveyor. The plat document shall also include existing
public improvements that serve the site; and shall include a demonstration that required setbacks may be met. A fee
based on the adopted fee schedule together with filing fees shall accompany the application.
2. Following submission, the Zoning Administrator and all City Department Heads shall review each application
according to the following criteria:
(a) Compliance with the conditions contained in Section 2.2 above.
(b) Consistency with the Comprehensive Development Plan of the City of Plattsmouth.
(c) Potential adverse environmental effects or effects on neighboring properties.
3. Following such review, the Zoning Administrator may approve the Administrative Subdivision. Such approval shall
be denoted by signed certificate of approval that must be filed along with the plat with the Cass County Register of
Deeds.
4. The Zoning Administrator retains the right to disapprove or not act on the Administrative Subdivision application. In
the event of such action, the application may proceed through the Minor or Major Subdivision process. If the
subdivision complies with the conditions of a Minor Subdivision application, it may be directed to that approval process.
Otherwise, the proposed subdivision shall be deemed a Major Subdivision and proceed through the appropriate review
and action process.
5. Following approval of an Administrative Subdivision, the Zoning Administrator shall file the plat and certificate of
approval with the Cass County Register of Deeds.
6. The City Clerk/ Zoning Administrator shall keep a complete and accurate record of all administrative subdivision
approvals.
2.3 Minor Subdivisions
a. Scope
The Minor Subdivision procedure may be used when a proposed subdivision meets all of the following conditions:
1. The subdivision creates no more than four lots from any single parcel, tract, or lot.
2. The subdivision is served by existing utilities and does not require the extension of streets, utilities, or public
improvements.
3. Each lot resulting from the subdivision procedure will conform fully to all requirements of the zoning district that
pertain to the lots; and each lot is developable according to the site development regulations of the Subdivision
Ordinance.
4. No part of the parcel has been the subject of a previous Administrative or Minor Subdivision approval.
5. No lot resulting from the Minor Subdivision shall be smaller than 60% of the size of the smallest lot on the block
containing the subdivision.
b. Application and Approval Procedure
An application for a Minor Subdivision may be approved under the following procedure:
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
5
1. The applicant submits an application on a form established by the City and including the supporting documents
required for Administrative Subdivisions in Table 11.3801. These documents shall include a plat of all lots and parcels
that are affected by the action, prepared by a Licensed Surveyor. A fee based on the adopted fee schedule together
with filing fees shall accompany each application.
2. Following submission, the Zoning Administrator shall review each application according to the following criteria:
(a) Compliance with the conditions contained in Section 2.3a above.
(b) Consistency with the Comprehensive Development Plan of the City of Plattsmouth.
(c) Potential adverse environmental effects or effects on neighboring properties.
(d) Effects of the subdivision on public services. In order to determine this effect, the Zoning Administrator may
submit the application to relevant school districts, utilities, and public safety agencies as required.
3. Following such review, the Zoning Administrator shall forward the application along with his/her recommendation in
a written report, to the Planning Commission.
4. The Planning Commission, following proper notice, shall hold a public hearing on each Minor Subdivision and,
following such public hearing, shall take action on the application. If the subdivision is approved by the Planning
Commission, the approval shall be documented by a certificate of approval, executed by the Zoning Administrator and
the Chairperson of the Planning Commission. This certificate shall be filed along with the approved plat with the Cass
County Register of Deeds. A record of all subdivisions and certificates of approval shall also be maintained by the City
Clerk.
5. The Planning Commission retains the right to disapprove or not act on the Minor Subdivision application. In the
event of such action, the applicant may re-apply for a Major Subdivision process.
6. Following approval of a Minor Subdivision, the Zoning Administrator shall file the plat and certificate of approval
with the Cass County Register of Deeds.
7. The City Clerk/ Zoning Administrator shall keep a complete and accurate record of all Minor Subdivision approvals.
2.4 Major Subdivisions
a. Applicability
The Major Subdivision procedures apply to all subdivisions which are not approved or eligible for approval under the
Administrative or Minor Subdivision procedures. In general, these include subdivisions that: 1) are not approved under
the Administrative or Minor Subdivision procedure; 2) create more than four lots; 3) require development or extension of
public improvements.
b. Stages in the Approval Process
The approval process for Major Subdivisions consists of three stages: the pre-application stage, the preliminary plat
approval stage, and the final plat approval stage.
c. Pre-application Procedures
1. Before filing an application for preliminary plat approval, the applicant shall meet with the Zoning Administrator
regarding general requirements and issues relating to the proposed subdivision.
2. At the pre-application conference, the applicant shall submit a concept plan. The concept plan shall include:
(a) A location map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to existing and proposed streets and
public facilities.
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
6
(b) A schematic plan illustrating the proposed layout of streets, lots, and other features and their relationship to
existing and proposed site topography.
3. Within fifteen working days, the Zoning Administrator shall inform the applicant about the consistency of the
concept plan with the objectives and policies of the City's Comprehensive Plan andSubdivision Ordinance.
4. The pre-application conference does not require a formal application or payment of a fee.
d. Preliminary Plat Application
1. Application Requirements
After the pre-application conference, the applicant shall prepare and submit an application for preliminary plat approval.
The applicant shall prepare and file 20 copies of a proposed preliminary plat. The application for preliminary plat
approval shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator at least 30 calendar days before the Planning Commission
meeting at which the application will be considered. The application shall consist of a form established by the Zoning
Administrator; the supporting documents required for Major Subdivisions in Table 2.1; and payment of a filing fee
based on the adopted fee schedule. The plat shall not be accepted until the filing fee has been paid.
2. Draft Subdivision Agreement
The preliminary plat application shall include a draft of a subdivision agreement prepared by the City following a format
established by the City of Plattsmouth. The subdivision agreement establishes the mutual responsibilities of city and
subdivider, including financing of public improvements; the nature of performance bonds and guarantees that the
developer will offer; and the financing arrangements proposed for the subdivision. The City may elect to waive this
requirement if it finds that such a subdivision agreement is unnecessary.
3. Preliminary Plat Approval Procedure
(a) After submission of a complete application for a preliminary plat, the Zoning Administrator shall review the
application. As part of the review, the Zoning Administrator will circulate the application to local utilities, the school
district in which the subdivision is located, public safety agencies, and any other applicable provider of public
services deemed necessary. Each reviewing agency shall submit written comments to the Zoning Administrator
within a fifteen (15) day period.
(b) Following the comment period, the Zoning Administrator shall submit a written recommendation for action to
the Planning Commission.
(c) The Planning Commission, following proper notice, shall hold a public hearing on each Major Subdivision
and, following such public hearing, shall take action on the application. The Planning Commission may
recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial of the preliminary plat to the City Council. In addition, the
Commission may delay action on the application in order to resolve outstanding issues.
(d) Following action by the Planning Commission, a written recommendation summarizing the Commission's
action shall be transmitted to the City Council.
(e) The City Council, following proper notice, shall hold a public hearing on each Major Subdivision and, following
such public hearing, shall take action on the application.
(f) Approval of a preliminary plat by the City Council shall not constitute approval of a final plat. The approval shall
be considered an expression of conditional approval to guide the preparation of a final plat, to be considered
subsequently by approving authorities. The preliminary approval shall confer upon the applicant the following
rights:
(1) The general terms and conditions under which the plat was approved will not change.
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
7
(2) The applicant may submit for approval a final plat for the whole or a part of the preliminary plat on or
before the expiration date of the preliminary approval. For some subdivisions, the preliminary and final plats
may be submitted and approved simultaneously.
(3) The preliminary plat approval shall stay in force for an indefinite period of time from the date of approval
by the City Council. The City Council may, at its discretion, establish a specific effective period or expiration
date for a preliminary plat.
e. Final Plat Application Process
1. Application Requirements
The applicant shall prepare and submit an application for final plat approval. The application for final plat approval
shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator at least 30 calendar days before the Planning Commission meeting at
which the application will be considered. The application shall consist of a form established by the City of Plattsmouth;
the supporting documents required for Final Plat Approval of Major Subdivisions in Table 2.1; and payment of a filing
fee based on the adopted fee schedule. The final plat shall not be accepted for filing until the filing fee has been paid.
2. Final Subdivision Agreement
The final plat application shall include the final subdivision agreement to be executed between the City and the
applicant. The terms of this agreement shall be acted upon along with action on the Final Plat.
3. Performance Bond
The subdivision agreement shall specify the amount of the performance bond for public improvements to be filed prior
to receiving final plat approval or, alternately, shall contain a statement that required improvements have been
satisfactorily completed. The performance bond, if required, must be presented in a form satisfactory to the City
Attorney prior to final approval of the subdivision.
4. Final Plat Approval
(a) The Zoning Administrator and Planning Commission shall review the final plat for consistency with the
approved preliminary plat and for compliance with the Subdivision Ordinance and other applicable local, state, or
federal statutes and regulations. If the final plat meets all conditions of the ordinance and is substantially
consistent with the terms of the preliminary plat approval, the Commission shall have no recourse but to approve
the final plat.
(b) If the Planning Commission finds in its review that the submitted final plat is inconsistent with the preliminary
plat, does not comply with the conditions of relevant ordinances and statutes, or requires a waiver of any section
of the Subdivision Ordinance, it shall hold a public hearing on the final plat. Following such public hearing, the
Commission shall transmit its recommendation on the final plat to the City Council.
(c) The City Council shall take final action on the application. The City Council is further empowered to grant
waivers of a section of the Subdivision Ordinance after a waiver request has received a recommendation from the
Planning Commission.
f. Filing the Final Plat
1. Following City Council approval of a final plat, the Chairman of the Planning Commission and the Mayor of the City
of Plattsmouth shall sign a certificate of approval, which shall be a part of the reproducible documents of the
subdivision plat required with submission of the final plat.
2. The passage of an Ordinance by the City Council accepting the plat shall constitute final approval of the platting of
the area shown on the final plat. The Zoning Administrator shall record the plat in the office of the Register of Deeds of
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
8
Cass County and shall file an executed print on mylar or similar film in the office of the City Clerk/ Zoning Administrator
as satisfactory evidence of such recording before the City shall recognize the plat as being in force.
3. The Zoning Administrator must file the fully executed plat along with all applicable covenants and other
documentation within 90 days of the execution of the plat by the Chairman of the Planning Commission and the Mayor.
Filings shall be with the Cass County Register of Deeds and the State Survey Depository Record. The subdivider must
pay all fees and cost related to the filing.
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
9
Table 2.1:
Application Requirements
ADMINISTRATIVE
SUBDIVISION
MINOR
SUBDIVISION
MAJOR SUBDIVISION
Preliminary Final
PLAT INFORMATION
Name, address of owner and applicant. X X X X
Name, signature, license number, seal
and address of engineer, land surveyor,
architect, planner, and/or landscape
architect, as applicable, involved in
preparation of plat.
X X X
Title block, denoting type of application,
legal description, and general location.
X X X X
Key map, showing location with
reference to surrounding property,
streets, current street names, city limits,
and other features within 200 feet of the
subdivision boundary.
X X X X
Present and proposed zoning. X X X X
North arrow, date, and graphic scale. X X X X
Benchmark NGVD 1929 or NAVD 1988 X X X X
Signature of Administrative Official X
Signature of the Planning Commission
Official
X X X
Signature of the Mayor and City Clerk X X X X
Appropriate certification blocks. X X X X
Monumentation. X X X
Metes and bounds description, including
dimensions, bearings, curb data, tangent
length, radii, arcs, chords, and central
angles for all centerlines and ROW’s, and
centerline curves on streets.
X X X
Acreage of tract. X X X X
Date of original and all revisions. X X X X
Dimensioning of setbacks. X X X
Location, dimensions, and names of
existing and proposed streets.
X X X X
All proposed lot lines, lot dimensions, and
lot areas in square feet.
X X X X
Existing and proposed easements or land
reserved for or dedicated to public use.
X X X X
Phasing plan. X X
Payment of application fees. X X X X
ENVIRONMENTAL INFORMATION
Property lines within 200 feet. X X X
All existing watercourses, flood-plains,
wetlands, habitat areas or other
environmentally sensitive features within
200 feet.
X X X X
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
10
Table 2.1:
Application Requirements
ADMINISTRATIVE
SUBDIVISION
MINOR
SUBDIVISION
MAJOR SUBDIVISION
Preliminary Final
PLAT INFORMATION (cont.)
Existing ROW’s and easements within
200 feet.
X X
Topography at two- foot contours
including areas up to 200 feet of the
plat boundaries.
X X
Existing site drainage system. X X
Drainage calculations and percolation
tests if needed.
X X
IMPROVEMENTS AND
CONSTRUCTION INFORMATION
Proposed utility infrastructure plans
including water, sanitary sewer, and
storm water management and
detention.
X
(Concept)
X
(Detail)
Road and paving cross-sections. X
Proposed street names. X X
New block and lot numbers. X X X
Certifications and seals from licensed
Professional Engineer and/or Licensed
Surveyor, as required by State Statute.
X X X
Improvement financing plan, including
sources of funding (Private,
assessments, public, Sanitary and
Improvement Districts, and other
sources).
X X
Draft subdivision agreement. X
Final subdivision agreement. X
Required Number of Copies of Plat
Document
5 15 20 20
Reduced 8 ½ by 11 copy 1 1 1
Required Minimum Scale of Plat
Documents
18x24 inch Submission of Final Plat to
register of Deeds and City of
Plattsmouth
1”=100 feet 1”=100 feet
X
1”=100 feet 1”=100 feet
X
Electronic file to City of Plattsmouth X X X
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
11
03 ARTICLE THREE
SUBDIVISIONS DESIGN CRITERIA AND GENERAL STANDARDS
3.1 Purpose
The purpose of this section is to provide flexible design alternatives in order to assure that subdivisions in the Plattsmouth
area create functional and attractive environments, minimize adverse effects, become assets to the city's urban and natural
setting, and adapt to their specific situation. The section defines specific types of subdivisions that have varying design
characteristics, applicable to various settings within the City of Plattsmouth and jurisdiction. It outlines specific design
criteria that should be incorporated into the concepts of various types of subdivisions.
3.2 Site Design and Constraints
a. Consideration of Plans
The design of developments shall consider all existing local and regional plans for Plattsmouth and its Jurisdiction.
These include the Comprehensive Development Plan for the City of Plattsmouth.
b. Grading Plan Required
1. A Grading Plan is required for erosion and sediment control on all construction sites greater than 1 acre in size.
Prior to grading or site disturbing activity, the developer shall apply to the Building Department for a grading permit.
The application for a grading permit shall include:
(a) A location map showing the location and extent of grading activity.
(b) A Sediment and Erosion Control Plan.
2. After submission of a complete application for a grading permit, the Zoning Administrator shall review the
application and forward the application to the City engineer for review and formal comment. As part of the review, the
Zoning Administrator shall circulate the petition to any agency with statutory authority for the management of
drainageways and stormwater management.
3. A grading permit shall be issued within ten working days if the Zoning Administrator has received assurances from
applicable state agencies that the Sediment and Erosion Control Plan is compatible with statute, and further that it is
compatible with the objectives and policies of the City's Comprehensive Development Plan and Subdivision Ordinance.
If the submitted Sediment and Erosion Control Plan is deemed inadequate, the applicant will be given a list of
mitigation measures that must be included to ensure conformance. The Zoning Administrator shall issue a grading
permit to the applicant upon certification that mitigation measures will be taken as prescribed, consistent with
applicable state and federal regulations regarding soil and sediment erosion, and environmental water quality.
c. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Stormwater Permit
The subdivider shall obtain coverage under the general National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit
(Number NER 100000) for stormwater discharge. A copy of the general permit is available at the office of the Public
Works Superintendent. The subdivider shall apply for authorization to discharge by submitting a Notice of Intent (NOI)
using form CSW-NOI. The subdivider shall comply with the terms and conditions of the general permit. A copy of the
NOI shall be submitted to the Public Works Superintendent along with the agreement prior to the beginning of any
construction activities. This item shall be considered incidental to the project and shall not be subject to a separate fee.
d. Preservation of Natural Features and Drainage Patterns
1. To the maximum extent possible, development shall be located to preserve natural features of the site, to avoid
areas of environmental sensitivity, and to minimize negative impact and alteration of natural features and drainage
patterns.
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
12
2. The subdivider shall give maximum consideration to the preservation of the following areas as open space, to the
extent consistent with reasonable utilization of land:
(a) Wetlands and other unique environmental areas, as defined in Section 404, Federal Water Pollution Control
Act of 1972 and delineated on wetlands maps prepared by the US Fish and Wildlife Service. Construction and fill
activity shall be prohibited on wetlands in excess of one acre in size. Development and fill upon wetlands smaller
than once acre in size should be avoided whenever possible, but regulated by permit authority of applicable state
and federal agencies.
(b) Significant stands or mature specimens of trees shall be designated by required tree surveys.
(1) Non-Residential and Attached Residential: Based on site inventory and aerial photography no tree taller
than 20 feet or larger than 6 inches in diameter (measured six inches above the ground) shall be removed
except when approved by the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee. Trees removed subject to City
approval shall be replaced with two (2) trees that are a minimum of three (3) inch caliper. The owner of a site
with natural landscaping that is unhealthful (for example, spaced too closely) may be permitted to plant
replacement trees in the parkway or elsewhere in the City, if approved by the Zoning Administrator.
(2) Single-Family Residential: Placement of the building must avoid trees taller than 20 feet or larger than 6
inches in diameter, measured 6 inches above the ground. Any such tree removed or damaged shall be
replaced by a species compatible with existing trees, on a one-to-one basis. The number of replacement
trees will be limited by what can be reasonably accommodated within the available lot area.
(c) Flood plain lands, other than areas that have already experienced substantial development.
(d) Slopes in excess of 15% as measured over a 10-foot interval. Development on slopes over 15% may be
permitted only if an erosion and slope stabilization plan is submitted and approved with the development and if
appropriate measures are taken in compliance with this approved plan. The City may, at its discretion, require
the review and certification of such a plan by a licensed Professional Engineer.
(e) Habitats of endangered species. Development shall avoid fill or disturbance of habitat sites as identified on
federal or state lists administered by the US Fish and Wildlife Service of the US Department of the Interior, and
applicable state environmental regulatory agencies. Developers are encouraged to preserve habitat areas as a
connected open space consistent with the parks and greenways system designated in the Plattsmouth
Comprehensive Development Plan.
e. General Guidelines for Subdivision Layout
Subdivisions shall be designed to comply with the following overall performance objectives:
1. Avoidance of adverse effects on ground water and aquifer recharge.
2. Reduction and minimizing of cut and fill.
3. Avoidance or reduction of unnecessary impervious surfaces.
4. Prevention of flooding and encroachment of water onto other properties.
5. Provision of adequate access to lots, including alternative routes to lots and sites within the subdivision and
minimizing of cul-de-sacs over 500 feet.
6. Mitigation of negative environmental effects on surrounding properties, including effects of shadow, noise, odor,
traffic, drainage, and utilities.
7. Respect for the urban character and traditional layout of Plattsmouth, including providing continuity to established
street and community facility networks; establishing linkages and connections between new development and existing
parts of the city; and preserving historically and architecturally significant sites and buildings, determined as those
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
13
sites or districts either listed on or determined to be eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places, as
determined by the State Historic Preservation Officer.
8. Dedication of arterial, collector, and key local streets on the general alignments specified in the Comprehensive
Development Plan.
d. Site Design Objectives and Approval
The Planning Commission and City Council shall take the above Site Design objectives into account during their review
and approval of subdivision applications.
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
14
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
15
04 ARTICLE FOUR
CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION DESIGN IN ED OVERLAY DISTRICTS
4.1 Purpose
These regulations are intended to guide development design standards and techniques in sensitive environmental areas around
Plattsmouth that are included within ED Environmental Resources Overlay Districts. The techniques of the RC district require that
the natural landforms determine the design and character of new residential development in these sensitive areas. Areas of
environmental sensitivity and potential application of the ED Overlay District may be established by the city’s comprehensive
development plan.
4.2 Process
Subdivisions in an ED Overlay district generally follow the approval procedures outlined in Article 02, establishing the process for
preliminary and final plat approval. Projects which do not require subdivision follow approval procedures appropriate to the specific
project, including Special Use Permits, zoning amendments, site plan review, or other applicable measures. The requirements and
standards included in this section are in addition to those established procedures.
4.3 Permitted Density Yield
Developments in ed Overlay districts are permitted the same density on developable area as would be allowed to
conventional residential development in the underlying zoning district. Yield in housing units (Y) is calculated by the
formula:
Y= .90(TA - UA)
SA
where:
TA = Total parcel area
UA = Undevelopable areas, defined as the sum of wetlands designated by the National Wetlands Survey, Water of the
United States, slopes exceeding 20%, floodways, and soils subject to slumping, as indicated on the medium intensity maps
contained in the county soil survey published by the USDA Soil Conservation Service, is subtracted from the total parcel
area.
.90 = an allowance for the typical percentage of land available after deducting the area of public streets and right-of-ways
serving a low-density residential development.
SA = Minimum site area per unit required by the underlying zoning district.
4.4 Minimum Percentage of Open Space
a. The minimum percentage of land that shall be designated as permanent open space, not to be further
subdivided, and protected through a conservation easement held by the City of Plattsmouth, Cass County, a Homeowners
Association, or a recognized land trust or conservancy, shall be a minimum of 35% of the Net Developable Area, defined as
.90(TA-UA)
b. The above areas shall generally be designated as undivided open space, to facilitate easement monitoring and
enforcement, and to promote appropriate management by a single entity according to approved land management standards.
c. All undivided open space and any lot capable of further subdivision shall be restricted from further subdivision through a
permanent conservation easement, in a form acceptable to the City and duly recorded in the Cass County Register of Deeds
Office.
d. The required open space may be used, without restriction, for underground drainage fields for individual or community
septic systems, and for “spray fields” for spray irrigation proposed in a “land treatment” sewage disposal system. However,
“mound” systems protruding above grade and aerated sewage treatment ponds shall be limited to no more than ten percent
of the required minimum open space.
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
16
e. Stormwater management ponds or basins may be included as part of the minimum required open space, as may land
within the rights-of-way for underground pipelines. However, land within the rights-of-way of high tension power lines shall not
be included as comprising part of the minimum required open space.
4.5 Conservation Areas as Open Space
a. The location of open space shall be consistent with the policies contained in the City of Plattsmouth’s Comprehensive
Development Plan, and with the recommendations contained in this section and the following section (“Evaluation Criteria”).
b. Open space shall be comprised of two types of land; “Primary Conservation Areas” and “Secondary Conservation Areas.”
All lands within both Primary and Secondary Conservation Areas shall be protected by a permanent conservation easement
prohibiting future development, and setting other standards safeguarding the site’s special resources from negative changes.
1. Primary Conservation Areas. This category consists of wetlands designated by the National Wetlands Survey, Water of
the United States, slopes exceeding 20%, floodways, and soils subject to slumping, as indicated on the medium intensity
maps contained in the county soil survey published by the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service.
2. Secondary Conservation Areas. Secondary Conservation Areas comprise at least 35 percent of the Net Developable
Area and shall be designated and permanently protected. Full density credit shall be allowed for land in this category that
would otherwise be buildable under local, state, and federal regulations, so that their development potential is not reduced
by this designation. Such density credit may be applied to other unconstrained parts of the site. Secondary Conservation
Areas are determined by specific project design and typically include all or some of the following kinds of resources:
(a) A 100-foot deep greenway buffer along all waterbodies and watercourses, and a 50-foot greenway buffer alongside
wetlands soils classified as “very poorly drained” in the medium intensity county soil survey of the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service). These areas must be conserved as Secondary Conservation Areas but are
considered as Developable Areas for the purpose of calculating yield.
(b) 100-year floodplains.
(c) woodlands, individual specimen trees, or small stands of significant trees
(d) aquifer recharge areas and areas with highly permeable (“excessively drained”) soil
(e) significant wildlife habitat areas
(f) Class I and Class II farmlands
(g) historic, archaeological or cultural features listed (or eligible to be listed) on the National Register of Historic Places
or the Historic Resources Surveys of the Nebraska State Historical Society.
(h) slopes in excess of 15%
(i) ridgelines and view corridors
(j) land with soils that do not support residential development.
4.6 Location Standards for Open Space
a. Access to Residential Lots
Undivided open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within a conservation subdivision.
To achieve this, the majority of house lots should abut undivided open space in order to provide direct views and access. Safe
and convenient pedestrian access to the open space from all lots not adjoining the open space shall be provided (except in the
case of farmland, or other resource areas vulnerable to trampling damage or human disturbance). Where the undivided open
space is designated as separate, noncontiguous parcels, no parcel shall consist of less than three (3) acres in area nor have a
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
17
length-to-width ratio in excess of 4:1, except such areas that are specifically designed as village greens, ballfields, upland
buffers to wetlands, waterbodies or watercourses, or trail links.
b. Interconnection of Open Spaces
Protected open spaces in each new subdivision are encouraged to adjoin each other, ultimately forming an interconnected
network of Primary and Secondary Conservation Areas across the county. The only elements of the network that would
necessarily be open to the public are those lands that have been required to be dedicated for public use and typically
configured in a linear fashion as an element of Plattsmouth’s long-range open space network through the Comprehensive
Development Plan.
4.7 Special Processes for Conservation Developments
The review and approval process for subdivisions in the ED Overlay District is the same as that for conventional subdivisions,
as set forth in Article 2. Additional provisions and approval processes are set forth in this section.
a. Existing Features Plan
1. Plans analyzing each site’s special features are required for all proposed subdivisions. The Existing Features Plan shall
include at a minimum(1) a contour map based at least upon topographical maps published by the U.S. Geological Survey;
(2) the location of severely constraining elements such as steep slops (over 25%),wetlands, watercourses, intermittent
streams and 100 year floodplains, and all rights-of-way and easements; (3) soil boundaries as shown on USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service medium- intensity maps; and (4) the location of significant features such as woodlands,
treelines, open fields or meadows, scenic views into or out from property, watershed divides and drainage ways, fences or
stone walls, rock outcrops, and existing structures, roads, tracks and trails.
2. The Existing Features Plan shall identify both Primary Conservation Areas and Secondary Conservation Areas, as
described in Section 4.5 of this ordinance. The Existing Features Plan shall form the basis for the Conceptual Preliminary
Plan, which shall show the tentative location of houses, streets, lot lines, and greenway lands in new subdivisions,
according to the four-step design process described in Section 4.7b below.
b. Conceptual Preliminary Plan
A sketch plan or a Conceptual Preliminary Plan shall be submitted for all proposed subdivisions to the Zoning Administrator
before submission of a formal preliminary plat application. A Conceptual Preliminary Plan presents a conceptual layout for
greenway and open lands, house sites, and street alignments. Each Conceptual Preliminary Plan shall follow a four-step
design process, as described below. Applicants shall be prepared to demonstrate to the Zoning Administrator that these four
design steps were followed in the preparation of the plan.
1. Step One: Designating the Open Space. During the first step, all potential conservation areas (both primary and
secondary as defined above) are identified, using the Existing Features Plan.
2. Step Two: Location of House Sites. During the second step, potential house sites are located. Subdivision applicants
shall identify tentative house sites on the Conceptual Preliminary Plan and proposed house sites on the detailed Final Plan.
House sites should generally be located not closer than 100 feet from Primary Conservation Areas, but may be situated
within 50 feet of Secondary Conservation Areas, in order to enjoy views of the latter without negatively affecting the former.
3. Step Three: Street and Lot Layout. The third step consists of aligning proposed streets to provide vehicular access to
each house in the most reasonable and economical way. When lots and access streets are laid out, they shall be located in
a way that avoids or at least minimizes adverse impacts on both the Primary and Secondary Conservation Areas. To the
greatest extent practicable, wetland crossings and streets traversing existing slopes over 15% shall be strongly
discouraged. Street connections shall generally be encouraged to minimize the number of new cul-de-sacs to be
maintained and to facilitate easy access to and from homes in different parts of the property (and on adjoining parcels).
Where cul-de-sacs are necessary, those serving six or fewer homes may be designed with “hammerheads” facilitating
three-point turns. In TND districts, the location of house sites follows the location of streets and squares.
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
18
4. Step Four: Lot Lines. The fourth step is simply to draw in the lot line (where applicable). These are generally drawn
midway between house locations and may include L-shaped “flag lots” meeting the city’s minimum standards for the same.
5. Review and Comments. The Zoning Administrator and the Public Works Director shall return written comments on the
Conceptual Preliminary Plan to the applicant within 30 days of submittal. These comments should recommend changes to
be made prior to submittal of a Preliminary Plat application.
4.8 Ownership and Maintenance of Common Open Space
Developments in the ED Overlay District shall provide for ownership and maintenance of common open space. Common
open space within a development shall be owned, administered, and maintained by any of the following methods, either
individually or in combination, and subject to approval by the City.
a. Offer of Dedication
The City of Plattsmouth, Cass County, or the Natural Resources District shall have the first and last offer of dedication of
undivided open space in the event said land is to be conveyed. Dedication shall take the form of a fee simple ownership. The
City or other public agency may, but shall not be required to accept undivided open space provided: (1) such land is
accessible to the residents of the county; (2) there is no cost of acquisition other than any costs incidental to the transfer of
ownership such as title insurance; and (3) the county agrees to and has access to maintain such lands. Alternatively, a public
agency may accept an easement, subject to the above conditions.
b. Homeowners Association
The undivided open space and associated facilities may be held in common ownership by a homeowners’ association. The
association shall be formed and operated under the following provisions:
1. The developer shall provide a description of the association, including its bylaws and methods for maintaining the open
space. The association will be obligated to have an elected board with the ability to assess dues for the maintenance of the
open space.
2. The association shall be organized by the developer and shall be operated with financial assistance from the developer,
before the sale of any lots within the development.
3. Membership in the association is automatic (mandatory) for all purchasers of propertytherein and their successors. The
conditions and timing of transferring control of the association from developer to homeowners shall be identified.
4. The association shall be responsible for maintenance of insurance and taxes on undivided open space, enforceable by
liens placed by the county on the association. The association may place liens on the homes or house lots of its members
who fail to pay their association dues in a timely manner. Such liens may require the imposition of penalty interest charges.
5. The members of the association shall share equitably the costs of maintaining and developing such undivided open
space. Shares shall be defined within the association bylaws.
6. In the event of a proposed transfer, within the methods here permitted, of undivided open space land by the
homeowners’ association, or of the assumption of maintenance of undivided open space land by a public agency, notice of
such action shall be given to all property owners within the development.
7. The homeowners’ association may lease open space lands to any other qualified person, or corporation, for operation
and maintenance of open space lands.
c. Condominiums
The undivided open space and associated facilities may be controlled through the use of condominium agreements. Such
agreements shall be in conformance with the state statute. All undivided open space land shall be held as a “common
element.”
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
19
d. Transfer of Easements to a Private Conservation Organization.
An owner may transfer easements to a private, nonprofit organization, among whose purposes it is to conserve open space
and /or natural resources, provided that:
1. The organization is acceptable to the City, and is a bona fide conservation organization with perpetual existence;
2. The conveyance contains appropriate provisions for proper reverter or retransfer in the event that the organization
becomes unwilling or unable to continue carrying out its functions; and
3. A maintenance agreement acceptable to the commission is entered into by the developer and the organization.
4.9 Maintenance Standards
a. Financial Responsibility
The ultimate owner of the open space (typically a homeowners’ association) shall be responsible for raising all monies
required for operations, maintenance, or physical improvements to the open space through annual dues, special
assessments, etc. The homeowners’ association shall be authorized under its bylaws to place liens on the property of
residents who fall delinquent in payment of such dues or assessments.
b. Maintenance Enforcement
1. In the event that the association or any successor organization shall, at any time after establishment of a
development containing undivided open space, fail to maintain the undivided open space in reasonable order and
condition in accordance with the development plan, the City may serve written notice upon the owner of record, setting
forth the manner in which the owner of record has failed to maintain the undivided open space in reasonable condition.
2. Failure to adequately maintain the undivided open space in reasonable order and condition constitutes a violation of
this ordinance.
3. Should any bill or bills for maintenance of undivided open space by the City or County be unpaid, a late fee of fifteen
percent shall be added to such bills and a lien shall be filed against the premises in the same manner as other municipal
claims.
4.10 Evaluation Criteria
In evaluating the layout of lots and open space, the following criteria will be considered by the Planning Commission and City
Council as indicating design appropriate to the site’s natural, historic, and cultural features, and meeting the purpose of this
ordinance:
a. Protection of floodplains, wetlands, and steep slopes from clearing, grading, filling, or construction except as may be
approved for essential infrastructure or active or passive recreation amenities.
b. Preservation and maintenance of woodlands, existing fields, pastures, meadows, and orchards, and sufficient buffer areas
to minimize conflicts between residential and agricultural uses.
c. Maintenance of buffers at least 100 feet in depth adjacent to wetlands and surface waters, including creeks, streams,
springs, lakes and ponds.
d. Design around existing treelines between fields or meadows, and minimal impacts on large woodlands (greater than five
acres), especially those containing many mature trees or a significant wildlife habitat.
e. Maintenance of scenic views.
f. Avoidance of new construction on prominent hilltops or ridges, by taking advantage of lower topographic features.
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
20
g. Protection of wildlife habitat areas of species listed as endangered, threatened, or of special concern by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency.
h. Design around and preserves sites of historic, archaeological, or cultural value, including stone walls, barn foundations,
cellar holes, earthworks, and burial grounds.
i. Protection of rural character and improves public safety and vehicular carrying capacity by avoiding development fronting
directly onto existing public roads.
j. Landscaping of common areas if appropriate.
k. Provision of active or passive recreational areas in suitable locations that offer convenient access by residents and
adequate screening from nearby house lots.
l. Inclusion of a pedestrian circulation system providing access between properties, activities, or special features within the
neighborhood open space system. All roadside footpaths should connect with off-road trails.
m. Provision of open space that is reasonably contiguous, avoiding fragmented open spaces.
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
21
05 ARTICLE FIVE
CIRCULATION SYSTEM DESIGN
5.1 Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to assure the development of functional and safe circulation patterns within new
subdivisions, in order to encourage economical and effective movement of motor vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians;
provide access for public safety vehicles; and encourage the development of circulation systems that enhance the quality
of life within new and existing neighborhoods in the City of Plattsmouth and its planning jurisdiction.
5.2 General Standards
The design of circulation systems should conform to the following general standards and requirements:
a. Roadway System Design
1. The road system shall be designed to permit safe and orderly movement of traffic, to meet but not exceed needs
of the present and future served population; to be simple and logical; to respect natural features, topography, and
landscape, and to present an attractive streetscape.
2. All newly platted streets must be dedicated to the public.
3. The system shall conform with the City's Comprehensive Development Plan. For streets not shown on the
Comprehensive Development Plan, the arrangement of streets shall provide for the logical extension of existing
streets.
4. The street network of a subdivision should provide for logical, continuous extensions of streets to subsequent later
developments. Such extensions shall make provision when necessary with a temporary turnaround with a radius
of at least 50 feet.
5. The system shall provide adequate traffic flow through a subdivision and provide at least two routes from each lot
within the subdivision to the rest of the City, except as explicitly permitted by the approving authorities.
Additionally, the system should be designed to discourage through traffic from using local streets.
6. The system should provide good internal street network connectivity. Internal connectivity shall be measured by a
Connectivity Index, calculated as:
CI = L/N
where N = the number of nodes (including intersections and cul-de-sac heads )in a subdivision and L = the
number of street links defined by those nodes. A desirable target for street connectivity is an index of over 1.20.
b. Pedestrian and Bicycle Systems
1. A continuous pedestrian system shall be provided within each non-industrial subdivision, designed to conduct
pedestrians between every point in the subdivision in a safe manner.
2. In conventional subdivisions, the pedestrian system will ordinarily be provided by sidewalks placed parallel to and
on both sides of each street, with exceptions permitted to preserve natural features, create visual interest, or maintain
greenways and pedestrian ways proposed in the Plattsmouth Comprehensive Development Plan.
3. In innovative developments, the pedestrian system may be an independent network diverging from streets but
providing continuous pedestrian access between all points.
4. All aspects of the pedestrian system, including sidewalks and intersection crossings, must be designed to comply
with the Americans with Disabilities Act.
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
22
5. Bikeways or recreational trails shall be required only if specifically indicated by the Comprehensive Development
Plan. Any land dedicated for trail development shall be credited toward the satisfaction of pedestrian system and open
space standards set forth by this ordinance.
5.3 Street Hierarchy and Design
a. Characteristics of the Hierarchy
1. Streets shall be classified according to a street hierarchy with design tailored to function.
2. The street hierarchy shall be defined by road function and projected average daily traffic (ADT), as calculated by trip
generation rates prepared by the Institute of Transportation Engineers or other generally accepted standards.
3. Each residential street shall be classified and designed to meet appropriate standards for its entire length.
4. The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the approving agencies that the distribution of traffic created
by the subdivision will not exceed the design capacity of the proposed street system and its individual segments.
5. The categories, functions, and projected traffic loads of the street hierarchy are set forth in Table 11.4001.
b. Cartway Width
1. Cartway width for each street classification is determined by parking and curbing requirements based on form or
intensity of adjacent development.
2. To promote economical development of streets, minimum cartway width should generally be used. Minimum
cartway widths are set forth in Table 11.4002.
c. Curbs.Gutters, and Shoulders
1. Curbing shall be required for the purposes of safety, drainage, and protection of the pavement edge, as set forth in
Table 5.3.
2. Requirements for curbs vary according to street function and the nature of adjacent development. Adjacent
development is defined as urban or rural as follows:
(a) Rural: Residential or predominately agricultural land use where average lot frontage exceeds 150 feet and
subdivisions are not provided with urban services, including municipal water and/or sanitary sewer. Rural
subdivisions are typically located within an RR district.
(b) Urban: Residential land use where average lot frontage is less than or equal to 150 feet and subdivisions are
provided with municipal water or sanitary sewer service; or adjacent land uses include commercial, office,
industrial, or civic use types.
3. Where curbing is not required, edge definition and stabilization shall be provided.
4. Where curbing is required, shoulders and drainage swales may be used only if soils or topography make the
provision of shoulders preferable to curbs; or where the character of an area is preserved by the use of shoulders and
drainage swales.
5. Shoulders, when developed, shall be at least eight feet in width on each side for all streets; and located within
right-of-way. Swale width is site-specific. Shoulders shall consist of stabilized turf or other acceptable material.
6. All curbs shall provide ramps for accessibility by handicapped people consistent with the requirements of the
Americans with Disabilities Act.
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
23
7. Curb construction shall follow standards established by the City of Plattsmouth.
d. Sidewalks
1. Sidewalk requirements are determined by road classification and intensity of development, as set forth in Table
5.1.
2. Where sidewalks are not otherwise required by Table 5.3, the City Council may require their installation if
necessary to provide access to generators of pedestrian traffic or major community features; to continue a walk on an
adjacent street; to link parts of the city; or to accommodate future development.
3. In conventional development, sidewalks shall be placed generally parallel to streets within right-of-way.
Exceptions are possible to preserve important natural features or to accommodate topography or vegetation; when
applicant shows an alternative for a safe and convenient pedestrian system; or in conservation subdivisions.
4. In commercial areas, sidewalks may abut curb provided they are a minimum of five feet wide. In industrial areas,
sidewalks are not mandatory but may be ordered in by the City Council.
5. Pedestrian rights-of-way at least 15 feet in width may be required through the center of blocks over 600 feet in
length if deemed necessary by the approving agencies to provide access to schools or community facilities; or to
maintain a continuous pedestrian network within and between subdivisions and districts of the City of Plattsmouth and
its jurisdiction. Such rights-of-way shall be dedicated to the public in the same manner as streets.
6. Sidewalks shall provide a clear path of at least four foot in width, free of any obstructions.
7. All sidewalks shall be constructed according to current standards in use by the City of Plattsmouth. Sidewalks
shall be of concrete construction four inches thick except at points of vehicular crossing where they shall be six inches
thick and no less than a minimum of six sack mix.
8. All sidewalks, crossings, and other segments of a continuous pedestrian system must comply with standards of the
Americans with Disabilities Act.
e. Bikeways and Recreational Trails
1. Bikeways and recreational trails shall be required in subdivisions only when specified as part of the comprehensive
development plan.
2. All off-street recreational trails shall be a minimum of ten feet in width for two-way traffic and comply with the
Americans with Disabilities Act. Surfacing of trails shall be acceptable to the City of Plattsmouth. Gradients for
bikeways and recreational trails should not exceed five percent, except for short distances.
3. Recreational trails may satisfy part of the requirements of this ordinance for sidewalks or open space.
4. All residential streets shall utilize bicycle safe drainage grates at storm sewer inlets.
f. Alleys
It is the general policy of the City of Plattsmouth to discourage the use of alleys outside of Planned Unit Developments.
When permitted in such projects, alleys shall be paved and shall have a width of not less than 14 feet. Alleys shall not
be used for parking.
g. Right-of-Way
1. Measurement: The right-of-way of a street shall be measured from lot line to lot line, and shall be wide enough to
contain the cartway, curbs or shoulder, sidewalks and sidewalk setbacks, other necessary graded areas, and utilities.
2. Any right-of-way that continues an existing street shall be no less than that of existing street.
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
24
3. The requirements for right-of-ways for functional categories of roads is set forth in Table 5.3.
4. Dedications: Dedications of right-of-way for collector, community, or arterial streets shall be made consistent with
the comprehensive development plan.
h. Street Design Standards
1. Pavement
(a) All streets shall be paved to current standards utilized in the City of Plattsmouth except:
(1) Local streets in rural subdivisions. Rural subdivisions may utilize a gravel or crushed rock surface of
sufficient thickness and with an adequate base to provide a durable surface as long as it meets the city’s
specifications for gravel roads. Any subdivision that takes advantage of this exception shall provide for
ownership and maintenance of such streets until they are accepted by the city or county and improved to city
or county standards. This permission is subject to submission of a petition by the platting owners binding
themselves and all succeeding property owners to agree that 100% of the paving costs would be completed
by a special assessment project if the subdivision were annexed by the city. Such petition shall waive any
required resolution of necessity, any applicable limitations of the amount that could be assessed against
subdivision property owners including intersection costs, and other costs normally paid by the City in special
assessment projects. This petition, agreeing to waive the right to protest future street paving assessments
shall be recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds as a deed restriction. When hard-surfaced, local
streets in rural subdivisions shall meet current city specifications for paving.
(2) Courts or lanes, which may utilize six-inch concrete, provided that such courts or lanes remain in private or
private cooperative ownership. The subdivision agreement and plat should clearly indicate that such streets are
private and are not subject to city maintenance or acquisition.
(b) Street pavement thickness shall relate to the role of the street in the hierarchy, subgrade conditions, and
pavement type.
2. Continuity of Arterial or Collector Streets
No subdivision shall prevent the extension of arterial or collector streets through and beyond the subdivision. The
subdivider may plan and design collector streets not designated in the Comprehensive Development Plan subject to
the approval of the City Council.
3. Cul-de-sacs
(a) Cul-de-sac streets designed to have one end permanently closed shall not exceed 500 feet in length and shall
be designed so that vision from entrance to end is not restricted. A longer length is permissible within
conservation developments or in the case of unconventional developments, such as golf course subdivisions.
(b) The closed end of a cul-de-sac within a conventional subdivision shall have a turnaround with a street
property line diameter of at least 100 feet in residential subdivisions. This diameter may be increased by the
Planning Commission if deemed necessary in the case of a commercial or industrial subdivision. In very low
density settings, the Planning Commission may allow the use of hammerhead designs or other non-standard
designs.
4. Street Grades
Maximum permitted street grades are set forth in Table 5.2. In typical circumstances, the minimum permitted street
gradient shall be 1.0%. In exceptional circumstances, the Public Works Superintendent may permit street gradients of
less than 1.0%; however, under no circumstances may the gradient be less than 0.4%.
5. Street Intersections
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
25
(a) Streets shall intersect as nearly at right angles as possible, unless limited by topography, existing street
alignments, or other clearly defined constraints.
(b) In most cases, no more than two streets should intersect at a single intersection. Exceptions may be made
within Planned Unit Developments.
(c) Local streets shall minimize intersections with major arterials.
(d) New intersections along one side of an existing or proposed street shall, if possible, align with intersections
on the other side of the street. Offsets between adjacent intersections shall measure at least 150 feet between
centerlines. The use of T-intersections is encouraged on local streets within the interior of a subdivision.
(e) Intersection design standards are set forth in Table 5.2.
6. Block Size
(a) The length, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be suited to the proposed land use and design of the proposed
subdivision. Blocks within urban subdivisions shall not exceed 600 feet in length, unless necessitated by
exceptional topography or other demonstrable constraints. Blocks within rural subdivisions shall not exceed 1,320
feet
7. Other design standards shall be as set forth in Table 11.4004.
5.4 Lighting and Wiring
a. Underground Wiring
1. All electric, telephone, television, cable TV, and other communication lines shall be provided by underground
wiring within easements or public right-of-way, except where in the opinion of the approving authorities, such location
is not feasible. Poles for permitted overhead lines shall be placed in rear lot line easements; or in other locations
designed to lessen their visual impact.
2. New lots adjacent to existing overhead service may utilize that service; however, new local service connections
shall be underground.
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
26
Table 5.1:
Street Hierarchy
Residential Street Type Function Guideline Maximum
Average Daily Traffic (ADT)
Lane or Court Street providing private access to no more than twelve housing
units. Private streets are permitted only in Planned Unit
Developments.
120-150
Local Provides frontage to lots and carries traffic with origin or
destination on street itself. Carries least traffic at lowest speed.
East-west orientation provides best solar access. Local
residential streets usually do not interconnect with adjoining
neighborhoods or subdivisions.
250-1,000
Collector Conducts and distributes traffic between local streets and major
streets in the community. Carries larger volume of traffic.
Residential collectors interconnect and provide through access
between residential neighborhoods. Collector streets should
preserve one through traffic lane in each direction, without
encroachment by parking. Collectors may be included in the city’s
Surface Transportation Program system for federal aid.
1,000-2,500
Frontage Road A street that generally runs parallel to a controlled access arterial
and provides access to individual properties along its length.
1,000-2,500
Minor Arterials Provides community wide access between residential
neighborhoods and to other activity centers in Plattsmouth,
including downtown and major commercial facilities. Direct
access may be provided to other arterial streets. Parking should
generally be prohibited on other arterials. Other arterials should
be excluded from residential areas. These streets are part of the
Surface Transportation Program system for federal aid.
2,500-7,500
Major Arterials Inter-regional road in the street hierarchy. Conveys traffic
between activity centers, often at high speeds and with limited
access. Should be excluded from residential areas. These
streets are part of the Surface Transportation Program system for
federal aid.
7,500+
Table 5.2:
Cartway Width, Grade, and Intersection
Standards
Residential Street Type Moving Lanes Maximum Grade Cartway Width Minimum Curb
Radii
Lane or Court (Private) Two 11-foot 10% (5%*) 25 feet 20 feet (Note 1)
Cul-de-sac Two 11-foot 10% (5%*) 28 feet 25 feet (Note 1)
Urban Local Two 11-foot 10% (5%*) 28 feet 25 feet (Note 1)
PUD Local Two 10-foot 10% 25 feet 25 feet (Note 1)
Rural Local Two 12-foot 10% 28 feet 25 feet (Note 1)
Collector Two 12-foot 8% (5%*) 36 feet 35 feet (Note 1)
Frontage Two 12-foot 8% (5%*) 30 feet 25 feet (Note 1)
Arterials Note 2 6% Note 2 Note 2
* Denotes Maximum Street Grade Within 50 Feet of an Intersection
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
27
Note 1: Intersections shall be rounded at the curb line, with the street having the highest radius requirement as shown in Table
5.2 determining the minimum standard for all curb lines.
Note 2: Arterial street width, grade, and curb radii are determined by state standards and the designation of individual street or
roadway segments.
Table 5.3:
Cartway Width, Sidewalk, and Right-of-Way Standards
Street Type Cartway
Width
Curb/
Shoulder
Sidewalk
(Note 2)
Sidewalk
Setback from
Curb
Total ROW
Private Lane or Court 25 feet Not Required Required 6 feet 50 feet
Cul-de-sac 28 feet Required Required 6 feet 60 feet at
approach
100 feet diameter
Rural Local 28 feet Not Required Not Required 66 feet
Urban Local 28 feet Curb Both sides 8 feet 60 feet
PUD 25 feet Curb Both sides 8 feet 60 feet
Community Boulevard
(divided)
18 feet, 18
foot median
Project specific Both sides 8 feet 85 feet
Community Boulevard
(undivided)
36 feet Project specific Both sides 8 feet 66 feet
Collector
Rural Collector 25 feet Not Required Not Required 66 feet
Urban Collector 36 feet Curb Both Sides 8 feet 70 feet*
Frontage 30 feet Curb One side 8 feet 40 feet
Urban and Rural
Arterials
36-48 feet
(Note 1)
Note 1 Note 1 8 feet 66-80 feet
minimum
* Right-of-way widths for these classes of street may be modified within Traditional Neighborhood Developments, Planned
Developments, or Conservation Subdivisions.
Notes to Table 5.3
Note 1: Arterial street width, grade, and curb radii are determined by state standards and the designation of individual street or
roadway segments.
Note 2: The edge of the sidewalk closest to the street is normally located eight feet in from the curb line. Sidewalks may meander
and diverge from this distance but should at no point be located closer than 4 feet from the inside of the curb or edge of
pavement.
Note 3: Required sidewalks in Industrial zoning districts are not mandatory but the City Council may order in sidewalks in any
zoning districts.
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
28
Table 5.4:
Street Design Requirements
Street Type Minimum radius of
horizontal curves
Minimum sight distance
on vertical curves
Maximum
Slope
Portland Cement Concrete
Pavement Thickness
Lane or Court 150 feet 150 feet 10% 6 inches with reinforcing wire; 7
inches without wire
Local
Urban
Rural
TND/PUD
200 feet
200 feet
150 feet
150 feet
150 feet
150 feet
10%
10%
10%
6 inches with reinforcing wire; 7
inches without wire
6 inches or gravel
6 inches with reinforcing wire; 7
inches without wire
Collector 300 feet 250 feet 8% 8 inches
Frontage 300 feet 250 feet 8% 8 inches
Arterials 400 feet 350 feet 8% 8 inches or determined by road
design
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
29
06 ARTICLE SIX
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND INFRASTRUCTURE
6.1 Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to assure that all subdivisions developed in the City of Plattsmouth and its jurisdiction are
adequately furnished with necessary public services. These services include adequate water, wastewater management,
and storm water drainage utilities; and park and open space resources.
6.2 Water
a. Connection
1. All installations shall be properly connected to an approved and functioning community water system, constructed in
conformance with the applicable design standards of the city.
2. All residential subdivisions inside of the corporate limits of Plattsmouth shall be connected to an existing public
water supply system if such a system is available within 300 feet of the subdivision.
3. Developments with more than 15 units and located within 0.5 mile of an existing public water
system must provide adequate justification as to why they are unable to connect to such a system. For developments
with more than 15 units and located more than 0.5 mile from a public water supply, the water supply strategy shall be
considered by the approving authorities on a case-by-case basis.
4. In a pre-existing subdivision that is served by well and/or septic systems that would otherwise require connection
under the provisions of this section, the Board of Adjustment may grant permission to build on previously undeveloped
lots of record, subject to compliance with Title 124, satisfactory percolation tests reviewed by the Public Works
Superintendent, and other applicable requirements.
5. All proposals for new water supplies, extensions, or main installation shall be approved by the City of Plattsmouth.
b. Capacity
1. The water supply system shall be adequate to handle the necessary flow, based on complete development of
the subdivision.
2. The demand rates for all uses, including emergency fire demand, shall be included in the computation of total
water demand.
3. Fire protection shall be furnished for any development connected to the municipal and/or rural water system.
Computation of minimum fire flows shall be based on calculations of the American Insurance Association and National
Board of Fire Underwriters.
4. Hydrants spaced for necessary fire flow and provided with adequate means of drainage as approved by City
Department Heads and Fire Chief. All mains serving hydrants shall be at least eight inches in diameter , should be
looping mains, and should have appropriate state approvals. All fire hydrant leads shall be a minimum of six inches in
diameter.
5. Installation of water systems shall conform to current design standards in use within the City of Plattsmouth, as
set forth by the Subdivision Design Manual.
6. A certification from a registered Professional Engineer shall be filed with the City of Plattsmouth certifying that
the water supply system of the subdivision is designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of this
Section; and all applicable standards of the State of Nebraska. This certification shall be affixed to an accurate set of
"as-built" system plans. The subdivision’s engineer shall furnish five sets of as-built drawings and one electronic file
compatible with the current version of AutoCad.
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
30
7. All state requirements shall be met and approvals from the Department of Health and Human Services
Regulations and Licensure Division shall be obtained for all water systems.
c. Private or Community Well Systems
If the development does not meet the required criteria for connection to a public water system or for reasons of
topography, economic feasibility, or other special condition proposes water service by a community and/or private well, the
developer shall request a variance according the following provisions:
1. The developer shall submit with the preliminary plat application an Economic Feasibility Study Report and an
Environmental Impact Study report, prepared by a Professional Engineer, which documents the cost of providing city
water service to the subdivision versus the cost of the proposed well system.
2. If a well system is approved by the City with the preliminary plat approval, the system shall be designed and built in
accordance with regulations of the Public Works Superintendent and the Nebraska Department of Health and Human
Services Regulations and Licensure Division. Both agencies shall approve its construction before the City issues
Certificates of Occupancy for any buildings in the subdivision.
3. If a public water supply system is proposed to be provided to an area within a ten-year period from the time of
platting, as indicated in an officially adopted document of the City or other authorized agency, the City may require
installation of a capped system or dry lines. Alternately, the City may require a payment in lieu of the improvement, to
be credited toward the extension and connection of the subdivision to a future public water supply.
4. City approval to install a community and/or private well system shall be allowed subject to the following additional
provisions:
(a) The system, including all distribution lines, hydrants, valves, and appurtenances, shall conform to current
design standards in use within the City of Plattsmouth and shall remain the property of the Developer and/or
Homeowners’ Association.
(b) The developer and all successive lot owners shall agree to connect to the City water system if installed to the
subdivision. Such connection shall not be required for ten years after the date of construction of the initial well
system.
(c) With connection to the City water system, all existing lot owners shall be required to disconnect from and
abandon the pre-existing well system in conformance with all local and State standards and shall share equally in
the cost of such disconnection. Disconnection and abandonment shall be completed within six months after
connection to the City water system.
6.3 Sanitary Sewers
a. Connection
1. All installations shall be properly connected to an approved and functioning sanitary sewer system prior to issuance
of a certificate of occupancy.
2. All residential subdivisions inside of the corporate limits of Plattsmouth shall be connected to an existing public
sanitary sewer system if such a system is available within 300 feet of the subdivision.
Developments with more than 15 units and located within 0.5 mile of an existing public sanitary sewer system must
provide adequate justification as to why they are unable to connect to such a system. For developments with more than
15 units and located more than 0.5 mile from a public sanitary sewer system, the waste disposal strategy shall be
considered by the approving authorities on a case-by-case basis.
In a pre-existing subdivision that is served by well and/or septic systems that would otherwise require connection under
the provisions of this section, the Board of Adjustment may grant permission to build on previously undeveloped lots of
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
31
record, subject to compliance with Title 124, satisfactory percolation tests reviewed by the Public Works
Superintendent, and other applicable requirements.
3. If the City creates a benefit fund for the purpose of financing public extensions of sanitary interceptor sewers to
newly developing areas, each subdivision to be benefited by such extensions shall contribute to such a fund.
Subdivisions within the city limits of Plattsmouth at the time of platting; or subdivisions currently served by existing
sanitary sewer service shall be exempt from this requirement. Contributions to the fund shall be computed on the basis
of proportionate costs and benefits of necessary extensions. Assessments shall be made on a per lot basis for singlefamily
development; a per-unit basis for multi-family residential development; and a site area basis for non-residential
development.
4. All proposals for new public sanitary sewer systems or extensions of existing systems shall be approved by
appropriate public agencies.
5. All state requirements shall be met and approvals from the Department of Environmental Quality or other
appropriate state agencies shall be obtained for all wastewater disposal systems.
b. Capacity
1. The sanitary sewer system shall be adequate to handle the necessary flow, based on complete development of the
subdivision including peak flows.
2. Installation of sanitary sewer systems shall conform to current design standards in use within the City of Plattsmouth
as set forth by the Subdivision Design Manual.
3. A certification from a registered Professional Engineer shall be filed with the City of Plattsmouth certifying that the
sanitary sewer system of the subdivision is designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of this
Section; and all applicable standards of the State of Nebraska. This certification shall be affixed to an accurate set of
"as-built" system plans. The subdivision’s engineer shall furnish five sets of as-built drawings and one electronic file
compatible with the current version of AutoCad.
c. Private Wastewater Disposal Systems
If the development does not meet the required criteria for connection to a public sanitary sewer system and gravity sewer
service connections, or if for reasons of topography, economic feasibility, or other special conditions, the developer
proposes service by a private wastewater disposal system, the developer shall request a variance according the following
provisions:
1. Subsurface or septic systems are not permissible on any lot created after the effective date of this Ordinance if the
gross density of the subdivision is higher than one unit per 70,000 square feet; if individual lots are smaller than one
acre; or in any urban subdivision.
2. The developer shall submit with the preliminary plat application an Economic Feasibility Study Report and an
Environmental Impact Study report, prepared by a Professional Engineer, which documents the cost of providing city
sewer service to the subdivision versus the cost of the proposed private disposal system.
3. The preliminary and final plat shall indicate the envelope for home sites on each lot. Percolation tests must be done
on areas outside the envelopes of home sites. The preliminary plat application shall also show the location of wells and
septic fields for each lot and/or for the subdivision as a whole, and shall submit percolation tests for each lot, taken at
the proposed adsorption field sites to determine the size of the field required for each lot.
4. The City shall consider all these submittals in determining whether to permit installation of private wastewater
disposal systems for the subdivision.
5. If a private wastewater disposal system is approved by the City with the preliminary plat approval, the system shall
be designed and built in accordance with regulations of the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality and the City
of Plattsmouth’s Subdivision Design Manual. The developer’s Professional Engineer shall furnish the City with five
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
32
certified copies of as-built plans and one electronic copy compatible with AutoCad showing service line locations and
final sewer and maintenance access locations, lengths, elevations, and grades.
6. If a sanitary sewer system is to be provided to an area within a ten-year period, as indicated in an officially adopted
document of the City the County, or other authorized
agency, the City may require installation of a capped system or dry lines. Alternately, the City may require a payment
in lieu of the improvement, to be credited toward the extension and extension of the subdivision of a future sanitary
sewer system.
7. City approval to install a community and/or private wastewater disposal system shall be allowed subject to the
following additional provisions:
(a) The system, including all sewer mains and appurtenances, shall conform to current design standards in use
within the City of Plattsmouth and shall remain the property of the Developer and/or Homeowners’ Association.
(b) The developer and all successive lot owners shall agree to connect to the City sanitary sewer system if
installed to the corner of their lot. Such connection shall not be required for ten years after the date of construction
of the initial wastewater system.
(c) With connection to the City sanitary sewer system, all existing lot owners shall be required to disconnect from
and abandon the pre-existing well system in conformance with all local and State standards and shall share
equally in the cost of such disconnection. Disconnection and abandonment shall be completed within six months
after connection to the City sewer system.
6.4 Storm Water Management
a. Design
1. All subdivisions shall have a storm water management system that is adequate to prevent the undue or unplanned
retention of storm water on the site. Undue retention does not include:
(a) Retention through planned facilities.
(b) Retention not substantially different from pre-existing conditions.
2. The design of the storm water management system shall be consistent with general and specific concerns and
standards of the Comprehensive Development Plan and the drainage control programs of applicable public agencies.
Design shall be based on environmentally sound site planning and engineering techniques and the City of Plattsmouth
Stormwater Design Standards.
3. To maximum degree possible, drainage from subdivisions shall conform to natural contours of land and not disturb
pre-existing drainageways.
4. Adjacent properties shall not be unduly burdened with surface water from the subdivision. Specifically:
(a) There may be no unreasonable impediment of water from higher adjacent properties across the subdivision,
causing damage to lower properties.
(b) No action shall unreasonably collect and channel storm water onto lower properties. The volume or rate of
post-development run off shall not exceed the amount of pre-development runoff, and is to be managed in a
manner consistent with Nebraska statutes and existing case law regarding such flows.
5. Design shall use the best available technology to minimize off-site runoff, encourage natural filtration, simulate
natural drainage, and minimize discharge of pollutants. Best available technology may include retention basins, swales,
porous paving, and terracing.
6. No surface water may be channeled into a sanitary sewer system.
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
33
7. Where possible, a subdivision's drainage system shall coordinate with that of surrounding properties or streets.
8. All storm water design shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer or city’s consulting engineer. The
preliminary plat submission must include preliminary drainage computations and demonstrations that the proposed
storm water management system meets the requirements of this Section. A certification from a registered Professional
Engineer shall be filed with the City of Plattsmouth certifying that the storm water management system of the
subdivision is designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of this Section; and all applicable
standards of the State of Nebraska. This certification shall be affixed to an accurate set of "as-built" system plans.
b. Erosion Control
1. With the submission of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall submit an erosion control plan, prepared and
certified by a licensed Professional Engineer, for any land disturbing activity. All grading activities must be carried out
consistent with this approved erosion control plan.
c. Seeding
1. The area of the plat, with the exception of street right-of-way, on which existing vegetation has been destroyed as a
result of grading shall be seeded with a seeding formula as approved by the City during the first growing season
immediately following the completion of grading operations.
6.5 Parks and Public Facilities
Purpose
In order to serve the educational and recreational needs of new residents within the subdivision and promote the public
health, welfare, community character and property values, residential subdividers are required to donate resources to
make improvements to the City of Plattsmouth's parks system as a condition of subdivision approval.
6.6 Parks Reservations
a. General Requirements
The amount of park facilities for new residents is partly based on data and policy in the adopted City of Plattsmouth
Comprehensive Plan. The Plans reflect a local adaptation of standards of the National Recreation and Park Association
(NRPA). The Comprehensive Plan is the result of a system-wide technical analysis and citizen participatory planning
process, which identified near-term and long-range needs for the local parks system.
Given these findings, the City of Plattsmouth has determined the following:
1. Neighborhood Park Dedication. The City of Plattsmouth’s standard for neighborhood park service is 2 acres per
1,000 people. Consistent with this standard and the comprehensive development plan, a subdivision shall dedicate up
to 0.003 acres per single-family detached dwelling unit and .002 acres per unit for other types of housing for a
neighborhood park. Alternately, the subdivider shall pay a fee equivalent to the cost of 0.006 acres per single-family
detached dwelling unit and .004 acres per unit for other types of housing, to be used specifically by the City for the
acquisition and development of park and recreational facilities which directly benefit the subdivision.
2. Location. Land donated for new parks shall be located based generally on the City's Comprehensive Development
Plan and official map and shall specifically consider the design of each development and natural features present. The
amount of land required shall not include wetlands, floodway, floodplain or storm water detention facilities.
c. Park Donation Substitutes
If park land would be more appropriately located off-site, the City Council may agree to accept cash in lieu of land from a
residential subdivider. The amount of land required from a residential subdivider may be reduced depending on the
amount of the improved land, up to two (2) acres established as a private park by the subdivider, provided that such land
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
34
is determined to be of equivalent value and available by right to all residents of the development. The subdivider shall
present evidence, through physical design and legal documentation that the private facility shall be equally available to all
residents of the development.
d. Criteria for Requiring a Contribution of Cash in Lieu of Park and Recreation Land
1. General Requirements. Where the subdivision is small and the resulting site is too small to be practical or when the
available land is inappropriate for parks and recreation land use, or when land for a park and recreation use cannot be
made contiguous to land dedication for a school site, the City Council shall determine whether the subdivider shall be
required to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the required land donation.
2. Park Accounting Trust and Use of Fees
(a) The cash contributions in lieu of land for parks and recreation use shall be held in trust by the City of
Plattsmouth for expenditure by the City as determined by the City Council. Such cash contributions shall be used
solely for the acquisition of land for parks and recreation that will be available to serve the immediate or future
needs of the residents of the subdivision or development, or for the improvement of recreation facilities and other
parks already existing which will benefit the subdivision.
6.7 Topography and Grading
The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site and its surroundings must be suitable for its intended purposes.
A subdivider shall allow the City to have access to the proposed sites for the purpose of conducting soil boring tests.
6.8 Timing and Conveyance
Unless otherwise determined through a Subdivision Agreement, a subdivider shall convey to the City (or such other
governmental body, corporation or such owner as determined by the City) the land required under this Section at the time
of final approval by the City Council of the subdivision or re-subdivision plat or final development plan, by the delivery of
the following documents:
a. A good and sufficient Trustee's or Warranty Deed conveying fee simple title free and clear of all liens and
encumbrances (except liens or encumbrances dischargeable by cash accompanying said deed) except for current
real estate taxes;
b. A deposit of money equal to 100% of the most ascertainable taxes for the year, pro-rated to the date that the
deed is delivered;
c. A plat of survey containing thereon the legal description of the property to be conveyed and any other matters
which may be required by the City Administrator, under as advised by the Zoning Administrator, City Attorney, and
the consulting Public Works Superintendent.
6.9 Timing of Payment
Cash contributions required under this Section shall be paid as follows:
a. Fees Paid Prior to Final Plat
Unless otherwise provided by the terms of a developer agreement entered into between the City and the subdivider, all
fees required pursuant to this Section, including fees arising from the development of land located in the City's two-mile
planning jurisdiction that may be subject of an intergovernmental agreement, shall be due and owing prior to the final plat
approval by the City Council.
However, if the subdivider's lands are the subject of an annexation agreement, payment shall be made at the times and in
the manner provided in said annexation agreement.
b. Procedures for Fee Collection and Administration
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
35
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk, or other official designated by the City Council to establish regulations and
procedures for the collection and administration of the cash contributions required under this Section.
6.10 Development Agreements
a. Development Agreements May Establish Time and Manner of Compliance
The City may enter into a Development Agreement with any subdivider that sets forth the time and manner of compliance
with the terms of this Section and implementation of any other provisions of these regulations. Such development
agreements shall be included as part of the Subdivision Agreement required for subdivisions subject to the provisions of
Section 7.4.
b. Prior Development Agreements
If any development agreement has previously been entered into between the City and a subdivider, and that Agreement
remains in full force and effect, the provisions of that agreement shall control, and this Section shall have no force and
effect, provided that the subdivider complies with the terms of such Agreement. However, if such subdivider is not
complying with the terms of that Agreement then the provisions of this Section shall apply and the City shall utilize the
criteria set forth herein to determine the appropriate exaction amount, less credits, if any.
Further, if the development contemplated by a subdivider has either increased in number of units or has otherwise
increased the demand for park and recreation facilities, then the developer Agreement previously entered into between
the subdivider and the City shall be amended and the subdivider shall provide additional land, or a pro-rata fee, based on
the provisions of this Section, less credits, if any.
6.11 Easements
a. Utility Easements
1. Urban Subdivisions: Minimum easements for utilities shall be provided for in the subdivision dedication allowing for
the construction, maintenance, repair, and replacement of utilities. Such easements shall be at least 5 feet in width,
centered on the lot lines, and 10 feet in width along the rear property line where not adjacent to additional lots, and shall
be provided along:
(a) All rear property lines.
(b) Side property lines where necessary to provide a continuous easement. Easement requirements
may be waived with proof that such easements are not required by utility service providers.
2. Easements of greater width may be required along lot lines or across lots. Easements of lesser width may be
approved if accepted by utility providers. Easements shall connect with easements on adjoining properties.
3. Easements shall be approved in writing by any appropriate public or private utility provider intending to use such
easement for their facilities. Such approval shall be submitted prior to final plat approval.
b. Drainage Easements
Where a subdivision is crossed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, a storm water easement or drainage
right-of-way shall be provided. It shall correspond generally with the extent of such watercourse, together with any
additional construction or expansion necessary to allow it to conduct storm water adequately. Easements shall extend not
less than 20 feet on each side from the centerline of the waterway. The total width of any easement shall be sufficient to
cover the 100-year flood plain calculated for a fully developed upstream drainage basin. Parallel streets or parkways may
be utilized to preserve such drainageways.
c. Setback Requirements for Structures Adjacent to Creeks and Drainageways
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
36
1. In addition to other applicable provisions of city ordinances, no persons shall be granted a permit for the
construction of any structure, exclusive of fences, bank stabilization structures, poles signs, and non-related parking
areas adjacent to any creek or stream unless such structure is located so that no portion whereof is any closer to the
stream than will allow a maximum 3:1 slope between the water's edge (during normal flow conditions) of the stream and
the closest point of the structure at-grade.
2. An exemption from the provisions of Sub-section (1) above may be granted if all of the following conditions are met
and required certification is filed with the City of Plattsmouth:
(a) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that adequate bank stabilization structures or
slope protection will be installed in the construction of said structure, having an estimated useful life equal to that of
the structure, which will provide adequate lateral support so that no portion of the structure adjacent to the stream
will be endangered by erosion or lack of lateral support.
(b) Certification shall be affixed to an accurate set of "as-built" construction plans for the structure, as well as “asbuilt”
plans of depicting any bank stabilization or slope protection measures or structures.
(c) In the event that the structure is adjacent to any stream that has been channelized or otherwise improved by
any agency of government, then such certification providing this exemption must take the form of a certification as
to the adequacy and protection of the improvements installed by such governmental unit.
d. Other Easements
The subdivision shall provide easements for other public utilities that cross through it, in a form acceptable to
the City or appropriate public agency.
6.12 Dedications
Before final plat approval is granted to the subdivision, dedications to public use of all streets, alleys, other public right-ofways,
or other parks and public lands shall be completed as required by this Ordinance.
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
37
07 ARTICLE SEVEN
IMPROVEMENT FINANCING AND GUARANTEES
7.1 Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to ensure the equitable financing and proper installation and maintenance of required
streets, utilities, and other improvements. The guarantee shall be structured to provide adequate assurances to the City
while not adding unnecessary costs to the developer.
7.2 Application
This Section applies to subdivisions that require the installation of streets, utilities, or other public improvements by the
City or developer.
7.3 Responsibility of Subdivider
The subdivider shall be responsible for the installation and/or construction of all improvements required by this Ordinance
and shall warrant the design, materials, workmanship, construction, and performance of such improvements for two years
after the date of completion.
7.4 Subdivision Agreement
a. Condition for Approval of Plat
As a condition for final approval, each major subdivision plat must include a subdivision agreement entered into between
the City of Plattsmouth and the subdivider. Additionally, no contract for the construction of public improvements involving
a subdivision within the extraterritorial jurisdiction but outside the corporate limits of Plattsmouth shall be awarded without
the approval of such an agreement.
b. Components of the Agreement
The agreement shall include provisions for the financing and distribution of responsibilities among the City and the
subdivider for land acquisition, design, and installation of public improvements. The agreement shall also state specifically
how public services will be provided in the subdivision prior to annexation by the City.
c. Rules for Distributing Improvement Costs
Generally, the following rules shall be followed in distributing costs for public improvements:
1. Public Costs
Allowable public costs will be those items that have demonstrable benefit to the general public. These items may
include:
(a) Pavement width in excess of 28 feet for streets designated as collector or arterial streets in the Plattsmouth
Comprehensive Development Plan or any subsequent amendment thereof. On collector and arterial streets
requiring a higher standard of paving than normal, the additional cost shall be borne by the City or other public
agency.
(b) The incremental cost of water mains over eight inches.
(c) Oversized storm sewers or drainage structures required to serve other areas in the watershed. Such
expenses may also be assessed on an area basis to properties served by the improvement.
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
38
(d) Sanitary outfall sewers or water lines outside of the limits of a subdivision that serve areas larger than that of
the subdivision, provided that such extension is consistent with the sequencing of development specified in the
Comprehensive Development Plan.
(e) The additional costs of sanitary sewers over 8 inches in diameter, when such sewers are required by the City.
(f) Park and recreation facilities consistent with the Comprehensive Development Plan.
(g) Those costs required to be paid by the City for extension of water and sewer lines, pursuant to the
Plattsmouth Municipal Code.
2. Private Costs
Allowable special assessment costs will be those items that have direct benefit primarily to adjacent properties. These
items may include:
(a) The entire cost of grading street rights-of-way, including intersections.
(b) All sanitary sewer lines serving the subdivision up to 8 inches and water lines serving the subdivision up to eight
inches.
(c) All paving and street construction, including curbs and gutters, up to a cartway width of 28 feet.
(d) A stormwater management system adequate to provide for the collection, retention, and removal of surface
runoff, extending to the boundaries of the subdivision
(e) Sidewalks as required by this Ordinance. Construction of sidewalks may be delayed until after completion of site
grading and construction, but must be completed prior to occupancy of the structure.
(f) The private share of trails or bicycle paths included in the city’s system, as identified by the Comprehensive
Development Plan; or trails or bicycle paths whose primary benefit is to residents of the subdivision.
(g) The contract charge for underground electrical and gas service.
(h) An iron rod not less than five-eighths (5/8) inch in diameter and 24 inches in length as follows:
(1) Set three feet deep at the intersection of all lines forming angles in the boundary of the subdivision and at
all street intersections.
(2) At lot corners and changes in direction of block and lot boundaries.
(h) Those costs required to be paid by the developer for extension of water and sewer lines, pursuant to the
Plattsmouth Municipal Code.
3. The subdivider in lieu of installing and constructing said improvements at his/her expense, may, along with all
owners of property to be affected by such improvements and all perfected lienholders , petition the Council to cause the
construction of such improvements. This petition shall waive any required resolution of necessity, any applicable
limitations of the amount which could be assessed against subdivision property owners including intersection costs, and
other costs normally paid by the City in special assessment projects.
7.5 Subdivisions Contiguous with City
Unless otherwise provided as a specific part of the subdivision approval by the city, all subdivisions now or hereafter laid
out adjoining or contiguous to the corporate limits of the city shall be included within such corporate limits and become a
part of the City of Plattsmouth. The residents of the subdivision shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges and subject
to all laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations of the City of Plattsmouth.
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
39
7.6 Performance Guarantees
a. As a condition of the final approval of the plat and prior to its recording with the Cass County Register of Deeds, the
City Council shall require and accept the following:
1. The furnishing of a performance bond, letter of credit, cash escrow, or other guarantee in a form acceptable to the
City, in an amount not to exceed 100% of the estimated cost of the improvement installation.
2. A specification of the time allowed for the installation of improvements. This period may be extended by the City
Council.
3. The performance guarantee amount and requirement, along with the permitted time for installation, shall be included
within the Subdivision Agreement negotiated between the City and the Developer and approved with the Final Plat.
7.7 Notification of Completion and Acceptance by City
a. Notification
Upon substantial completion of all required improvements, the developer shall notify the Public Works Superintendent in
writing, as well as submitting a certification from a registered Professional Engineer, attesting to the adequacy of the
installation.
b. Inspection and Acceptance
1. The Public Works Superintendent shall inspect all installations, and shall approve, partially approve, or
disapprove the installation. Upon completion of improvements, he/she shall file a statement with the City Council and
Zoning Administrator certifying that the improvements have been completed satisfactorily or listing the defects in the
improvements.
2. If the installation is approved, the Public Works Superintendent shall notify the Developer of acceptance in
writing. Such acceptance shall release the developer from liability pursuant to the performance guarantee for the
installation. The City has the right to retain up to 10% of the value of the performance guarantee for a period of up to
one year from the date of acceptance to remedy any deficiencies which appear during that period.
3. If improvements are not accepted or not completed within the specified time, the performance guarantee shall
be forfeited and used by the City to complete satisfactory installation of improvements.
4. No residential occupancy permits shall be issued for a subdivision unless the installation of improvements has
been inspected and approved in full by the Public Works Superintendent.
B A S I C P R O V I S I O N S
1-1
01 ARTICLE ONE
BASIC PROVISIONS
1-1 Title
Chapter 11 of the Plattsmouth Municipal Code shall be known as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Plattsmouth.
1-2 Jurisdiction
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all property within the corporate limits of the City of Plattsmouth
and its two-mile extra-territorial jurisdiction as provided by Section 14, Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943.
1-3 Purpose
The purposes of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Plattsmouth are to:
A. Serve the public health, safety, and general welfare of the city and its jurisdiction.
B. Classify property in a manner that reflects its suitability for specific uses.
C. Provide for sound, attractive development within the city and its jurisdiction.
D. Encourage compatibility of adjacent land uses.
E. Protect environmentally-sensitive areas.
F. Further the objectives of the Comprehensive Development Plan of the City of Plattsmouth.
1-4 Consistency with Comprehensive Development Plan
The City of Plattsmouth intends that this Zoning Ordinance and amendments thereto shall be consistent with the
City’s Comprehensive Development Plan.
1-5 Conflicting Provisions
The Zoning Ordinance shall be held to provide the minimum requirements necessary for the promotion of health,
safety, and welfare. If any provision of the Zoning Ordinance conflicts with any other provision of the Zoning
Ordinance, any other Ordinance of the City of Plattsmouth, or any applicable state or federal law, the more
restrictive provision shall apply.
1-6 Relief from Other Provisions
Nothing in these provisions shall relieve any property owner or user from satisfying any condition or requirement
associated with a previous approval, special permit, variance, development permit, or other permit issued under any
local, state, or federal ordinance or statute.
1-7 Severability of Provisions
If any chapter, section, subsection, clause, or phrase of this Zoning Ordinance is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance.

D E F I N I T I O N S
2-1
02 ARTICLE TWO
DEFINITIONS
2-1 Purpose
Article Two shall be known as “Definitions.” The purpose of these provisions is to promote consistency and
precision in the interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance. The meaning and construction of words as set forth shall
apply throughout the Zoning Ordinance, unless where modified in a specific section or where the context of such
words or phrases clearly indicates a different meaning or construction.
2-2 General Construction Language
The following general rules of construction apply to the text of this chapter:
A. Headings: Section and subsection headings contained herein are provided for illustrative purposes only
and shall not be deemed to limit, govern, modify or otherwise affect the scope, meaning, or intent of any
provision of this chapter.
B. Illustration: In the case of any real or apparent conflict between the text of this chapter and any illustration
explaining the text, the text shall apply.
C. Shall and May: "Shall" is always mandatory; "may" is discretionary.
D. Tenses and Numbers: Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the
singular include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
E. Conjunctions: Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the following conjunctions shall be
interpreted as follows:
1. "And" indicates that all connected items or provisions apply.
2. "Or" indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singly or in any combination.
3. "Either ... or" indicates that the connected items or provisions shall apply singly but not in
combination.
F. Referenced Agencies: Unless otherwise indicated, all public officials, bodies, and agencies referred to in
this chapter are those of the City of Plattsmouth.
2-3 Definitions of Terms
For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Certain sections contain
definitions which are additional to those listed here. Where terms are not specifically defined, their ordinarily
accepted meanings or meanings implied by their context shall apply.
2-4 A
1. Abutting: Having lot lines or district boundaries in common, including property separated by a
public street or alley. Used interchangeably with adjacent.
2. Accessory Structure: A structure which is incidental to and customarily associated with a
specific principal use or building on the same site.
D E F I N I T I O N S
2-2
3. Accessory Use: A use which is incidental to and customarily associated with a specific principal
use on the same site.
4. Adjacent: Having lot lines or district boundaries in common, including property separated by a
public street or alley; used interchangeably with "abutting or contiguous."
5. Addition: Any construction which increases the size of a building or structure in terms of site
coverage, height, length, width, or gross floor area.
6. Agent of Owner: Any person showing written verification that he/she is acting for, and with the
knowledge and consent of, a property owner.
7. Alley: A public right-of-way which is used as a secondary means of access to abutting property.
8. Alteration: Any construction to the internal arrangement of spaces, the supporting members, the
positioning on a site, or the appearance of a building or structure.
9. Attached: Having one or more walls in common with a principal building or connected to a
principal building by an integral architectural element, such as a covered passageway, facade
wall extension, or archway.
2-5 B
1. Basement: A level of a building below street level that has at least one-half of its height below
the surface of adjacent ground. A basement used for independent dwelling or business purposes
shall be considered a story for the purposes of height measurement.
2. Base Zoning District: A district established by this Ordinance to prescribe basic regulations
governing use and site development standards. No more than one base district shall apply to
any individually platted lot or parcel.
3. Beginning of Construction: The initial incorporation of labor and materials within the foundation
of a building or structure.
4. Block: An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, by streets and
the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, or by a combination of the above with a watercourse
or lake, and which has been designated as such on a plat for the purposes of legal description of
a property.
5. Block Face: The property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest
intersection streets, or between the one nearest intersecting street and a major physical barrier,
including, but not limited to, railroads, streams, lakes, or the corporate limits of Plattsmouth.
6. Board of Adjustments: A body, established by the city, pursuant to Nebraska R.R.S. §§ 19-901
through 19-914, expressly for the purpose of granting relief from situations of hardship and to
hear appeals as provided by this chapter.
7. Bufferyard: A landscaped area intended to separate and partially obstruct the view of two
adjacent land uses or properties from one another.
8. Building: A structure having a roof and built to provide shelter, support, or enclosure for persons
or property.
9. Building Coverage: The area of a site covered by buildings or roofed areas, excluding allowed
projecting eaves, balconies, and similar features.
D E F I N I T I O N S
2-3
10. Building Envelope: The three-dimensional space within which a structure is permitted to be built
on a lot after all zoning and other applicable municipal requirements have been met.
11. Building Line: The outer boundary of a building established by the location of its exterior walls.
12. Building Official: The designee of the City Council, responsible for supervision and operation of
the building and land use regulations of the City of Plattsmouth.
13. Business: Activities that include the exchange or manufacture of goods or services on a site.
14. Business Center: A building containing more than one commercial business, or any group of
non-residential buildings within a common development, characterized by shared parking and
access.
2-6 C
1. Certificate of Occupancy: An official certificate issued by the Building Official or his/her
designee, indicating conformance with the zoning regulations and other applicable ordinances of
the city and authorizing legal use of the premises for which it is issued.
2. Change of Use: The replacement of an existing use by a new use.
3. City: The City of Plattsmouth, Nebraska.
4. City Council: The City Council of Plattsmouth, Nebraska.
5. Cluster: A development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site
to allow remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, or the preservation of
historically or environmentally sensitive features.
6. Cluster Development: A development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific
areas on a site to allow remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space or the
preservation of historically- or environmentally-sensitive features.
7. Collector Street: A street connecting neighborhoods within the same communities, designed to
carry traffic from local to arterial streets.
8. Common Area: An area held, designed, and designated for common or cooperative use within a
development.
9. Common Development: A development proposed and planned as one unified project not
separated by a public street or alley.
10. Common Open Space: Land within or related to a development that is not individually owned or
dedicated for public use, designed and generally intended for the common use of the residents
of the development.
11. Compatibility: The degree to which two or more different land use types are able to exist
together in close proximity, with no one use having significant negative effects on any other use.
12. Comprehensive Plan: The duly adopted Comprehensive Development Plan of the City of
Plattsmouth.
13. Condominium: A real estate ownership arrangement that combines fee simple title to a specific
unit and joint ownership in common elements shared with other unit owners. Types of units may
include dwelling units, parking spaces, office spaces, or commercial spaces.
D E F I N I T I O N S
2-4
14. Conservation Subdivision: A type of cluster subdivision that maintains environmentally-sensitive
areas as common or private open space, while clustering development in areas that have fewer
environmental limitations.
15. County: Cass County, Nebraska.
16. Courtyard: An open, unoccupied space, bounded on two or more sides by the walls of the
building.
17. Conventional Subdivision: A subdivision which literally meets all nominal standards of Chapter
170, Subdivision of Land, for lot dimensions, setbacks, street frontage and other site
development regulations.
18. Cul-De-Sac: A local street having one end open to vehicular traffic and the other end
permanently closed with a vehicular turnaround.
2-7 D
1. Density: The amount of development per specific unit of a site.
2. Drive-in Services: Uses which involve the sale of products or provision of services to occupants
in vehicles.
3. Detached: Fully separated from any other building or jointed to another building in such a
manner as not to constitute an enclosed or covered connection.
4. Driveway: A permanently-surfaced area providing vehicular access between a street and an offstreet
parking or loading area.
5. Dwelling Unit: One or more rooms, designed, occupied, or intended for occupancy as a
separate living quarter, with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling
unit for the exclusive use of a single family maintaining a household.
2-8 E
1. Easement: A privilege or right-of-use granted on, above, under, or across a particular tract of
land by one owner to another.
2. Enclosed: A roofed or covered space fully surrounded by walls.
2-9 F
1. Family: One or more persons living together and sharing common living, sleeping, cooking, and
eating facilities within an individual housing unit, no more than three of whom may be unrelated.
The following persons shall be considered related for the purpose of this chapter:
a. Persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption.
b. Persons residing with a family for the purpose of adoption.
c. Not more than eight persons under 19 years of age, residing in a foster house licensed
or approved by the tate of Nebraska.
d. Not more than eight persons 19 years of age or older residing with a family for the
purpose of receiving foster care licensed or approved by the State of Nebraska.
e. Person(s) living with a family at the direction of a court.
2. Federal: Pertaining to the government of the United States of America.
D E F I N I T I O N S
2-5
3. Floor Area Ratio: The quotient of gross floor area divided by gross site area.
4. Frontage: The length of a property line of any one lot or premise abutting on a public street or
other public or private street or way that provides principal access to the lot, measured from the
points at which the side lot lines intersect the street property line. On corner lots, each yard
adjacent to a street is a front yard.
2-10 G
1. Grade: The horizontal elevation of the finished surface of ground, paving, or sidewalk adjacent
to any building line.
a. For buildings having walls facing one street only, the grade shall be the elevation of
the sidewalk at the center of the wall facing the street.
b. For buildings having walls facing more than one street, the grade shall be the average
elevation of the grades of all walls facing each street.
c. For buildings having no walls facing a street, the grade shall be the average level of
the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building.
2. Gross Floor Area: The total enclosed area of all floors of a building, measured to the inside
surfaces of the exterior walls. This definition excludes the areas of basements, elevator shafts,
airspaces above atriums, and enclosed off-street parking and loading areas serving a principal
use.
2-11 H
1. Hard Surface: A ground surface covered with cobblestones, flagstone, bricks, sectional paver
units, poured concrete, asphalt, asphaltic concrete, or other material that provides a stable,
relatively impervious surface. Sectional pavers that include perforations permitting the growth of
grasses or vegetation (such as Grasscrete) also fall under the definition of hard surfaces. A
graded natural surface or a surface overlaid with loose gravel or granulated stone is not
considered a hard surface.
2. Height: The vertical distance from the established grade to the highest point of the coping of a
flat roof, the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height between eaves and ridge for
gable, hip, shed, or gambrel roofs. Where a building is located on a slope, height shall be
measured from the average grade level adjacent to the building.
D E F I N I T I O N S
2-6
3. Home Occupation: An accessory occupational use conducted entirely within a dwelling unit by
its inhabitants, which is clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling unit or residential
structure and does not change the residential character of its site.
4. Housing Unit or Dwelling Unit: One or more rooms, designed, occupied, or intended for
occupancy as a separate living quarter, with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary facilities provided
within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single family maintaining a household.
2-12 I
1. Impervious Coverage: The total horizontal area of all buildings, roofed or covered spaces, paved
surface areas, walkways and driveways, and any other site improvements that decrease the
ability of the surface of the site to absorb water, expressed as a percentage of site area. The
surface water area of pools, ponds, creeks, streams, and other natural or engineered bodies of
water are excluded from this definition.
2. Irregular Lot: A lot in which the side lots lines are not parallel to each other and/or the front and
back lot lines are not parallel to each other; or a lot that has more or less than four lot lines.
2-13 J
2-14 K
2-15 L
1. Landscape Plan: A plan, drawn to scale, showing dimensions and details for revegetating an
area, including maintenance and protection measures.
2. Landscaped Area: The area within the boundaries of a given lot, site, or common development
consisting primarily of plant material, including, but not limited to, grass, trees, shrubs, vines,
groundcover, and other organic plant materials; or grass paver masonry units installed such that
the appearance of the area is primarily landscaped.
a. Perimeter Landscaped Area: Any required landscaped area that adjoins the exterior
boundary of a lot, site, or common development.
b. Interior Landscaped Area: Any landscaped area within a site exclusive of required
perimeter landscaping.
D E F I N I T I O N S
2-7
3. Legal Access: A dedicated right-of-way that connects a subdivision to another dedicated right of
way that is external to the subdivision and connects to the rest of the community’s transportation
system.
4. Loading Area: An off-street area used for the loading or unloading of goods from a vehicle in
connection with the use of the site on which such area is located.
5. Lot: A parcel of real property with a separate and distinct number or other designation shown on
a plat, record or survey, parcel map, or subdivision map recorded in the office of the Cass
County Register of Deeds. When a lot is used together with one or more contiguous lots in a
common development, all of the lots used, including any lots used for off-street parking, shall be
considered a single lot for purposes of these zoning regulations. A lot shall have a minimum
frontage of 20 feet, except as provided in an approved planned unit development and/or cluster
subdivision.
a. Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersection of two streets, private ways, or courts, or
on two segments of a curved street, private way, or court forming an angle of no more
than 135 degrees.
b. Double Frontage Lot: A lot, other than a corner lot, having frontage on two streets,
private ways, or courts. Primary access shall be restricted on a double-frontage lot to
the minor of the two streets or to the front line as determined at time of platting or as
defined by this chapter. (Also known as a "through lot.")
c. Interior Lot: A lot other than a comer lot.
5. Lot Area: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot.
6. Lot Depth: The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
7. Lot Line: The lines bounding a lot as herein defined.
a. Front Lot Line: For an interior lot, the lot line separating the lot from the street, private
way, or court. For a corner lot, the shorter lot line abutting a street, private way, or
court, or the line designated as the front lot line on a subdivision plat or parcel map.
For a double-frontage lot, the lot lines separating the lot from the right-of-way or
D E F I N I T I O N S
2-8
easement of the more minor street. In cases where each street has the same
classification, the front lot line shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator at the
time of application for the original building permit for the lot, or as may be noted on the
final plat.
b. Rear Lot Line: The lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line.
c. Side Lot Line: Any lot line that is neither a front nor rear lot line. A side lot line
separating a lot from a street, private way, or court is a street side lot line. A side lot
line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line.
8. Lot Width: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at the two points of
intersection between the front yard setback line and the side lot lines.
2-16 M
1. Manufactured Home/Structure: A factory-built structure which is to be used as a place for human
habitation, which is not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing
it to be moved other than to a permanent site; does not have permanently attached to its body or
frame any wheels or axles; bears a label certifying that it was built in compliance with the
National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards promulgated by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development; and which complies with the following
architectural and aesthetic standards:
a. The home shall have at least 900 square feet of floor area;
b. The home shall have an exterior width of at least 18 feet;
c. The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of 2.5 inches for each 12 inches
of horizontal run;
d. The exterior material is of a color, material, and scale comparable with those existing
in the residential site on which the manufactured home dwelling is being permanently
installed;
e. The home shall have a nonreflective roof material which is or simulates asphalt or
wood shingles, tile, or rock;
f. Permanent utility connections shall be installed in accordance with local regulations;
g. The home shall have all wheels, axles, transporting lights, and towing apparatus
removed; and
h. The home shall be installed upon a permanent foundation that is constructed and built
in accordance with local regulations.
2. Manufactured Home Park: A unified development under single ownership, providing spaces for
rent or lease for the placement of mobile home units. Mobile home parks usually include
common areas and facilities for management, recreation, laundry, utility services, storage, and
other services.
3. Manufactured Home Seal: A device or insignia issued by the Nebraska Department of Health to
be displayed on the exterior of a manufactured home/structure or recreational vehicle to
evidence compliance with departmental standards. The federal manufactured home label shall
be recognized as a seal.
4. Mixed-Use Building: A building or structure that incorporates two or more use types.
5. Mixed-Use Development: A single development which incorporates two or more use types
within its site boundaries.
6. Mobile Homes: A building type designed to be transportable in one or more sections,
constructed on a permanent chassis or undercarriage, and designed to be used as a dwelling
unit or other use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities,
but not bearing a seal attesting to the approval and issuance of the Nebraska Department of
D E F I N I T I O N S
2-9
Health or conformance to the manufactured home procedural and enforcement regulations, as
adopted by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
7. Modular Housing Unit: Any structure whose construction consists entirely or in major portions of
preassembled units not fabricated on the final site of the unit. Such units are moveable or
portable until placed on a permanent foundation and connected to utilities. Modular housing
units pursuant to this definition are not included in the definition of manufactured home and, for
the purpose of this ordinance, are not distinguished from other forms of permanent construction.
8. Modular Home Seal: A device or insignia issued by the Nebraska State Department of Health to
be displayed on the exterior of the modular housing unit to evidence compliance with
departmental standards.
2-17 N
1. Nonconforming Development: A building, structure, or improvement which does not comply with
the regulations for its zoning district set forth by this Zoning Ordinance but which complied with
applicable regulations at the time of construction.
2. Nonconforming Lot: A lot which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this
chapter but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the
present requirements of this chapter. No action can be taken which would increase the
nonconforming characteristics of the lot.
3. Nonconforming Sign: A sign that was legally erected prior to the adoption, revision, or
amendment of this chapter but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to
conform to the present requirements of this chapter.
4. Nonconforming Structure: A structure which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or
amendment of this chapter but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to
conform to the present requirements of this chapter. No action can be taken which would
increase the nonconforming characteristics of the structure.
5. Nonconforming Use: A lawful use of land, other than a sign, which does not comply with the use
regulations for its zoning district set forth by this Zoning Ordinance but which complied with
applicable regulations at the time the use was established.
6. Nuisance: An unreasonable and continuous invasion of the use and enjoyment of a property
right which a reasonable person would find annoying, unpleasant, obnoxious, or offensive.
2-18 O
1. Open Space: Area included on any site or lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky, except
for allowed projections of cornices, overhangs, porches, balconies, or plant materials.
2. Outdoor Storage: The storage of materials, parts, or products that are related to the primary use
of a site for a period exceeding three days.
3. Overlay District: A district established by this ordinance to prescribe special regulations to be
applied to a site only in combination with a base district.
4. Owner: An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, or corporation having sufficient
proprietary interest to seek development of land.
D E F I N I T I O N S
2-10
2-19 P
1. Parking Facility: An area on a lot and/or within a building, including one or more parking spaces,
along with provision for access circulation, maneuvering, and landscaping, meeting the
requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. Parking facilities include parking lots, private garages,
and parking structures.
2. Parking Spaces: An area on a lot and/or within a building, intended for the use of temporary
parking of a personal vehicle. This term is used interchangeably with "parking stall." Each
parking space must have a means of access to a public street. Tandem parking stalls in singlefamily
detached, single-family attached, and townhome residential uses shall be considered to
have a means of access to a public street.
3. Paved: Permanently surfaced with poured concrete, concrete pavers, or asphalt.
4. Permitted Use: A land-use type allowed as a matter of right in a zoning district, subject only to
special requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.
5. Planned Unit Development: A development of land which is under unified control and is planned
and developed as a whole in a single development operation or programmed series of
development stages. The development may include streets, circulation ways, utilities, buildings,
open spaces, and other site features and improvements.
6. Porch, Unenclosed: A roofed or unroofed open structure projecting from an exterior wall of a
building and having no enclosed features more than 30 inches above its floor other than wire
screening and a roof with supporting structure.
7. Premises: A tract of land consisting of one or more lots or sites which are contiguous and under
common ownership or control.
8. Private Garage: A building for the storage of motor vehicles where no repair or service facilities
are maintained and where no motor vehicles are kept for rental or sale.
9. Property Line: The line separating parcels.
2-20 Q
2-21 R
1. Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle towed or self-propelled on its own chassis or attached to the
chassis of another vehicle and designed or used for temporary dwelling, recreational, or sporting
purposes. Recreational vehicles include, but are not limited to, travel trailers; campers; motor
coach homes; converted buses and trucks, boats, and boat trailers; and van conversions.
2. Regulation: A specific requirement set forth by this Zoning Ordinance which must be followed.
3. Remote Parking: A supply of off-street parking at a location not on the site of a given
development.
2-22 S
1. Screening: The method by which a view of one site from another adjacent site is shielded,
concealed, or hidden. Screening techniques include fences, walls, hedges, berms, or other
features.
D E F I N I T I O N S
2-11
2. Setback: A line within a lot parallel to and measured from a corresponding lot line, forming the
boundary of a required yard and setting forth the nearest that a building face may come to that
lot line.
3. Sign. A symbolic, visual device fixed upon a building, vehicle, structure, or parcel of land, which
is intended to convey information about a product, business, activity, place, person, institution,
candidate, or political idea.
4. Site: The parcel of land to be developed or built upon. A site may encompass a single lot, a
portion of a lot, or a group of lots developed as a common development. A site must be in one
base district, and cannot be separated by a public street or alley.
5. Site Plan: A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, the
boundaries of a site and the location of all buildings, structures, uses, and principal site
development features proposed for a specific parcel of land.
6. Special Permit Use: A use with operating and/or physical characteristics different from those of
permitted uses in a given zoning district which may, nonetheless, be compatible with those uses
under special conditions and with adequate public review. Special permit uses are allowed in a
zoning district only at the discretion of and with the explicit permission of the City Council, upon
the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
7. State: The State of Nebraska.
8. Story: The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the
next floor above it; if there is no floor above it, the space between such floor and the next ceiling
above it. A half story is a story under a sloped roof, the wall heights of which on at least two
opposite, exterior walls are less than four feet.
9. Street, Local: A street which is used primarily for access to the abutting properties.
10. Street, Private: A right-of-way, outlot, or other area, designated in a plat and protected by a
permanent easement, established to provide vehicular access within a development. A private
street is not dedicated or intended to be dedicated to the city or maintained by the city.
11. Street, Public: A right-of-way, dedicated to public use and maintained by the city, county, or
state, that affords a primary means of access to the abutting property. This definition is intended
to be inclusive of the term as defined in Nebraska statute.
12. Street, Intersecting and Principal: In regard to a site, the principal street shall be the street to
which the majority of lots on a block face are oriented; the intersecting street shall be a street
other than a principal street.
13. Street Major: A street carrying traffic between neighborhoods, connecting neighborhoods with
major activity centers, or accommodating major through traffic. Major streets are designated as
collectors, arterials, or expressways by the Comprehensive Development Plan.
14. Structure: Any object constructed or built, the use of which requires location on the ground or
attachment to something located on the ground.
15. Swimming Pool: A body of water in an artificial or semi-artificial receptacle or other container
either located indoors or outdoors, used or intended to be used by the public, semi-public, or
private swimming by adults, children, or both adults or children, operated and maintained by any
person or entity whether as an owner, lessee, operator, licensee, or concessionaire, including a
family pool (a swimming pool used or intended to be used solely by the owner, operator, or
lessee thereof and his or her family, and by friends invited to use it without payment of any fee).
D E F I N I T I O N S
2-12
This definition includes structures, appurtenances, equipment, appliances and other facilities
appurtenant to and intended for the operation and maintenance of a swimming pool.
2-23 T
1. Townhouse: A dwelling unit having a common wall with or abutting one or more adjacent
dwelling units in a townhouse structure, with its own front and rear access to the outside, and
neither above nor below any other dwelling unit.
2. Townhouse Structure: A building formed by two or more contiguous townhouses with common or
abutting walls.
2-24 U
1. Urban Space Plan: A plan that identifies the nature and programmed use of major open spaces
within a development.
2. Use: The conduct of an activity, or the performance of a function or operation, on a site or in a
building or facility.
3. Utilities: Installations, either above or below ground, necessary for the production, generation,
transmission, delivery, collection, treatments, or storage of water, solid or fluid wastes,
stormwater, energy media, gas, electronic or electromagnetic signals, or other services which
are precedent to development and use of land.
2-25 V
1. Value: The estimated cost to replace a structure in kind, based on current replacement costs.
2-26 W
2-27 X
2-28 Y
1. Yard: A required open space on a lot adjoining a lot line, containing only landscaping or other
uses as provided by this Zoning Ordinance.
a. Front Yard: A required yard extending the full width of a lot, between the front lot line
and the front setback line.
b. Rear Yard: A required yard extending the full width of a lot, between the rear lot line
and the rear setback line.
c. Interior Side Yard: A required yard extending the depth of a lot from the front to rear lot
lines, between the interior side lot line and the side setback line.
2-29 Z
1. Zoning District: A designated specified land classification, within which all sites are subject to a
unified group of use and site development regulations set forth in this Zoning Ordinance.
U S E T Y P E S
3-1
03 ARTICLE THREE
USE TYPES
3-1 Purpose
Article Three shall be known as “Use Types.” The purpose of the use types is to establish a classification system
for land uses and a consistent set of terms defining uses permitted or conditionally permitted within various zoning
districts. The use types section also provides a procedure for determining the applicable use type of any activity not
clearly within any defined use type.
3-2 Determinations
A. Classification of Uses: In the event of any question as to the appropriate use types of any existing or
proposed use or activity, the Building Official of the City of Plattsmouth shall have the authority to
determine appropriate use type. A determination of the Building Official may be appealed to the Board of
Adjustment. In making such determinations, the Building Official and the Board of Adjustment shall
consider the operational and physical characteristics of the use in questions and shall consider such
characteristics or specific requirements of the use in common with those included as examples of use
types. Those examples, when included in use type descriptions, are intended to be illustrative, as
opposed to exclusive lists.
B. Records: The Building Official shall make all determinations of appropriate use types in writing. The
record of the determination shall contain a report explaining the reasons for the determination.
3-3 Residential Use Types
Residential use types include uses providing wholly or primarily non-transient living accommodations. They exclude
institutional living arrangements providing 24-hour skilled nursing or medical care, forced residence, or therapeutic
settings.
A. Single-Family Residential: The use of a site for one dwelling unit, occupied by one family, excluding a
mobile home unit.
1. Single-Family Residential (Detached): A single-family residential use in which one dwelling unit
is located on one lot, with no physical or structural connection to any other dwelling unit.
2. Single-Family Residential (Attached): A single-family residential use in which one dwelling unit is
located on one legally-described lot and is attached by a common vertical wall to only one other
adjacent dwelling unit on another legally-described lot.
B. Duplex Residential: The use of a legally-described lot for two dwelling units, each occupied by one family
within a single building, excluding manufactured or mobile home units, but including modular housing
units.
C. Two-Family Residential: The use of a single, legally described lot for two dwelling units, each occupied by
one household, each in a separate building, excluding a mobile home unit.
D. Townhouse Residential: The use of a site for three or more attached dwelling units, each occupied by
one family and separated by vertical side walls extending from foundation through roof without openings.
Each townhouse unit must have at least two exposed exterior walls.
E. Multiple-Family Residential: The use of a site for three or more dwelling units within one building.
U S E T Y P E S
3-2
F. Group Residential: The use of a site for a residence by more than three unrelated persons, not defined as
a family, in which occupants are accommodated in rooms not defined as dwelling units. Group residential
uses are limited to facilities that are officially recognized or operated by a college or university,
government agency, or nonprofit organization.
G. Retirement Residential: A building or group of buildings that provide residential facilities for older adults.
Within a retirement residential use, 75 percent of the resident households must include at least one
member of at least 50 years of age. A retirement residential use may provide a range of residential
building types, including assisted-living and independent-living facilities. Assisted-living facilities may also
provide support services to residents, including, but not limited to, food service, general health
supervision, medication services, housekeeping services, personal services, recreation facilities, and
transportation services. The retirement residence may accommodate food preparation in independent
units or meal service in one or more common areas. Retirement residences may include additional health
care supervision or skilled nursing care included within a continuing care retirement center (CCRC) that
also provides assisted and independent living facilities within a unified development.
H. Manufactured Home Residential: Use of a site for one or more manufactured homes.
I. Mobile Home Park: Use of a site under single ownership for one or more mobile home units. Generally,
the land on which mobile homes are placed in a mobile home park is leased from the owner of the facility.
J. Mobile Home Residential: Use of a site one or more mobile home units.
K. Mobile Home Subdivision: Division of a tract of land into lots that meet all the requirements of the
Subdivision of Land Ordinance, for the location of mobile homes. Generally, a lot within a mobile home
subdivision is owned by the owner of the mobile home placed upon such lot.
3-4 Office Use Types
Office use types include uses providing for administration, professional services, and allied activities. These uses
often invite public clientele but are more limited in external effects than commercial uses.
A. Corporate Offices: Use of a site for administrative, processing, or research offices that generally do not
provide service to clients from Plattsmouth and the surrounding region. Corporate offices are destinations
for commuters drawn from a relatively wide region around Plattsmouth, as well as from the community
itself. Typical uses include corporate headquarters offices, telemarketing, or information processing
offices.
B. General Offices: Use of a site for business, professional, medical, or administrative offices. Typical uses
include real estate, insurance, management, travel, or other business offices; organization and
association offices; medical offices; banks or financial offices; or professional offices.
C. Financial Services: Provision of financial and banking services to consumers or clients. Walk-in and drivein
services to consumers are provided on site. Typical uses include banks, savings and loan associations,
savings banks, and loan companies. An ATM (automatic teller machine) that is not accompanied on site
by an office of its primary financial institution is considered within the personal services use type. The
financial services use type is divided into two categories. Financial Services A includes less than 4,000
square feet of floor area and has no more than two drive-up lanes (including ATM lanes). Financial
Services B includes 4,000 square feet or more of floor area and/or has more than two drive-up lanes.
D. Medical Offices: Use of a site for facilities which provide diagnoses and outpatient care on a routine
basis, but which does not provide prolonged, in-house medical or surgical care. Medical offices are
operated by doctors, dentists, or similar practitioners licensed for practice in the State of Nebraska. The
medical offices use type is divided into two categories. Medical Offices A includes less than 3,000 square
feet of floor area. Medical Offices B includes 3,000 square feet or more of floor area.
U S E T Y P E S
3-3
3-5 Commercial Use Types
Commercial uses include the sale, rental, service, distribution of goods, and the provision of services other than
those classified under other use types.
A. Agricultural Sales and Service: Establishments or places of business engaged in sale from the premises
of feed, grain, fertilizers, farm equipment, pesticides and similar goods, or in the provision of agriculturallyrelated
services with incidental storage on lots other than where the service is rendered. Typical uses
include nurseries, hay, farm implement dealerships, feed and grain stores, and tree service firms.
B. Automotive and Equipment Services: Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in sale
and/or service of automobiles, trucks, or heavy equipment. The following are considered automotive and
equipment use types:
1. Automobile Auction Lots: Sale of motor vehicles through a process of periodic auctions or bid
procedures. Automobile auction lots usually include large on-site storage areas of motor
vehicles and lack showrooms, auto repair facilities, and other structures and facilities that are
typical of new car dealerships.
2. Automotive Rental and Sales: Sale or rental of automobiles, noncommercial trucks, motorcycles,
motor homes, recreational vehicles or boats, including incidental storage, maintenance, and
servicing. Typical uses include new and used car dealerships, motorcycle dealerships, and boat,
trailer, and recreational vehicle dealerships.
3. Auto Services:
a. Provision of fuel, lubricants, parts and accessories, and incidental services to motor
vehicles.
b. Washing, cleaning, and/or repair of automobiles, noncommercial trucks, motorcycles,
motor homes, recreational vehicles, or boats, including the sale, installation, and
servicing of equipment and parts.
Typical uses include service stations, car washes, muffler shops, auto repair garages, tire sales
and installation, wheel and brake shops, and similar repair and service activities but exclude
dismantling, salvage, or body and fender repair services.
4. Body Repair: Repair, painting, or refinishing of the body, fender, or frame of automobiles, trucks,
motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles, boats, tractors, construction equipment,
agricultural implements, and similar vehicles or equipment. Typical uses include body and
fender shops, painting shops, and other similar repair or refinishing garages.
5. Equipment Rental and Sales: Sale or rental of trucks, tractors, construction equipment,
agricultural implements, mobile homes, and similar heavy equipment, including incidental
storage, maintenance, and servicing. Typical uses include truck dealerships, construction
equipment dealerships, and mobile home sales establishments.
6. Equipment Repair Services: Repair of trucks, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural
implements, and similar heavy equipment. Typical uses include truck repair garages, tractor and
farm implement repair services, and machine shops, but exclude dismantling, salvage, or body
and fender repair services.
C. Bed-and-Breakfast: A lodging service that provides overnight or short-term accommodations to guests or
visitors, usually including provision of breakfast. Bed-and-breakfasts are usually located in large
residential structures that have been adapted for this use. For the purpose of this definition, bed-andbreakfasts
are always owned and operated by the resident owner of the structure, include no more than
ten units, and accommodate each guest or visitor for no more than seven consecutive days during any
one-month period.
U S E T Y P E S
3-4
D. Business Support Services: Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the sale, rental, or
repair of equipment, supplies, and materials or the provision of services used by office, professional, and
service establishments to the firms themselves, but excluding automotive, construction and farm
equipment; or engaged in the provision of maintenance or custodial services to businesses. Typical uses
include office equipment and supply firms, small business machine repair shops or hotel equipment, and
supply firms, janitorial services, photography studios, and convenience printing and copying.
E. Business or Trade Schools: A use providing education or training in business, commerce, language, or
other similar activity or occupational pursuit, and not otherwise defined as a home occupation, college or
university, or public or private educational facility.
F. Campground: Facilities providing camping or parking areas and incidental services for travelers in
recreational vehicles or tents.
G. Cocktail Lounge: A use engaged in the preparation and retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption
on the premises, including taverns, bars, cocktail lounges, and similar uses other than a restaurant as that
term is defined in this section.
H. Commercial Recreation (Controlled Impact): Private businesses, or other organizations that may or may
not be commercial by structure or by nature, primarily engaged in the provision or sponsorship of sports,
entertainment, or recreation for participants or spectators. Controlled impact commercial recreation uses
typically take place entirely within enclosed buildings or, when outdoors, have limited effects related to
lighting, hours of operation, or noise. Typical uses include theaters, private dance halls, billiard or bowling
centers, game arcades, indoor skating facilities, miniature golf courses, and private golf courses.
I. Commercial Recreation (High Impact): Private businesses, or other organizations that may or may not be
commercial by structure or by nature, primarily engaged in the provision or sponsorship of sports,
entertainment, or recreation for participants or spectators. High impact commercial recreation uses are
typically located outdoors and have operating effects caused by lighting, noise, traffic, or hours of
operation that create substantial environmental impacts. Typical uses include shooting ranges, lighted
driving ranges, go-kart tracks, amusement parks, race tracks, and private baseball complexes.
J. Communication Services: Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of broadcasting and other
information-relay services accomplished through the use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms but
excludes those classified as utilities. Typical uses include television studios, telecommunication service
centers, telegraph service offices, or film and sound recording facilities.
K. Construction Sales and Services: Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail or
wholesale sale, from the premises, or materials used in the construction of buildings or other structures
other than retail sale of paint, fixtures, and hardware. This use type excludes those uses classified under
automotive and equipment services. Typical uses include building materials sales, or tool and equipment
rental or sales.
L. Consumer Services: Establishments which provide services, primarily to individuals and households, but
excluding automotive use types. Typical uses include automated banking machines, appliance repair
shops, watch or jewelry repair shops, or musical instrument repair shops.
M. Convenience Storage: Storage services primarily for personal effects and household goods within
enclosed storage areas having individual access but excluding use of such areas as workshops, hobby
shops, manufacturing, or commercial activity. Typical uses include mini-warehousing.
U S E T Y P E S
3-5
N. Food Sales: Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail sale of food or household
products for home consumption. Typical uses include groceries, delicatessens, meat markets, retail
bakeries, and candy shops.
1. Convenience Food Sales: Establishments occupying facilities of less than 10,000 square feet,
characterized by sales of specialty foods or a limited variety of general items, and by the sales
of fuel for motor vehicles, and including the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for off-premises
consumption when conducted as a secondary feature of the use, producing less than 25 percent
of the establishment's gross income.
2. Limited Food Sales: Establishments occupying facilities of 10,000 square feet or less;
characterized by sales of specialty foods or a limited variety of general items, but excluding the
accessory sale of fuel for motor vehicles. Typical uses include delicatessens, meat markets,
retail bakeries, candy shops, and small grocery stores.
3. General Food Sales: Establishments selling a wide variety of food commodities, using facilities
larger than 10,00 square feet or food sales uses of any size that include the accessory sale of
fuel for motor vehicles. Typical uses include supermarkets and convenience stores.
O. Funeral Services: Establishments engaged in undertaking services such as preparing the human dead for
burial, and arranging and managing funerals. Typical uses include funeral homes or mortuaries.
P. Gaming Facilities: Establishments engaged in the lawful, on-site operation of games of chance that
involve the risk of money for financial gain by patrons. Gaming facilities shall include the accessory sale of
liquor and food, pursuant to licensing regulations of the City of Plattsmouth or the State of Nebraska.
Q. Kennels: Boarding and care services for dogs, cats, and similar small mammals or bipedal birds, or any
premises on which three or more animals included under this definition over four months of age are kept
and maintained. Typical uses include boarding kennels, ostrich raising facilities, pet motels, or dog
training centers.
R. Laundry Services: Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of laundering, cleaning, or dyeing
service
S. Liquor Sales: Establishments or places of business engaged in retail sale for off-premise consumption of
alcoholic beverages. Typical uses include liquor stores, bottle shops, or any licensed sales of liquor, beer,
or wine for off-site consumption.
T. Lodging: Lodging services involving the provision of room and/or board. Typical uses include hotels,
motels, or bed-and breakfasts.
U. Personal Improvement Services: Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of informational,
instructional, personal improvements, and similar services of a non-professional nature. Typical uses
include driving schools, health or physical fitness studios, reducing salons, dance studios, and handicraft
and hobby instruction.
V. Personal Services: Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the provision of services of
a personal nature. Typical uses include beauty and barber shops; seamstress, tailor, or shoe repair
shops; photography studios; dry cleaning stations serving individuals and households; driving schools;
health or physical fitness studios; reducing salons; dance studios; handicraft; and hobby instruction.
W. Pet Services: Retail sales, incidental pet health services, and grooming and boarding, when totally within
a building, of dogs, cats, birds, fish, and similar small animals customarily used as household pets.
Typical uses include pet stores, small animal clinics, dog bathing and clipping salons, and pet grooming
shops, but exclude uses for livestock and large animals.
U S E T Y P E S
3-6
X. Recreation Vehicle Sales and Storage: Establishments that include the storage and/or display of boats,
campers, and motorized recreational vehicles for the purpose of rental or sale.
Y. Research Services: Establishments primarily engaged in research of an industrial or scientific nature.
Typical uses include electronics research laboratories, space research and development firms, testing
laboratories, or pharmaceutical research labs.
Z. Restaurants: A use engaged in the preparation and retail sale of food and beverages, including the sale of
alcoholic beverages when conducted as a secondary feature of the use, producing less than 50 percent of
the establishment's gross income.
1. Restaurant (Drive-in or Fast Food): An establishment which principally supplies food and
beverages in disposable containers and is characterized by high automobile accessibility and
on-site accommodations, self-service, and short stays by customers.
2. Restaurant (General): An establishment characterized by table service to customers and/or
accommodation to walk-in clientele. Typical uses include cafes, coffee shops, and restaurants.
AA. Restricted (or Adult) Entertainment Business:
1. Adult bookstore means an establishment having as a significant portion of its stock in trade
books, films, magazines, and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting or describing sex acts or specified anatomical areas.
2. Adult motel means a motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on depicting or describing sex acts or specified anatomical areas.
3. Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion
picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images
to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing sex acts or
specified anatomical areas.
4. Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing sex acts or
specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
5. Sexual encounter center means any business, agency or person who, for any form of
consideration or gratuity, provides a place where three or more persons may congregate,
assemble, or associate for the purpose of engaging in sex acts or exposing specified anatomical
areas, excluding nursing mothers.
6. Sex Acts and Specified Anatomical Areas: For purposes of the subsections 1 through 5 of this
definition, the terms "sex acts" and "specified anatomical areas" mean as follows:
a. Sex acts means any sexual contact, actual or simulated, either natural or deviate,
between two or more persons, or between a person and an animal, by penetration of
the penis into the vagina or anus, or by contact between the mouth or tongue and
genitalia or anus, or by contact between a finger of one person and the genitalia of
another person, or by use of artificial sexual organs or substitute therefore in contact
with the genitalia or anus.
b. Specified anatomical areas include the following: human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, and female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
U S E T Y P E S
3-7
BB. Retail Services: Sale or rental with incidental service of commonly-used goods and merchandise for
personal or household use but excludes those classified more specifically by these use type classifications.
Typical uses include department stores, apparel stores, furniture stores, or establishments providing the
following products or services: Household cleaning and maintenance products, drugs, cards, stationery,
notions, books, tobacco products, cosmetics and specialty items; flowers, plants, hobby materials, toys and
handcrafted items; apparel jewelry, fabrics and like items; cameras, photograph services, household
electronic equipment, records, sporting equipment, kitchen utensils, home furnishing and appliances, art
supplies and framing, arts and antiques, paint and wallpaper, hardware, carpeting and floor covering; interior
decorating services; office supplies; mail order or catalog sales; bicycles; and automotive parts and
accessories (excluding service and installation). Retail services are divided into three categories:
1. Limited Retail Services: Establishments providing retail services, occupying facilities less than
10,000 square feet in a single establishment or multi-tenant facility. Typical establishments
provide for specialty retailing or general purpose retailing oriented to Plattsmouth and its
surrounding vicinity.
2. Large Retail Services: Establishments providing retail services, occupying facilities between
10,001 and 40,000 square feet in a single establishment or multi-tenant facility. Typical
establishments provide for specialty retailing or general purpose retailing oriented to Plattsmouth
and its surrounding vicinity.
3. Mass Retail Services: Establishments providing retail services, occupying facilities over 40,000
square feet in a single establishment or multi-tenant facility. Typical establishments provide for
general purpose retailing oriented to Plattsmouth and the surrounding region.
CC. Stables: Boarding, breeding or raising of horses, llamas, or other hooved animals which are not owned by
the occupants of the premises; or for the purpose of riding animals included in this definition by members
of the public other than the occupants of the premises or their nonpaying guests. Typical uses include
boarding stables or public stables.
DD. Surplus Sales: Businesses engaged in the sale of used or new items, involving regular, periodic outdoor
display of merchandise for sale. Typical uses include flea markets and factory outlets or discount
businesses with outdoor display.
EE. Trade Services: Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the provision of services that
are not retail or primarily dedicated to walk-in clientele. These services often involve services to
construction or building trades and may involve a small amount of screened, outdoor storage in
appropriate zoning districts. Typical uses include shops or operating bases for plumbers, electricians, or
HVAC (heating , ventilating, and air conditioning) contractors.
FF. Travel Centers: Facilities that provide for the sale of fuel, provisions, supplies to motorists, including
operators of over-the-road trucks, in which less than 30 percent of the total site area is devoted to the
servicing, accommodation, parking, or storage of over-the-road trucks. The calculation of these areas
includes but is not limited to fuel islands for diesel fuel, truck washing facilities, truck parking areas, and
associated maneuvering areas. Travel centers include a mix of uses, including food sales, general retail
services, auto and equipment services, and restaurants, and are typically located along or near interstate
highways or other principal state and federal designated highway routes.
GG. Truck Stops: Facilities that provide for the sale of fuel, provisions, supplies to motorists, including
operators of over-the-road trucks, in which 30 percent or more of the total site area is devoted to the
servicing, accommodation, parking, or storage of over-the-road trucks. The calculation of these areas
includes but is not limited to fuel islands for diesel fuel, truck washing facilities, truck parking areas, and
associated maneuvering areas. Travel centers include a mix of uses, including food sales, general retail
services, auto and equipment services, and restaurants, and are typically located along or near interstate
highways or other principal state and federal designated highway routes.
HH. Veterinary Services: Veterinary services and hospitals for animals. Typical uses include pet clinics, dog
and cat hospitals, pet cemeteries, and veterinary hospitals for livestock and large animals.
U S E T Y P E S
3-8
3-6 Civic Use Types
Civic use types include the performance of utility, educational, recreational, cultural, medical, protective,
governmental, and other uses which are strongly vested with public or social importance.
A. Administration: Governmental offices providing administrative, clerical, or public contact services that
deal directly with the citizen, together with incidental storage and maintenance of necessary vehicles.
Typical uses include federal, state, county, and city offices.
B. Cemetery: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery
purposes, including columbariums, mausoleums, and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and
within the boundary of such cemetery.
C. Crematoria: A location containing properly installed, certified apparatus intended for use in the act of
cremation.
D. Clubs: Uses providing meeting, recreational, or social facilities for a private, non-profit, or noncommercial
association, primarily for use by members and guests. Clubs include:
1. Clubs (Recreational): Clubs that provide indoor and/or outdoor athletic facilities, with or without
social or meeting facilities. Typical uses include country clubs, private or nonprofit community or
recreation centers, and private golf courses and driving ranges.
2. Clubs (Social): Clubs that provide primarily social or meeting facilities. Typical uses include
private social clubs and fraternal organizations.
E. College and University Facilities: An educational institution of higher learning which offers a course of
study designed to culminate in the issuance of a degree certified by a generally recognized accrediting
organization. Typical uses include universities, colleges, and community colleges.
F. Convalescent Services: A use providing bed care and in-patient services for persons requiring regular
medical attention but excluding a facility providing surgical or emergency medical services and excluding
a facility providing care for alcoholism, drug addiction, mental disease, or communicable disease.
G. Cultural Services: A library, museum, or similar registered non-profit organizational use displaying,
preserving, and exhibiting objects of community and cultural interest in one or more of the arts and
sciences.
H. Daycare Services (Limited): A facility, or use of a building or portion thereof, for part-time care of fewer
than 12 individuals. This term includes nursery schools, preschools, daycare centers for children or adults,
and similar uses but excludes public and private primary and secondary educational facilities.
I. Daycare Services (General): A facility, or use of a dwelling unit or portion thereof, for part-time care of at
least 12 individuals. This term includes nursery schools, preschools, daycare centers for children or
adults, and similar uses but excludes public and private primary and secondary educational facilities and
non-commercial shelters.
J. Detention Facilities: A publicly operated or contracted use providing housing and care for individuals
legally confined, designed to isolate those individuals from the community.
K. Emergency Residential Services: A facility or use of a building to provide a protective sanctuary for
victims of crime or abuse, including emergency housing during crisis intervention for victims of rape,
abuse, or physical beatings.
U S E T Y P E S
3-9
L. Group Care Facility: A facility licensed or approved by the State of Nebraska or other appropriate agency,
which provides for the care and short- or long-term overnight occupancy of more than three unrelated
persons who require and receive therapy or counseling on site as part of an organized and therapeutic
ongoing program for any of the purposes listed below. Such facilities shall exclude those uses defined as
group homes. Group care facilities include facilities which provide for the:
1. Adaptation to living with, or rehabilitation from, the handicaps of physical disability.
2. Adaptation to living with, or rehabilitation from, the handicaps of emotional or mental disorder; or
of mental retardation if such facility has an overnight occupancy of more than eight persons.
3. Rehabilitation from the effects of drug or alcohol abuse.
4. Supervision while under a program alternative to imprisonment, including but not limited to prerelease,
work-release, and probationary programs.
M. Group Home: A facility licensed by the State of Nebraska in which at least four but no more than eight
persons, not including resident managers or house parents, who are unrelated by blood, marriage, or
adoption reside while receiving therapy, training, or counseling for the purpose of adaptation to living with
or rehabilitation from cerebral palsy, autism, or mental retardation.
N. Guidance Services: A use providing counseling, guidance, recuperative, or similar services to persons
requiring rehabilitation assistance as a result of mental illness, alcoholism, detention, drug addiction, or
similar condition on a daytime care basis.
O. Health Care: A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical service for sick or injured persons
exclusively on an out-patient basis including emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training,
administration and services to out-patients, employees, or visitors.
P. Hospital: A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical service for sick or injured persons primarily
on an inpatient basis, including emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, administration, and
services to patients, employees or visitors.
Q. Maintenance Facilities: A public facility supporting maintenance, repair, vehicular or equipment servicing,
material storage, and similar activities, including street or sewer yards, equipment service centers, and
similar uses having characteristics of commercial services, contracting, or industrial activities.
R. Park and Recreation Services: Publicly-owned and operated parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities, and
open spaces.
S. Postal Facilities: Postal services, including post offices, bulk mail processing, or sorting centers operated
by the United States Postal Service.
T. Primary Educational Facilities: A public, private, or parochial school offering instruction at the elementary
school level in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools of the State
of Nebraska.
U. Public Assembly: Facilities owned and operated by a public agency or a charitable non-profit organization
accommodating major public assembly for recreation, sports, amusement, or entertainment purposes.
Typical uses include civic or community auditoriums, sports stadiums, convention facilities, fairgrounds,
incidental sales, and exhibition facilities.
V. Religious Assembly: A use located in a permanent building and providing regular organized religious
worship and religious education incidental thereto but excluding private primary or private secondary
educational facilities, community recreational facilities, daycare facilities, and associated parking facilities.
A property tax exemption obtained pursuant to Property Tax Code of the State of Nebraska shall
constitute prima facie evidence of religious assembly use.
U S E T Y P E S
3-10
W. Safety Services: Facilities for conduct of public safety and emergency services including police and fire
protection services and emergency medical and ambulance services.
X. Secondary Educational Facilities: A public, private, or parochial school offering instruction at the middle
level or high school level in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools
of the State of Nebraska.
Y. Skilled Nursing Services: A facility that is licensed by the State of Nebraska and provides bed care and
in-patient services for persons requiring regular medical attention but excludes facilities that provide
surgical or emergency medical services or facilities that provide care for alcoholism, drug addiction,
mental disease, or communicable disease. Typical use includes nursing homes.
Z. Utility Facility: Any above-ground structures or facilities, other than lines, poles, and other incidental
facilities, used for the production, generation, transmission, delivery, collection, or storage of water,
sewage, electricity, gas, oil, energy media, communications, electronic or electromagnetic signals, or
services which are precedent to development and/or use of land.
3-7 Parking Use Types
A. Off-Street Parking: Parking use types include parking of motor vehicles on a temporary basis within a
privately or publicly owned off-street parking facility, other than accessory to a principal use.
B. Parking Structure: The use of a site for a multi-level building which provides for the parking of motor
vehicles on a temporary basis, other than as an accessory to a principal use on the same site.
3-8 Industrial Use Types
Industrial use types include the on-site extraction or production of goods by non-agricultural methods, and the
storage and distribution of products.
A. Construction Yards: Establishments housing facilities of businesses primarily engaged in construction
activities, including incidental storage of materials and equipment on lots other than construction sites.
Typical use is building contractor's yards.
B. Custom Manufacturing: Establishments primarily engaged in the on-site production of goods by hand
manufacturing, within enclosed structures, involving:
1. The use of hand tools, or
2. The use of domestic mechanical equipment not exceeding two horsepower, or
3. A single kiln not exceeding 8 KW or equivalent.
This category also includes the incidental direct sale to consumers of goods produced on site or otherwise
permitted within the zoning district. Typical uses include ceramic studios, custom jewelry manufacturing,
and candle making shops.
C. Light Industry: Establishments engaged in the manufacture or processing of finished products from
previously prepared materials, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging of
such products, and incidental storage, sales, and distribution. These establishments are characterized by
having no major external environmental effects across property lines and include no unscreened or unenclosed
outdoor storage. Typical uses include commercial bakeries, butcher shops, soft drink bottling,
apparel assembly from fabrics, electronics, manufacturing, print shops, and publishing houses.
D. General Industry: Enterprises engaged in the processing, manufacturing, compounding, assembly, packaging,
treatment, or fabrication of materials and products from prepared materials or from raw materials without
U S E T Y P E S
3-11
noticeable noise, odor, vibration, or air pollution effects across property lines, but often including outdoor
storage of materials or products.
E. Heavy Industry: Enterprises involved in the basic processing and manufacturing of products, predominately from
raw materials, with noticeable noise, odor, vibration, or air pollution effects across property lines; or a use or
process engaged in the storage of or processes involving potentially or actually hazardous, explosive,
flammable, radioactive, or other commonly recognized hazardous materials, except for those uses defined as
agricultural industries.
F. Recycling Collection: Any site which is used in whole or part for the receiving or collection of any postconsumer,
non-durable goods including, but not limited to, glass, plastic, paper; cardboard, aluminum, tin, or
other recyclable commodities.
G. Recycling Processing: Any site which is used for the processing of any post-consumer, non-durable goods
including, but not limited to, glass, plastic, paper, cardboard, aluminum, tin, or other recyclable commodities.
H. Resource Extraction: A use involving on-site extraction of surface or subsurface mineral products or natural
resources, excluding the grading and removal of dirt. Typical uses are quarries, borrow pits, sand and gravel
operations, and mining.
I. Salvage Services: Places of business primarily engaged in the storage, sale, dismantling, or other processing of
used or waste materials which are not intended for reuse in their original forms. Typical uses include automotive
wrecking yards, junk yards, or paper salvage yards.
J. Vehicle Storage (Long-Term): Long-term storage of operating or non-operating vehicles. Typical uses
include storage of private parking tow-aways or impound yards but exclude dismantling or salvage.
K. Warehousing: Uses including open air storage, distribution, and handling of goods and materials. Typical
uses include monument yards, grain elevators, and open storage.
L. Construction Yards: Establishments housing facilities of businesses primarily engaged in construction
activities, including incidental storage of materials and equipment on lots other than construction sites.
Typical use is building contractor's yards.
3-9 Transportation Use Types
Transportation use types include the use of land for the purpose of providing facilities supporting the movement of
passengers and freight from one point to another.
A. Aviation Facilities: Landing fields, aircraft parking and service facilities, and related facilities for operation,
service, fueling, repair, storage, charter, sales, and rental of aircraft, and including activities directly
associated with the operation and maintenance of airport facilities and the provision of safety and security.
B. Railroad Facilities: Railroad yards, equipment servicing facilities, and terminal facilities.
C. Transportation Terminal: Facility for loading, unloading, and interchange of passengers, baggage, and
incidental freight or package express, including bus terminals, railroad stations, and public transit facilities.
D. Truck Terminal: A facility for the receipt, transfer, short term storage, and dispatching of goods
transported by truck.
U S E T Y P E S
3-12
3-10 Agricultural Use Types
Agricultural use types include the on-site production of plant and animal products by agricultural methods.
A. Horticulture: The growing of horticultural and floricultural specialties, such as flowers, shrubs, or trees
intended for ornamental or landscaping purposes. This definition may include accessory retail sales under
certain conditions. Typical uses include wholesale plant nurseries and greenhouses.
B. Crop Production: The raising and harvesting of tree crops, row crops, or field crops on an agricultural or
commercial basis. This definition may include accessory retail sales under certain conditions.
C. Animal Production: The raising of animals or production of animal products, such as eggs or dairy
products on an agricultural or commercial basis, or the raising of animals for recreational use. Typical
uses include grazing, ranching, dairy farming, and poultry farming.
D. Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation (CAFO):
1. The use of a site for the confined feeding or holding of 1,000 or more animal units of livestock or
poultry within buildings, lots, pens, or other close quarters which are not used for crop
production or where grazing of natural vegetation is not the major feed source. Livestock and
poultry shall include any animal or fowl which are used primarily for use as food or food products
for human consumption, or for laboratory or testing purposes. A CAFO does not include areas
which are used for the raising of crops or other vegetation, and upon which livestock are allowed
to graze or feed.
2. For the purpose of this calculating animal units, the animal unit equivalents for each type of
livestock are established as follows:
Type of Livestock Equivalent Animal Units
Slaughter and Feed Cattle 1.00
Mature Dairy Cattle 1.40
Swine 0.40
Sheep 0.10
Horses 2.00
Turkeys 0.02
Ducks 0.20
Chickens 0.01
M. Livestock Sales: Use of a site for the temporary confinement and exchange or sale of livestock. Typical
use includes sales barns.
3-11 Miscellaneous Use Types
A. Amateur Radio Tower: A structure(s) for the transmission or broadcasting of electromagnetic signals by
FCC-licensed amateur radio operators.
B. Alternative Energy Production Devices: The use of a site for the production of energy utilizing methods
that do not involve the oxidation, combustion, or fission of primary materials. Typical uses include solar
collector fields, geothermal energy installations, or water-powered mills or generating facilities.
C. Communications Tower: A structure(s) for the transmission or broadcasting of radio, television, radar or
microwaves, ordinarily exceeding the maximum height permitted in its zoning district. Typical uses
include broadcasting towers and cellular communications towers.
D. Construction Batch Plant: A temporary demountable facility used for the manufacturing of concrete,
asphalt, or other paving materials intended for specific construction projects.
U S E T Y P E S
3-13
E. Wind Energy Conservation System (WECS): Any device which converts wind energy to a form of usable
energy, including wind charges, windmills, or wind turbines.
F. Landfill (Non-Putrescible Solid Waste Disposal): The use of a site as a depository for solid wastes that do
not readily undergo chemical or biological breakdown under conditions normally associated with land
disposal operations. Typical disposal material would include ashes, concrete, paving wastes, rock, brick,
lumber, roofing materials, and ceramic tile.
G. Landfill (Putrescible and Non-Putrescible Solid Waste Disposal): The use of a site as a depository for any
solid waste except hazardous and toxic waste as defined by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency
and/or the State of Nebraska. Typical disposal material would include non-putrescible wastes, and
putrescible wastes such as vegetation, tree parts, agricultural wastes (garbage), and manure.

Z O N I N G D I S T R I C T S
4-1
04 ARTICLE FOUR
ZONING DISTRICTS
4-1 General Purpose
Article Four presents the “Zoning District” regulations. Zoning districts are established in the Zoning Ordinance to
promote compatible land use patterns and to establish site development regulations appropriate to the purposes
and specific nature of each district.
4-2 Establishment of Districts
The following base districts and overlay districts are hereby established.
Map Code District Name
Base Districts
AG Agricultural District
RR Rural Residential District
R-1 Urban Residential Low-Density District
R-2 Urban Residential Medium-Density District
R-3 Urban Residential High-Density District
MH Mobile Home Park Planned District
LC Limited Commercial and Office District
UC Urban Corridor District
GC General Commercial District
CB Central Business District
BP Business Park District
GI General Industrial District
HI Heavy Industrial District
Overlay Districts
MU Mixed Use Overlay District
CCD Civic Corridor Design Overlay District
PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District
ED Environmental Resources Overlay District
HD Historic Overlay District
FP/FW Floodplain/Floodway Overlay District
AV Aviation Overlay District
4-3 Application of Districts
A. A base district designation shall apply to each lot or site within the city and its planning jurisdiction. A site
must be in one base district.
B. The flood plain/floodway, planned unit development, historic, and environmental resources overlay
districts may be applied to any lot or site or any portion thereof, in addition to a base district designation.
Z O N I N G D I S T R I C T S
4-2
4-4 Hierarchy
References in the Zoning Ordinance to less intensive or more intensive districts shall be deemed to refer to those
agricultural, residential, commercial, and industrial base zoning districts established in Section 4-2, and shall represent
a progression from the AG Agricultural District as the least intensive to the HI Heavy Industrial District as the most
intensive. The overlay districts shall not be included in this reference.
4-5 Development Regulations
For each zoning district, permitted uses are set forth in Table 4.1. Individual sections describe the purpose and
specific development regulations for each zoning district. Supplemental regulations may affect specific land uses or
development regulations in each zoning district. The applicable supplemental regulations are noted in Table 4.1.
4-6 Zoning Map
A. Boundaries of zoning districts established by this Zoning Ordinance shall be shown on the zoning map
maintained by the City Clerk. This map, together with all legends, references, symbols, boundaries, and
other information, shall be adopted as a part of, and concurrent with, this ordinance.
B. The zoning map may be changed from time to time by ordinance, following the procedure set forth by
Article Twelve. Such changes shall be reflected on the zoning map. The City Clerk shall keep a complete
record of all changes to the zoning map.
4-7 Interpretation of District Boundaries
The following rules shall apply in determining the boundaries of any zoning district shown on the zoning map.
A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall be
considered the district boundaries.
B. Where district boundaries are indicated as within street or alley, railroad, or other identifiable rights-ofway,
the centerline of such rights-of-way shall be considered the district boundary.
C. Where a district boundary divides a property, the location of the boundary shall be determined by the use
of the scale appearing on the zoning map.
D. The City Council shall determine any other uncertainty regarding district boundaries not covered in this
section.
4-8 Vacation of Streets and Alleys
Whenever a public street or alley is vacated, the zoning district adjoining each side of such right-of-way shall be
extended out to the former centerline.
4-9 Zoning on Additions to the Extra-Territorial Jurisdiction
All unimproved or agricultural territory that may hereafter be added to the city through annexation shall be
considered as lying in the AG Agricultural District until such classification shall be changed as provided by this
ordinance. Any improved property under Plattsmouth zoning that is added to the extra-territorial jurisdiction shall be
zoned according to the zoning district that most nearly describes either its present use or the use proposed by
Plattsmouth’s Comprehensive Development Plan. This zoning shall be established by the Planning Commission
and the City Council at the time of the expansion of the jurisdiction.
Z O N I N G D I S T R I C T S
4-3
4-10 Required Conformance
Except as specified in this chapter, no building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used that does not comply with all of the district regulations
established by this title for the district in which the building or land is located.
4-11 Required Frontage
No lot shall contain any building used in whole or in part for residence purposes unless such lot abuts for at least 20
feet on at least one public street, or unless it has an exclusive unobstructed private easement of access or right-ofway
of at least 20 feet wide to a street; and there shall be not more than one single-family dwelling for such frontage
or easement, except that a common easement of access at least 50 feet wide may be provided for two or more
such single-family dwellings or for one or more two-family or multiple dwellings.
4-12 Use Matrix: Levels of Permitted Uses
Within zoning districts in Plattsmouth, different uses are permitted with different conditions. These are displayed in
Table 4.1: Use Matrix. Levels of permission include:
A. Uses that are Permitted by Right: These uses are permitted subject to issuance of a building permit by
the Building Official, subject only to compliance with all regulations of this ordinance. Uses permitted by
right might be subject to supplemental regulations contained in this ordinance. These uses are indicated
in the use matrix by a “P” in the applicable cell.
B. Special Uses: These uses are subject to approval of a special use permit by the City Council, following
recommendation of the Planning Commission and the procedure set forth in Article 12. These uses are
indicated in the use matrix by a “S” in the applicable cell.
C. Site Plan Approval: Some use types require an additional site plan approval by the Zoning Administrator/
Building Official, based on specific criteria for review. This procedure is set forth in Section 12-3. These
uses are indicated in the use matrix by an asterisk (*) following the citing of a specific use type.
4-13 Guide to Site Development Regulators
The regulators set forth in the tables in Sections 4-14 through 4-26 establish the limits and requirements for most
development in the City of Plattsmouth and its extra-territorial jurisdiction. This section is intended to provide
guidance for applying the regulators contained in these tables.
A. Site Area per Housing Unit: This indicates the gross land area per unit within a residential development.
For example, a 40-lot subdivision on a 10-acre (435,600 square foot tract) will have a site area per unit of
10,890 square feet. Site area per unit, which measures gross density, may differ from minimum lot size.
In conservation development, the site area per unit will be larger than minimum lot size, permitting the
clustering of lots in exchange for common open space. In multi-family development, the site area per unit
will usually be smaller than minimum lot size, because the lot is the legal parcel on which a multiple-unit
building is built.
B. Minimum Lot Area: This indicates the minimum size of a legally described and recorded parcel upon
which development can take place. As noted above, minimum lot area and site area per unit may not be
the same.
C. Minimum Lot Width: This is the required minimum distance connecting at points along opposite side lot
lines, measured at the required front yard setback. For example, the lot width of an irregular lot in a
district requiring a 25-foot front yard setback is determined by:
1. Locating the points along each side lot line at a distance of 25 feet back from the front property
line.
Z O N I N G D I S T R I C T S
4-4
2. Drawing a line connecting these two points.
3. Measuring the length of this line. The length is the lot width.
D. Minimum Yards: These define the required setbacks of buildings from front, side, and rear property lines.
While the yard requirements apply to a majority of development, the ordinance provides for a number of
exceptions. Some of these include:
1. Planned Unit Developments: Front yard setbacks may be varied within planned unit
developments, which are reviewed and approved by the City Council after a recommendation
from the Planning Commission.
2. Major Streets: The city may require greater than normal setbacks along segments of the city’s
arterial street system, as defined in the Comprehensive Development Plan.
3. Flexibility Provided by Supplemental Development Regulations: Article 07 establishes
supplemental regulations, many of which provide flexibility or variations in setback regulations
for specific contexts.
E. Maximum Setbacks: Some specific zoning districts provide maximum as well as minimum setbacks.
These setbacks establish “build-to” lines that may be necessary to protect the appearance and character
of special urban districts.
F. Maximum Height: Height normally measures the vertical distance from the established grade to the
highest point of a building. However, as established by the definition of height, the point of measurement
may vary for different types of buildings and roof slopes.
G. Maximum Building Coverage: This measures the percentage of a site that may be covered by the
footprint of buildings. Thus, a 20,000 square foot building on a 40,000 square foot site has a building
coverage of 50 percent. This is a method of regulating the scale of buildings in an area.
H. Maximum Impervious Coverage: This measures the percentage of a site that may be covered by
buildings and other surfaces and development features which prevent the penetration of water into the
ground (such as driveways, porches, parking lots, and other features). Limits on impervious coverage
help control the velocity and quantity of stormwater runoff and provide for groundwater recharge.
I. Floor Area Ratio: Just as site area per unit controls the density of residential development, floor area ratio
(FAR) controls the density of non-residential development. FAR is the ratio of gross floor area of a
building to total site area. Thus, in an area with a maximum permitted FAR of 1.0, a 40,000 square foot
building may be located on a 40,000 square foot site. Naturally, because of coverage ratios, landscaping,
and parking requirements, such a building will be multi-story.
J. Maximum Amount of Total Parking in Street Yard: This controls the maximum amount of parking that can
be located in the area between a building facade and the street. When applied in certain zoning districts,
it is intended to reduce the number of cars seen from the street, encourage site planning which locates
parking in rear and side yards, and produce a stronger relationship between buildings and streets. For
example, a project with 100 parking stalls and a 50 percent limit on the amount of parking located in street
yards must locate 50 of its stalls in rear or side yards without street exposure.
K. Minimum Depth of Landscaping Adjacent to Street Right-of-Ways: This establishes the depth of
landscaping that must be provided on private property adjacent and in from the right-of-way line. Thus, if
the required minimum depth is 15 feet, a project must landscape the first 15 feet of its site back from the
right-of-way line. All landscaping must be done in accordance with Article 08, establishing landscaping
standards.
Z O N I N G D I S T R I C T S
4-5
L. Minimum Bufferyard Requirements: This establishes the depth of a bufferyard that must be provided by
intensive land uses adjacent to primarily residential land uses in residential zoning districts. All
landscaping must be done in accordance with Article 08 establishing landscaping standards.
M. Supplemental Use Regulations: Certain permitted uses require satisfaction of specific requirements in
order to function successfully in their urban or rural contexts. These supplemental requirements are set
forth in Article 06. These requirements are cross-referenced in the “Supplementary Regulations” column
of the use matrix.
TABLE 4.1: PERMITTED USES BY ZONING DISTRICT
P = Permitted Uses by Right S = Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit Blank = Uses Not Permitted
Use Types AG RR R-1 R-2 R-3 MH LC UC GC CBD BP GI HI
Supplementary
Regulations
Agricultural Uses
Horticulture P P 6-2
Crop Production P P 6-2
Animal Production P S 6-2
Confined Animal
Feeding Operations 6-2
Livestock Stales S
Residential Uses
Single-Family Detached P P P P P P S P S
Single-Family Attached S S P P S P S
Duplex S P S S S
Two-Family* S S S S S S S S 6-3 A
Townhouse* S P S P S
Multiple-Family* P S P P 6-3 B
Group Residential* P P P P 6-3 B
Retirement Residential* S S S P P S S P P 6.3 D
Mobile Home Park* P
Mobile Home
Subdivision S S S P P S S P 6.3 C
Mobile Home
Residential S 6-3 C
Manufactured Home
Residential P P P P P P P P S
Civic Uses
Administration S P P P P P P P
Cemetery* P P S S
Crematoria S S P P
Clubs (Recreational)* S S S S P S P P P P P P P 6-4A
Clubs (Social)* S S S S S S P P P P P P P 6-4A
College/ University* S S S P S P P P P
Convalescent
Services* P P P S
Cultural Service* P P P P P P P P P P P
Day Care (Limited) P P P P P P P P P P S 6-4B
Day Care (General)* S S S P S P P P P P S 6-4C
Detention Facilities* S S S S S
Emergency Residential
Services P P P P P P P
Group Care Facility* S S S S P S P P P P S 6-4D
Group Home P P P P P P 6-4D
Guidance Services P P P P P P
Health Care* S P P P P P P
Hospital* S S S S S P P P S S
Maintenance Facilities* S S P P P P
Park and Recreation P P P P P P P P P
Z O N I N G D I S T R I C T S
4-6
TABLE 4.1: PERMITTED USES BY ZONING DISTRICT
P = Permitted Uses by Right S = Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit Blank = Uses Not Permitted
Use Types AG RR R-1 R-2 R-3 MH LC UC GC CBD BP GI HI
Supplementary
Regulations
Postal Facilities* S P P P P P P P
Primary Education* P P P P P P P S P
Public Assembly* S S P P S
Religious Assembly* S S P P P P P P P P
Safety Services* P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Secondary Education* S S S P S S S S S S
Skilled Nursing* S S S S S P P P S S
Utilities* P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Office Uses
General Offices S P P P P P P P
Corporate Offices* S P P P P P P P
Financial Services P P P P P P P
Medical Offices P P P P P P P
Commercial Uses
Agricultural Sales/Service* S P S P P
Automobile Auction Lots*
Automotive Rental/ Sales* P S 6-5C
Auto Services* S S P P P P P 6-5A, 6-5 B
Body Repair* S S P P 6-5 A
Equipment Rental/ Sales* P S S P P 6-5 C
Equipment Repair * P S P P 6-5 A
Bed and Breakfast* S S P S P P P P S P 6-5 D
Business Support
Services* P P P P P P P
Business/ Trade Schools* P P P P
Campground* P S S 6-5 E
Cocktail Lounge * P P P
Commercial Recreation *
(Controlled Impact) S P P P P P
Commercial Recreation *
(High Impact) S P S P P
Communication Services* P P P P P P P
Construction Sales and
Service* P S P P P 6-5G
Consumer Services* P P P P P P
Convenience Storage* S S S S P P P 6-5 F
Food Sales
(Convenience)* P S P P S P S
Food Sales (Limited )* S P P P P S
Food Sales (General)* S P P P S
Funeral Services* P P P P P
Kennels* P S S P 6-5H
Laundry Services* P S P P P
Liquor Sales* S P P
Lodging * S P P P P
Personal Improvement P P P P P P
Personal Services* S P P P P P P
Pet Services * P P P P P
Recreation Vehicle Sales
and Storage* S S S S
Research Services* S P P P P P P
Restaurants (Drive-In)* S P S
Restaurants (General)* P P P P P S
Restricted (Adult)
*Businesses S P P 6.5I
Limited Retail Services P P P P P
Large Retail Services* P S P P P
Z O N I N G D I S T R I C T S
4-7
TABLE 4.1: PERMITTED USES BY ZONING DISTRICT
P = Permitted Uses by Right S = Uses Permitted by Special Use Permit Blank = Uses Not Permitted
Use Types AG RR R-1 R-2 R-3 MH LC UC GC CBD BP GI HI
Supplementary
Regulations
Mass Retail Services* S
Stables* P S
Surplus Sales* P P P P P
Trade Services* S S P S P P P
Travel Centers S P S P P
Truck Stops* S S S P
Veterinary Services* S S P P
Gaming Facility* P S
Parking Uses
Parking Structure* S P P P P P
Off -Street Parking* P P P P Article 9
Industrial
Construction Yards* P P P
Custom Manufacturing P P S P P P
Light Industry* S P P P P
General Industry* P P P
Heavy Industry* P
Resource Extraction* S P 6-6 A
Salvage Services* P 6-6 B
Warehousing* P P P
Construction Yards* P P
Recycling Collection* P P P
Recycling Processing* P P
Vehicle Storage (Long-
Term)* S P P P
Transportation Uses
Aviation* P S P
Railroad Facilities* S S P P
Transportation Terminal* S P P P P
Truck Terminal* P
Miscellaneous Uses
Amateur Radio Tower P P P P P P P P P S P P P
Communications Tower S S S S P P P 6-7B
Construction Batch Plant P P
WECS S S S S S S S S S S S 6-7C
Landfill (Non-Putrescible)* S S S 6-7 A
Landfill (Putrescible)* S S 6-7 A
Alternative Energy
Production Devices S S S S S S S S S S S S
* Additional Site Plan Approval as set forth in Section 12-3
Z O N I N G D I S T R I C T S
4-8
4-14 AG – Agricultural District
Purpose: The AG district provides for and preserves the agricultural and rural use of land, while accommodating
extremely low density residential development generally associated with agricultural uses. This district is designed
to maintain permanent and comprehensive agricultural uses within the Plattsmouth extra-territorial jurisdiction. It
recognizes that major agriculture has industrial aspects and negative effects on nearby neighborhoods that often
create conflicts between agricultural and residential uses. In addition, land included in the urban reserve in the
Comprehensive Plan should be retained in the AG district to prevent premature or inappropriate development.
TABLE 4.2: AG SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Regulator
One-Family
Units Other Permitted Uses
Site Area per Housing Unit 10 Acres NA
Minimum Lot Area 10 Acres 10 Acres
Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 300 300
Minimum Yards (Feet)
Front Yard
Side Yard
Street Side Yard
Rear Yard
50 (Note 1)
25
25
35
50
25
25
35
Maximum Height (Feet) 35 35; 50 for Farm Buildings,
100 for Grain Storage Structures
Maximum Building Coverage NA NA
Maximum Impervious Coverage NA NA
Floor Area Ratio NA NA
Maximum Amount of Total
Parking Located in Street Yard NA NA
Note 1: Front yard setback is measured from property line of platted lots. For unplatted lots along roads,
residential structures shall be set back sufficiently to allow for future right-of-way dedications. This setback is
typically 75 feet from the center line of the adjacent road. The Zoning Official may establish a different setback
requirement based on the specific context of a parcel. The reason for any such variation shall be documented in
writing by the Zoning Official.
Z O N I N G D I S T R I C T S
4-9
4-15 RR – Rural Residential District
Purpose: The RR district provides for the rural residential use of land, accommodating agriculture and very low
density residential environments. It is designed for permanent development of relatively remote areas that are
beyond the reach of Plattsmouth’s foreseeable urban development pattern, making eventual extension of urban
services extremely unlikely. RR districts do not permit comprehensive agriculture, and are intended for areas
where farming is not a primary, permanent land use. Subdivisions in RR districts generally will be developed to
rural standards, with gravel roads, surface drainage, and individual water and wastewater management systems. In
parts of the Plattsmouth jurisdiction with distinctive landforms, conservation development design is required to
maintain the character of the land. These areas are designated by the ED - Environmental Resource overlay
district and are subject to special standards and planning procedures set forth in Section 5-5 of the Zoning
Ordinance. These standards encourage the preservation of important open space resources without reducing the
density permitted the developer or property owner.
TABLE 4.3: RR SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Regulator
One-Family
Units
Other
Permitted
Uses
Site Area per Housing Unit 1 Acre NA
Minimum Lot Area 1 Acre 1 Acre
Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 100 100
Minimum Yards (Feet)
Front Yard
Side Yard
Street Side Yard
Rear Yard
50
25
25
35
50
25
20
35
Maximum Height (Feet) 36 36
Maximum Building Coverage 30% 30%
Maximum Impervious Coverage 40% 40%
Floor Area Ratio NA NA
Maximum Amount of Total
Parking Located in Street Yard NA NA
Project Size Requiring Planned
Development District (PD) NA NA
Z O N I N G D I S T R I C T S
4-10
4-16 R-1 – Urban Residential Low-Density District
Purpose: The R-1 district is intended to provide for urban residential development, with gross densities generally
below four units per acre. These areas generally include single-family detached and attached dwellings on
relatively large lots with supporting community facilities and urban services, including city water and sanitary sewer
service. The R-1 district will typically be used for single-family development that is provided with municipal water
and sewer service.
TABLE 4.4: R-1 SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Regulator
One-Family
Detached
One-Family
Attached
(Note 2)
Other
Permitted
Uses
Site Area per Housing Unit 7,500 6,000
Minimum Lot Area
7,500 Square
Feet
5,000
per Unit 7,500
Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 75 45 per Unit 75
Minimum Yards (Feet)
Front Yard
Side Yard (Note 1)
Street Side Yard
Rear Yard*
25
15
20
20
25
15
20
20
25
15
20
20
Maximum Height (Feet) 36 36 36
Maximum Building Coverage 40% 40% 40%
Maximum Impervious Coverage 50% 50% 50%
Floor Area Ratio NA NA NA
Maximum Amount of Total
Parking Located in Street Yard NA NA NA
* The required rear yard area is calculated as 20 percent of the lot depth times
the lot width. Provided that this minimum area is maintained, a portion of a
residential structure may come as close as 10 feet from a rear lot line.
Note 1 - Zero Lot Line: Within a common development, one interior side yard may be equal to zero for singlefamily
detached residential use if:
A. The normal side yard setback requirement must be maintained adjacent to any lot with an existing
structure not within the common development; or not otherwise designated for zero lot line use.
B. An easement for maintenance of the zero lot line façade is prepared by the developer and filed with the
Cass County Register of Deeds, the City Clerk, and the Zoning Official at the time of application for a
building permit.
Note 2 - Single-Family Attached Development: Single-family attached development requires approval of a
Planned Unit Development.
Z O N I N G D I S T R I C T S
4-11
4-17 R-2 – Urban Residential Medium-Density District
Purpose: The R-2 district is intended to provide for moderate density residential development, with gross densities
generally between six and twelve units per acre. These developments are characterized by single-family dwellings
on moderately-sized lots along with low-density multi-unit residential structures such as duplexes and townhouses
approved by special use permit. It adapts to both established and developing neighborhoods, as well as transitions
between single-family and multi-family areas.
TABLE 4.5: R-2 SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Regulator
One-Family
Detached
One-Family
Attached Duplex
Townhouse
(Note 1)
Other
Permitted
Uses
Site Area per Housing Unit
(Square Feet)
In Conventional Development
In Planned Developments
5,000
5,000
5,000
4,000
4,000
3,000
3,000
2,500
Minimum Lot Area
In Conventional Development
In Planned Unit Developments
5,000
4,000
5,000
4,000
8,000
6,000
3,000
2,500
6,000
6,000
Minimum Lot Width (Feet)
In Conventional Development
In Planned Unit Developments
75
45
45 per Unit
40 per Unit
75
60
30
25
60
60
Minimum Yards (Feet) (Note 3)
Front Yard
Side Yard (Note 2)
Street Side Yard
Rear Yard*
25
15
20
20
25
15
20
20
25
15
20
20
25
15
20
20
25
15
20
25
Maximum Height (Feet) 36 36 36 36 36
Maximum Building Coverage 40% 40% 40% 50% 50%
Maximum Impervious Coverage 50% 50% 50% 60% 60%
Floor Area Ratio NA NA NA NA 0.50
Maximum Amount of Total
Parking Located in Street Yard NA NA NA NA 50%
* The required rear yard area is calculated as 20 percent of the lot depth times the lot width. Provided that this
minimum area is maintained, a portion of a residential structure may come as close as 10 feet from a rear lot line.
Note 1 - Townhouse Development: No more than four units may be attached in a single townhouse structure
within an R-2 district. Regulators are shown on a per unit basis.
Note 2 - Zero Lot Line or Single-Family Attached Development: Within a common development, one interior
side yard may be equal to zero for single-family detached residential use if:
A. The normal side yard setback requirement must be maintained adjacent to any lot with an existing
structure not within the common development; or not otherwise designated for zero lot line use.
B. An easement for maintenance of the zero lot line façade is prepared by the developer and filed with the
Cass County Register of Deeds, the City Clerk, and the Building Official at the time of application for a
building permit.
Note 3 - Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Unit Developments: The Planning Commission and City Council
may vary required minimum setbacks in planned districts. However, the setback from the front facade of a garage
to any public or private street right-of-way including the boundary of sidewalk(s) must be at least 20 feet.
Z O N I N G D I S T R I C T S
4-12
4-18 R-3 – Urban Residential High-Density District
Purpose: The R-3 district is intended to provide for low and medium density multi-family residential development,
with gross densities above 12 units per acre. These developments often are characterized by low-rise buildings in
multiple structure configurations, with an emphasis on open space, convenient parking, and, in many cases,
common community facilities such as clubhouses and swimming pools. This district is also appropriate for larger
townhouse complexes, while still accommodating lower density forms of development.
TABLE 4.6: R-3 SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Regulator
One-Family
Detached
One-Family
Attached
(Note 1) Duplex
Townhouse
(Note 1)
Multi-Family
(Note 2)
Other
Permitted
Uses
Site Area per Housing Unit (SF)
In Conventional Development
In Planned Developments
5,000
4,000
4,000
3,000
3,000
2,500
3,000
2,500
2,500
1,500
Minimum Lot Area
In Conventional Development
In Planned Developments
5,000
4,000
4,000
3,000
6,000
5,000
3,000
2,500
10,000
10,000
5,000
5,000
Minimum Lot Width (Feet)
In Conventional Development
In Planned Unit Developments
50
45
40
30
50
45
25
20
100
100
50
50
Minimum Yards (Feet) (Note 3)
Front Yard
Side Yard
Street Side Yard
Rear Yard (Note 4)
25
5
15
20% of Lot
Depth
25
5
15
20% of Lot
Depth
25
5
15
20% of Lot
Depth
25
5
15
20% of Lot
Depth
25
(Note 6)
15
20
25
(Note 6)
15
35
Maximum Height (Feet) 36 36 36 36 72 72
Maximum Building Coverage 50% 50% 50% 60% 60% 60%
Maximum Impervious Coverage 60% 60% 60% 70% 70% 70%
Floor Area Ratio NA NA NA NA 0.50 0.50
Maximum Amount of Total
Parking Located in Street Yard NA NA NA NA 50% 50%
Note 1 – One-Family Attached and Townhouse Development: Regulators are shown on a per unit basis. Side
yard setbacks are indicated for detached building walls.
Note 2 - Multi-Family Development: Site area per unit may be reduced subject to approval of a special use permit
by the City Council after a recommendation of the Planning Commission, or within a planned unit development.
Note 3 - Zero Lot Line and Single-Family Attached Development: Within a common development, one interior
side yard may be equal to zero for single-family detached residential use if:
A. The normal side yard setback requirement must be maintained adjacent to any lot with an existing
structure not within the common development; or not otherwise designated for zero lot line use.
B. An easement for maintenance of the zero lot line façade is prepared by the developer and filed with the
Cass County Register of Deeds, the City Clerk, and the Building Official at the time of application for a
building permit.
Note 4: The required rear yard area is calculated as the lesser of 20 feet or 20 percent of the lot depth to a
minimum of 15 feet.
Note 5 - Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Unit Developments: The Planning Commission and City Council
may vary required minimum setbacks in planned districts. However, the setback from the front facade of a garage
to any public or private street right-of-way including the boundary of sidewalk(s) must be at least 20 feet.
Note 6 - Side Yard Set Back: Interior side yard is equal to five feet for each story of height.
Additional Requirements: Parking areas, accessory buildings, and garages must be at least five feet from a side
or rear lot line. A greater separation from residential zoning districts may be required by Article 9.
Z O N I N G D I S T R I C T S
4-13
4-19 MH – Mobile Home Park Planned District
Purpose: The MH district recognizes that mobile home development, properly planned, can provide important
opportunities for affordable housing. It provides opportunities for mobile home development within planned parks or
subdivisions, along with the supporting services necessary to create quality residential neighborhoods.
TABLE 4.7: MH SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Regulator
One-Family
Detached
and Mobile
Home Units
on Sub-
Divided Lots
One-Family
Attached
and
Townhouse
(Note 1) Duplex
Mobile
Home Park
(Note 2)
Other
Permitted
Uses
Site Area per Housing Unit (SF)
In Conventional Development
In Planned Developments
5,000
4,000
4,000
3,000
4,000
3,000
NA
4,000
Minimum Lot Area
In Conventional Development
In Planned Developments
5,000
4,000
4,000
3,000
8,000
6,000
NA
2 Acres
6,000
6,000
Minimum Lot Width (Feet)
In Conventional Development
In Planned Developments
50
40
40
30
50
45
NA
100
60
60
Minimum Yards (Feet) (Note 3)
Front Yard
Side Yard (Note 4)
Street Side Yard
Rear Yard (Note 5)
25
5
25
20% of Lot
Depth
25
10
25
20% of Lot
Depth
25
5
25
20% of Lot
Depth
35
35
35
35
25
10
25
25
Maximum Height (Feet) 36 36 36 36 36
Maximum Building Coverage 40% 40% 40% NA NA
Maximum Impervious Coverage 50% 50% 50% 50% 50%
Floor Area Ratio NA NA NA NA 0.50
Maximum Amount of Total
Parking Located in Street Yard NA NA NA NA 50%
* The required rear yard area is calculated as 20 percent of the lot depth times the lot width. Provided that this
minimum area is maintained, a portion of a residential structure may come as close as 10 feet from a rear lot line.
Note 1 –Single-Family Attached Townhouse Development: No more than four units may be attached in a single
townhouse structure within an MH district. Regulators are shown on a per unit basis. Side yard setbacks are
indicated for detached building walls.
Note 2 - Mobile Home Parks and Subdivisions: Complete development standards for mobile home parks and
subdivisions are set forth in Section 6-3C.
Note 3 - Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Districts: The Planning Commission and City Council may vary
required minimum setbacks in planned districts other than mobile home parks. However, the setback from the front
facade of a garage to any public or private street right-of-way, including the boundary of sidewalks, must be at least
20 feet.
Note 4 - Zero Lot Line and Single-Family Attached Development: Within a common development, one interior
side yard may be equal to zero for single-family detached residential use if:
A. The normal side yard setback requirement must be maintained adjacent to any lot with an existing
structure not within the common development, or not otherwise designated for zero lot line use.
B. An easement for maintenance of the zero lot line façade is prepared by the developer and filed with the
Cass County Register of Deeds, the City Clerk, and the Building Official at the time of application for a
building permit.
Note 5: The required rear yard area is calculated as the lesser of 20 feet or 20 percent of the lot depth to a
minimum of 15 feet.
Z O N I N G D I S T R I C T S
4-14
4-20 LC – Limited Commercial and Office District
A. Purpose: The LC district is intended for neighborhood shopping facilities serving the needs of residents of
a surrounding residential area. Allowed commercial and office uses are generally compatible with nearby
residential areas in scale and intensity. Site development regulations are intended to ensure compatibility
in size, scale, and site characteristics with these residential environments. LC districts are generally most
appropriate at intersections of collector and/or arterial streets, at the edge of residential areas, in planned
commercial areas in newly developing residential districts, or at other locations where local commercial
services are required.
TABLE 4.8: LC SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
FOR REGULAR LC DISTRICTS
Regulator
Permitted
Residential
Uses
All Other
Permitted
Uses
Site Area per Housing Unit (SF) NA
Minimum Lot Area 5,000
Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 50
Minimum Yards (Feet)
Front Yard (Note 1)
Side Yard
Street Side Yard
Rear Yard
20
10
15
Lesser of
20% of Lot
Depth or 15
Feet
Maximum Height (Feet) 40
Maximum Building Coverage 50%
Maximum Impervious Coverage 70%
Floor Area Ratio (Note 2) 0.50
Maximum Amount of Total
Parking Located in Street Yard
Same
Standards
as for the
R-3 District
60%
Note 1 – Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Unit Development Districts: The Planning Commission and City
Council may vary required minimum setbacks in PUD districts. Along arterials designated in the City’s
Comprehensive Development Plan, the Public Works Director may require a deeper front-yard setback.
Note 2 - Flexible Floor Area Ratios in Planned Districts: The Planning Commission and City Council may
increase the maximum floor area ratio for a development in a PUD district.
B. Supplemental Development Regulations in for Office and Commercial Uses in the LC District: In order to
maintain a residential character in community commercial areas in Plattsmouth, the following design
standards shall apply to any office or commercial use developed within the LC district:
1. No single building shall have a building coverage area that exceeds 15,000 square feet without
approval of a special use permit, as set forth in Section 12-4.
2. No street-facing facade may have a continuous length of 100 feet or over without an offset in the
building elevation equal to a dimension of at least five feet.
3. Window area on each street-facing facade shall be equal to at least 20 percent of the area of
that facade.
4. No building facade facing a street shall have the appearance of a rear facade. Architectural
details, including materials, textures, patterns, colors, and design features used on the front
facade shall be incorporated into all facades facing public streets and easily visible to the public.
5. All buildings and developments shall include a direct, clear, and safe pedestrian connection from
adjacent public sidewalks to the entrances of buildings within the development.
Z O N I N G D I S T R I C T S
4-15
4-21 UC - Urban Corridor District
A. Purpose: The UC district recognizes the mixed use character of major urban corridors, including
traditional arterials such as Chicago Avenue and emerging mixed-use corridors. These corridors
sometimes accommodate a combination of residential, commercial, and office uses. Design standards
maintain their character as important urban streets. Some uses in the UC district will require development
above normal standards in order to assure compatibility with surrounding uses.
TABLE 4.9: UC SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Regulator
One-Family
Detached
One-Family
Attached
(Note 1) Duplex
Townhouse
(Note 1) Multi-Family
Other
Permitted
Uses
Site Area per Housing Unit (SF)
In Conventional Development
In Planned Developments
5,000
4,000
4,000
3,000
3,000
2,500
3,000
2,500
2,000
1,000
Minimum Lot Area
In Conventional Development
In Planned Unit Developments
5,000
4,000
4,000
3,000
6,000
5,000
2,500
2,000
8,000
8,000
5,000
5,000
Minimum Lot Width (Feet)
In Conventional Development
In Planned Unit Developments
50
40
40
30
60
50
25
20
80
80
40
40
Minimum Yards (Feet)
Front Yard
Side Yard (Notes 1, 3)
Street Side Yard
Rear Yard
20
10
10
(Note 6)
20
10
10
(Note 6)
20
10
10
(Note 6)
20
10
10
(Note 6)
(Note 5)
(Note 2)
10
15
(Note 5)
10
10
15
Maximum Height (Feet) 40 40 40 40 60 60
Maximum Building Coverage 50% 50% 50% 60% 60% 60%
Maximum Impervious Coverage 60% 60% 60% 70% 70% 70%
Floor Area Ratio NA NA NA NA 0.80 0.50
Maximum Amount of Total
Parking Located in Street Yard NA NA NA NA 50% 50%
* The required rear yard area is calculated as 20 percent of the lot depth times the lot width. Provided that this minimum area
is maintained, a portion of a residential structure may come as close as 10 feet from a rear lot line.
Note 1 - Single-Family Attached Townhouse Development: Regulators are shown on a per unit basis. Side
yard setbacks are indicated for detached building walls.
Note 2 - Multi-Family Development: Interior side yard is equal to five feet for each story of height.
Note 3 - Zero Lot Line and Single-Family Attached Development: Within a common development, one interior
side yard may be equal to zero for single-family detached residential use if:
A. The normal side yard setback requirement must be maintained adjacent to any lot with an existing
structure not within the common development, or not otherwise designated for zero lot line use.
B. An easement for maintenance of the zero lot line façade is prepared by the developer and filed with the
Cass County Register of Deeds, the City Clerk, and the Building Official at the time of application for a
building permit.
Note 4 - Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Districts: The Planning Commission and City Council may vary
required minimum setbacks in planned districts. However, the setback from the front facade of a garage to any
public or private street right-of-way, including the boundary of sidewalks, must be at least 20 feet.
Z O N I N G D I S T R I C T S
4-16
Note 5 - Setbacks along Urban Corridors: Normal minimum front yard setback is 25 feet. Front yard setback
may be reduced to 15 feet if:
A. No parking is placed within the street yard.
B. The entire street yard area is landscaped, with the exception of driveways to parking areas or pedestrian
accesses to the principal building on the site.
This setback flexibility shall not be applied on any street designated as a major arterial by the City’s Comprehensive
Development Plan without the specific approval of the City’s Public Works Director.
Note 6: The required rear yard area is calculated as the lesser of 20 feet or 20 percent of the lot depth to a
minimum of 15 feet.
B. Supplemental Development Regulations in for Office and Commercial Uses in the UC District: In order to
maintain the fine-grained character of major mixed use corridors in Plattsmouth, the following design
standards shall apply to any office or commercial use developed within the UC district:
1. No single building shall have a building coverage area that exceeds 10,000 square feet without
approval of a special use permit, as set forth in Section 12-4.
2. No street-facing facade may have a continuous length of 50 feet or over without an offset in the
building elevation equal to a dimension of at least five feet.
3. Window area on each street-facing facade shall be equal to at least 20 percent of the area of
that facade.
4. Exterior materials shall be brick, stone, wood clapboard, or other exterior materials typical of
exterior building materials in common use in Plattsmouth’s residential districts or central
business district.
5. The dominant roof form shall be a pitched or gabled roof with a minimum roof slope equal to one
foot of vertical height to every three feet of horizontal distance. Permitted roof materials may
include asphalt shingles, slate or simulated slate shingles, standing seam metal, or other similar
roof materials.
6. Each site design shall provide a clear and safe method of pedestrian circulation along the street
right-of-way and between the street right-of-way and a principal customer entrance of the
business.
Z O N I N G D I S T R I C T S
4-17
4-22 GC – General Commercial District
Purpose: The GC district is intended for commercial facilities which serve the needs of markets ranging from
several neighborhoods to the overall region. While allowed commercial and office uses are generally compatible
with nearby residential areas, traffic and operating characteristics may have more negative effects on residential
neighborhoods than those permitted in the LC district. GC districts are appropriate at major intersections, at the
junction of several neighborhoods, or at substantial commercial sub-centers.
TABLE 4.10: GC SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Regulator
Permitted
Residential
Uses
All Other
Permitted
Uses
Minimum Lot Area 5,000
Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 50
Minimum Yards (Feet)
Front Yard (Note 1)
Side Yard
Street Side Yard
Rear Yard
10
0
10
10
Maximum Height (Feet) 60
Maximum Building Coverage 70%
Maximum Impervious Coverage 80%
Floor Area Ratio (Note 2) 1.0
Maximum Amount of Total
Parking Located in Street Yard
Same
Standards
as for the
R-3 High
Density
Residential
District
100%
Note 1 - Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Unit Development Districts: The Planning Commission and City
Council may vary required minimum setbacks in PUD districts. Along arterials designated in the City’s
Comprehensive Development Plan, the Public Works Director may require a deeper front-yard setback.
Note 2 - Flexible Floor Area Ratios in Planned Districts: The Planning Commission and City Council may
increase the maximum floor area ratio for a development in a PUD district.
Z O N I N G D I S T R I C T S
4-18
4-23 CB – Central Business District
A. Purpose: The CB district provides appropriate development regulations for downtown Plattsmouth, the
city’s central business district. The grouping of uses is designed to strengthen the town center’s role as a
center for trade, service, and civic life. Mixed uses are allowed and encouraged within the CB district.
TABLE 4.11: CB SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Regulator
1-Family
Detached
1-family
Attached
(Note 3) Duplex
Townhouses
(Note 3)
Other
Permitted
Residential
Uses
All Other
Permitted
Uses
Site Area per Housing Unit (SF) 4,000 3,000 2,500 2,500 1,000 NA
Minimum Lot Area 4,000 3,000 5,000 2,000 5,000 None
Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 40 30 50 20
No
Requirement
No
Requirement
Minimum Yards (Feet)
Front Yard
Side Yard
Street Side Yard
Rear Yard*
20
10
10
Note 2
20
10
10
Note 2
20
10
10
Note 2
20
10
10
Note 2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Maximum Height (Feet) 40 40 40 40 No Limit No Limit
Maximum Building Coverage 50% 50% 50% 60% 100% 100%
Maximum Impervious Coverage 60% 60% 60% 70% 100% 100%
Floor Area Ratio (Note 1) NA NA NA NA NA 5.0
Maximum Amount of Total
Parking Located in Street Yard NA NA NA NA NA
0% Along
Main Street
between
Third and
Sixth Streets;
50% in Other
Areas
Note 1 - Flexible Floor Area Ratios in Planned Unit Development Districts: The Planning Commission and City
Council may increase the maximum floor area ratio for a development in a planned district.
Note 2- Rear Yard: The required rear yard area is calculated as the lesser of 20 feet or 20% of the lot depth of a
minimum 15 feet.
Note 3-Single-Family Attached Townhouse Development: Regulators are shown on a per unit basis. Side yard
setbacks are indicated for detached building walls.
B. Special Regulations and Standards:
1. All new projects developed in the CB district shall be subject to approval of a special use permit
by the City Council, after the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
2. New developments in the CB district shall be consistent with the standards of the civic corridor
design overlay district, with additional or modified standards established in this section.
3. No building facade facing a street shall have the appearance of a rear facade. Architectural
details, including materials, textures, patterns, colors, and design features used on the front
facade shall be incorporated into all facades facing public streets and easily visible to the public.
All facades with frontage along Main Street shall be designed as front building facades.
4. At least 60 percent of the frontage of any new building along Main Street shall be built to the
street property line. Parking shall not be allowed between a building façade and the Main Street
right-of-way line.
5. All buildings and developments shall include a direct, clear, and safe pedestrian connection from
adjacent public sidewalks to the entrances of buildings within the development.
Z O N I N G D I S T R I C T S
4-19
6. For commercial buildings, transparency and visibility on the street are important virtues in the
CB district. Street level facades should be at least 50 percent transparent, composed of
windows and doors. Window shapes and sizes should be consistent with historic precedents
along Main Street. Typically, historic storefronts included multiple, individual windows rather
than the wider sweeps of glass typical of contemporary storefronts. This pattern should
generally be maintained in new development. New projects along Main Street shall maintain the
overall character and rhythm of buildings within the Plattsmouth National Register District.
7. Upper story commercial facades should similarly be transparent, with windows comprising a
minimum of 40 percent of the front façade area. Window shapes are most typically vertical, with
ornamental elements such as arches frequently employed.
8. Any single-family detached, single-family attached, duplex, two-family or townhouse residential
use lawfully established on the effective date of this ordinance shall be presumed to have an
approved special use permit.
Z O N I N G D I S T R I C T S
4-20
4-24 BP – Business Park District
Purpose: The BP district is designed to promote the development of planned business parks that accommodate
corporate offices, research facilities, and structures that can combine office, distribution, and limited industrial uses.
These facilities serve a more regional audience, but may provide services to local residents. They usually include
extensive landscaping, abundant parking facilities, and good visual and pedestrian relationships among buildings.
TABLE 4.12: BP SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Regulator
Permitted
Uses
Minimum District Size (SF) One Acre
Minimum Lot Area (SF) 10,000
Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 100
Minimum Yards (Feet)
Front Yard (Note 1)
Side Yard
Street Side Yard
Rear Yard
20
10
15
15
Maximum Height (Feet) 40
Maximum Building Coverage 50%
Maximum Impervious Coverage 70%
Floor Area Ratio (Note 2) 2.0
Maximum Amount of Total
Parking Located in Street Yard 50%
Note 1 - Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Unit Development Districts: The Planning Commission and City
Council may vary required minimum setbacks in PUD districts. Along arterials designated in the City’s
Comprehensive Development Plan, the Public Works Director may require a deeper front-yard setback.
Note 2 - Flexible Floor Area Ratios in Planned Unit Development Districts: The Planning Commission and City
Council may increase the maximum floor area ratio for a development in a PUD district.
Z O N I N G D I S T R I C T S
4-21
4-25 GI – General Industrial District
Purpose: The GI district is intended to reserve sites appropriate for the location of industrial uses with relatively
limited environmental effects. The district is designed to provide appropriate space and regulations to encourage
good quality industrial development, while assuring that facilities are served with adequate parking and loading
facilities.
TABLE 4.13: GI SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Regulator
Permitted
Uses
Minimum District Size (SF) 5,000
Minimum Lot Area (SF) 5,000
Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 50
Minimum Yards (Feet)
Front Yard (Note 1)
Side Yard
Street Side Yard
Rear Yard
15
0
10
10
Maximum Height (Feet) 72
Maximum Building Coverage 70%
Maximum Impervious Coverage 90%
Floor Area Ratio (Note 2) 1.0
Maximum Amount of Total
Parking Located in Street Yard 100%
Note 1 - Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Unit Development Districts: The Planning Commission and City
Council may vary required minimum setbacks in PUD districts. Along arterials designated in the City’s
Comprehensive Development Plan, the Public Works Director may require a deeper front-yard setback.
Note 2 - Flexible Floor Area Ratios in Planned Unit Development Districts: The Planning Commission and City
Council may increase the maximum floor area ratio for a development in a PUD district.
Z O N I N G D I S T R I C T S
4-22
4-26 HI – Heavy Industrial District
Purpose: The HI district is intended to accommodate a wide variety of industrial uses, some of which may have
significant external effects. These uses may have operating characteristics that create conflicts with lower-intensity
surrounding land uses. The district provides the reservation of land for these activities and includes buffering
requirements to reduce incompatibility.
TABLE 4.14: HI SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Regulator
Permitted
Uses
Minimum District Size (SF) 10,000
Minimum Lot Area (SF) 10,000
Minimum Lot Width (Feet) 100
Minimum Yards (Feet)
Front Yard (Note 1)
Side Yard
Street Side Yard
Rear Yard
15
0
10
10
Maximum Height (Feet) 72
Maximum Building Coverage 85%
Maximum Impervious Coverage 100%
Floor Area Ratio (Note 2) 2.0
Maximum Amount of Total
Parking Located in Street Yard 100%
Note 1 - Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Unit Development Districts: The Planning Commission and City
Council may vary required minimum setbacks in PUD districts. Along arterials designated in the City’s
Comprehensive Development Plan, the Public Works Director may require a deeper front-yard setback.
Note 2 - Flexible Floor Area Ratios in Planned Unit Development Districts: The Planning Commission and City
Council may increase the maximum floor area ratio for a development in a PUD district.
4-27 Concordance between Comprehensive Development Plan Land Use Categories and Zoning Districts
A. General Purpose: Under Nebraska State Statutes, the municipal power to adopt zoning regulations
requires approval of a Comprehensive Development Plan, and that the application and administration of
such zoning regulations be in accordance with the Comprehensive Development Plan (Nebraska Rev.
Stat. § 19-901-903). The Plattsmouth Comprehensive Development Plan establishes various land use
categories to establish a future vision of the city’s urban development and to guide development
decisions. These categories provide for general policies and ranges of land uses, but do not represent
specific zoning districts. This article establishes a concordance between the future land use categories
set forth by the comprehensive development plan and the zoning districts that implement the objectives of
these categories.
B. Comprehensive Plan Land Use Categories and Corresponding Zoning Districts: The accompanying table
sets forth the future land use categories of the Comprehensive Development Plan and the zoning districts
appropriate to each of these categories. Zoning districts established within each of these categories shall
be considered consistent with the city’s comprehensive development plan. This, however, shall not be
interpreted to require the city to approve a rezoning application or specific project solely on the basis of
consistency with this table.
TABLE 4.15: FUTURE LAND USE
Future Land Use Plan Category Appropriate Zoning Districts
Urban Reserve AG
Rural Residential/Residential Estates RR, R-1
Low-Density Residential RE, R-1, R-2, MH
Medium-Density Residential R-1, R-2, MH
High-Density Residential R-3
Z O N I N G D I S T R I C T S
4-23
TABLE 4.15: FUTURE LAND USE
Future Land Use Plan Category Appropriate Zoning Districts
Commercial LC, GC, MU
Mixed Use 1 R-3, LC, UC, MU
Mixed Use 2 R-3, LC, GC, MU
Mixed Use 3 GC, BP, GI, MU
Downtown Mixed Use CB
Business Park BP, GC
Industrial GI, HI
4-28 Large Project Special Use Permit
A. Purpose: The large project special use permit process applies to projects of sufficient size or scale to
require public comment and individual review by the Planning Commission and City Council. In order to
avoid duplication, this process is intended for projects that would not otherwise receive individual public
review or are outside of PUD or MU Districts that offer similar levels of review and control.
B. Application and Procedures: The following projects require approval of a special use permit, including
application of criteria established by Section 12-4.
TABLE 4.16: MINIMUM THRESHOLD REQUIRING L DISTRICT AND SPECIAL USE PERMIT APPROVAL
Zoning District
R-2 Townhouse projects with over five acres or 30 units.
Other permitted non-residential uses on sites of 10 or more acres.
R-3 Townhouse or multi-family projects with over 10 acres or 60 units.
Other permitted non-residential uses on sites of 10 or more acres.
LC Townhouse or multi-family projects with over five acres or 30 units.
Other permitted non-residential uses on sites of five or more acres or a building area of 40,000 SF or more.
UC Townhouse or multi-family projects with over five acres or 30 units.
Other permitted non-residential uses on sites of five or more acres or a building area of 40,000 SF or more.
GC Eight or more acres or building area of 60,000 SF or more.
CB All new construction projects.
LI, BP Eight or more acres or building area of 80,000 SF or more.
GI, HI Ten or more acres or building area of 100,000 SF or more.
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-1
05 ARTICLE FIVE
OVERLAY DISTRICTS
5-1 General Purpose
Overlay districts are used in combination with base districts to modify or expand base district regulations. Overlay
districts are adapted to special needs of different parts of the City of Plattsmouth.
The overlay districts are designed to achieve the following objectives:
A. To recognize special conditions in specific parts of the city which require specific regulation.
B. To provide flexibility in development and to encourage innovative design through comprehensivelyplanned
projects.
5-2 MU – Mixed Use District
A. Purpose: The mixed-use (MU) district is intended to accommodate projects which combine several
compatible land uses into an integrated development. The MU district may also be used to predesignate
parts of the city that are appropriate for a mixture of residential, commercial, office, light industrial, and
accessory uses. The district permits mixing residential areas with workplaces and services. Development
in the MU district must accommodate transportation systems, pedestrian and bicycle movement, and
surrounding environments. All projects developed in an MU district are subject to a special use permit
process.
B. Permitted Uses:
1. Each ordinance establishing an MU district establishes the use types permitted within its
boundaries.
2. Each MU district must contain use types within at least two use categories. Use categories
include residential, civic, office, commercial, transportation, and industrial uses. No single use
category may account for more than 80 percent of the building area or net developable land
area of an MU district. Net developable land area includes the land area of a development
excluding dedicated public streets, private streets, or other dedicated public land.
C. Site Development Regulations:
1. The minimum area of any MU district is three acres.
2. Prior to the issuance of any building permits or other authorization, all projects in the MU district
shall receive approval by the City Council, following a recommendation by the Planning
Commission, according to the procedure set forth in Article 12. This approval may be granted for
a master plan for the development of an MU district in lieu of a plan for individual projects,
provided that any subsequent developments are consistent with the specific plan.
3. Applications for approval must contain at a minimum the following information:
a. Development agreement providing conditions for approval of the application.
b. A detailed site map, including:
(1) A boundary survey.
(2) Site dimensions.
(3) Contour lines at no greater than five-foot intervals.
(4) Adjacent public rights-of-way, transportation routes and pedestrian or bicycle
systems.
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-2
(5) Description of adjacent land uses.
(6) Utility service to the site and easements through the site.
(7) Description of other site features, including drainage, soils or other
considerations that may affect development.
c. A development plan, including:
(1) A site layout, including the location of proposed buildings, parking, open
space, and other facilities.
(2) Location, capacity, and conceptual design of parking facilities.
(3) Description of the use of individual buildings.
(4) Description of all use types to be included in the project or area, and
maximum floor area devoted to each general use.
(5) Maximum height of buildings.
(6) Schematic location and design of open space on the site, including a
landscaping plan.
(7) Vehicular and pedestrian circulation plan, including relationship to external
transportation systems.
(8) Schematic building elevations and sections if required to describe the
project.
(9) Grading plans.
(10) Proposed sewer and utility improvements.
(11) Location, sizes, and types of all proposed signage.
d. Specific proposed development regulations for the project, including:
(1) The specific use types permitted within the proposed district.
(2) Maximum floor area ratios.
(3) Front, side, and rear yard setbacks.
(4) Maximum height.
(5) Maximum building and impervious coverage.
(6) Design standards applicable to the project.
e. A traffic impact analysis, if required by the city.
D. Adoption of MU District:
1. The Planning Commission and City Council shall review and evaluate each proposal or
application for a MU district. The city may impose reasonable conditions as deemed necessary
to ensure that projects within a MU district shall be compatible with adjacent land uses, will not
overburden public services and facilities, and will not be detrimental to public health, safety, and
welfare.
2. The Planning Commission, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon each
application.
3. The Planning Commission may recommend amendments to MU district applications.
4. The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be transmitted to the City Council for
final action.
5. The City Council, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon any ordinance
establishing an MU district. Proper notice shall mean the same notice established for any other
zoning amendment.
6. Upon approval by the City Council, the mixed use development plan shall become a part of the
ordinance creating or amending the MU district. All approved plans shall be filed with the City
Clerk.
7. Building Permits. The city shall not issue a building permit, certificate of occupancy, or other
permit for a building, structure, or use within a MU district unless it is in compliance with the
approved development plan or any approved amendments.
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-3
E. Amendment Procedure: The Zoning Administrator is authorized at his/her discretion to approve
amendments to an approved development plan, provided that:
1. A written request is filed with the Zoning Administrator, along with information specifying the
exact nature of the proposed amendment.
2. The amendment is consistent with the provisions of this article.
3. The amendment does not alter the approved site regulations of the development plan and does
not materially alter other aspects of the plan, including traffic circulation, mixture of use types,
and physical design.
4. Any amendment not conforming to these provisions shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission and City Council for action.
5-3 CCD - Civic Corridor Design Overlay District
A. Purpose: This section establishes civic corridors for the City of Plattsmouth. Within these civic corridors,
design guidelines apply to major development within the City of Plattsmouth, including multi-family
residential, commercial, and industrial uses. These guidelines are designed to ensure that larger-scale or
more intensive development within the city maintains good design quality and provides quality places for
residents of Plattsmouth. They are also designed to provide an overall level of unity and concordance of
development in the city, while maintaining the flexibility to encourage quality design solutions.
B. Application:
1. These guidelines and standards apply to all development within 500 feet from the centerline of
the following corridors:
a. US Highway 75.
b. Webster Boulevard.
c. Chicago Avenue/South 15th.
d. Main Street.
e. 21st Street.
f. Highway 66.
g. Lincoln Avenue.
2. The City Council, with the recommendation of the Planning Commission, may from time to time
apply the CCD overlay district to other corridors.
C. Multi-Family Design Guidelines in the CCD District:
1. Purpose: The purpose of multi-family residential design guidelines for the City of Plattsmouth
are to:
a. Provide a variety of quality housing environments that address the needs of people at
various stages of life.
b. Allow housing types that respond flexibly to changing preferences and markets.
c. Provide high site development standards with site amenities and quality public spaces.
d. Create development standards that make higher-density housing more consistent and
complementary to Plattsmouth’s single-family character.
2. Application: The multi-family design guidelines apply to all multi-family residential development
within a CCD overlay district.
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-4
3. Site Design Guidelines:
a. Relationship to Landforms:
(1) Buildings shall maintain a minimum buffer of 30 feet from the edge of any
special flood hazard area on the most current flood insurance rate maps or
from the edge of any wetlands identified by the National Wetlands Inventory
or a site specific inventory of wetlands.
(2) Site design shall minimize cut-and-fill and, to the maximum degree possible,
follow the natural topography of the site.
(3) Developments shall preserve natural and scenic areas, streams, and natural
drainageways, floodplains, prairies, and wetlands. Developments shall, to the
maximum degree possible, preserve individual trees or stands of trees
specified by the City of Plattsmouth’s list of recommended tree species.
Developments that remove specified trees taller than 20 feet or larger than
12 inches in diameter(measured six inches above the ground) shall replace
such trees with two (2) trees. All replacement trees must also be listed on
the list of recommended species and shall have a caliper of at least three (3)
inches.
(4) Each project application shall include an inventory of natural and scenic
features, and the site development plan shall demonstrate how these areas
will be preserved.
b. Building Location and Orientation:
(1) Buildings shall be grouped in ways that avoid continuous rows of building
walls and permit visibility into the development from surrounding streets.
(2) Building siting shall define positive open spaces. These spaces may include
street environments emphasizing public walks, porches, street-oriented
entrances, lighting and street furniture, or more internalized public spaces
that serve the needs of the development. All projects shall submit an urban
space plan that identifies the nature and programmed use of major open
spaces created by the development. Building entrances shall be oriented
toward and provide direct entrances to these major open spaces identified by
the urban space plan.
(3) Typically, buildings that are directly adjacent to single-family residential
development shall minimize the mass of buildings that directly face singlefamily
structures. Where parallel orientation is necessary, setbacks from the
street shall be greater than the required minimum setbacks and buildings
shall include design and elevation features that complement adjacent lowerdensity
development.
c. Pedestrian Access:
(1) Developments shall provide an internal pathway system that connects
individual buildings together and links developments with adjacent residential
areas, community open spaces, and adjacent trails. For trails that are
proposed in the city’s comprehensive plan but are not yet constructed, the
development plan shall make provisions for a connection to the trail, and
shall be responsible for constructing the connection when the trail becomes
available.
(2) Sidewalks shall be provided along all public streets.
d. Vehicular Access:
(1) All multi-family development shall provide internal vehicular connections to
adjacent collector or local streets.
(2) Developments over five acres shall include a minimum of one community
street with detached sidewalks and parkway strips with a minimum width of
eight feet between the back of curb and the edge of the sidewalk. The
community street shall connect to a public street on both ends.
(3) Community streets shall be aligned with local streets in adjacent developed
areas.
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-5
(4) Landscaped parking courts, local loops, and innovative street designs are
encouraged to create improved public space and provide for safe, slow
movement of vehicles within and around the development.
e. Parking:
(1) Garages and parking facilities shall be internalized or oriented away from street
frontages to the maximum degree possible. Off-street parking shall not be
permitted in streetyards adjacent to single-family residential development.
(2) Garages or carports shall be limited to six bays in any single structure to
avoid long rows of horizontal structures.
(3) Parking lot design shall define vehicular circulation routes that are separated
by landscaped islands or other site amenities from parking bays and
pedestrian pathways.
(4) All detached parking structures above the surface of the ground shall relate
to the architecture of the project’s residential buildings, providing compatible
forms, scale, materials, colors, and details.
f. Open Space:
(1) For multi-family development, at least 40 percent of the development area
shall be designated as common open space. Common open space includes
open or landscaped areas not occupied by primary or accessory structures,
recreational amenities, landscaped pathways that are at least feet away
from adjacent streets or driveways, and perimeter landscaped areas.
(2) Internal common open spaces shall be defined by residential buildings to the
maximum degree possible. These spaces shall have direct access from
primary building entrances and shall be directly observable from residential
units.
(3) Common open spaces shall incorporate and protect significant environmental
resources, including drainageways and swales, mature trees, wetlands, and
prairies and grassland areas.
(4) Detention ponds shall be located, designed, and managed to provide visual
amenities or entryway features, or to provide opportunities for passive
recreation.
(5) Other parking and screening requirements are set forth in Section 08,
Landscaping and Screening Requirements.
4. Building Design Guidelines:
a. Building Mass and Scale:
(1) Building mass shall reflect the surrounding neighborhood context, and should
place buildings or building elements with greater mass and height away from
peripheral streets with adjacent lower-density development.
(2) Building mass shall be articulated to reduce apparent scale. Building design
should incorporate more massive features at the base and lighter or smaller
building elements at upper levels.
(3) Buildings should use features such as bays, insets, porticos, porches, or
stoops to add scale. Such features shall relate to the overall composition of
openings in the building elevation. Breaks in wall planes, gables, balconies,
and other features shall be used to maintain residential scale.
b. Building Materials:
(1) Permitted exterior building materials shall be high-quality, durable materials
that include, but are not limited to, brick, native or manufactured stone (such
as Renaissance stone or similar masonry materials, shingle or wood siding,
stucco or similar materials, and other materials generally associated with
quality residential development.
(2) The following exterior materials are prohibited: split shakes, rough-sawn
wood, concrete block, tilt-up concrete panels, field-painted or prefinished
standard corrugated metal siding, standard single- or double-tee concrete
systems, or EIFS (Exterior Insulated Finish System).
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-6
(3) These guidelines are not intended to inhibit creativity and innovation in
building design. The Zoning Administrator may permit the use of other
materials if the applicant demonstrates that the use of such materials will
result in a building that gives a sense of quality and permanence.
c. Roof Forms:
(1) On two- or three-story buildings, roofs should be residential in scale,
incorporating a gable or hip configuration with dormers or other
complementary elements. Roof design will be reviewed on an individual
basis.
(2) Roofs shall effectively screen all rooftop mechanical equipment from public
view.
(3) Visible roof materials shall include clay or concrete tile, standing seam metal,
architectural grade asphalt shingles, architectural metals, copper, natural or
synthetic slate, or similar durable materials.
D. Commercial and Office Design Guidelines within the CCD Overlay District:
1. Purpose: The purpose of the commercial and office design guidelines for the City of Plattsmouth
are to:
a. Encourage development design that reflects the physical character and image of the
City of Plattsmouth.
b. Develop commercial projects that become valued places within the fabric of the city.
c. Set minimum requirements for site design and development, building design,
landscaping, and signage without discouraging creativity and flexibility in design.
d. Permit safe and convenient transportation access and circulation for motorized and
non-motorized vehicles, and for pedestrians.
e. Respect the relationship of commercial development to surrounding neighborhoods.
2. Application: The commercial and office design guidelines apply to all commercial and office
development within a CCD overlay district. These guidelines also apply to all development
within MU district and the planned unit development (PUD).
3. Site Design Guidelines:
a. Relationship to Landforms:
(1) Buildings shall maintain a minimum buffer of 30 feet from the edge of any
special flood hazard area on the most current flood insurance rate maps or
from the edge of any wetlands identified by the National Wetlands Inventory
or a site specific inventory of wetlands.
(2) Site design shall minimize cut-and-fill and, to the maximum degree possible,
follow the natural topography of the site.
(3) Developments shall preserve natural and scenic areas, streams and natural
drainageways, floodplains, prairies, and wetlands. Developments shall, to the
maximum degree possible, preserve individual trees or stands of trees
specified by the City of Plattsmouth’s list of recommended tree species.
Developments that remove specified trees taller than 20 feet or larger than
12 inches in diameter(measured six inches above the ground) shall replace
such trees with two (2) trees. All replacement trees must also be listed on
the list of recommended species and shall have a caliper of at least three (3)
inches.
4. Building Location and Orientation:
a. Facades with principal entrances shall be oriented to the project’s primary street or to
an active pedestrian or public zone within the site. For multi-tenant buildings, at least
50 percent of the entrances shall be oriented to the primary street or pedestrian or
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-7
public zone. Facades with principal customer entrances may be turned perpendicular
to the primary street if they provide a direct pedestrian connection from a public
sidewalk to the major customer entrance without interruption by vehicular traffic. The
primary street for a development is any arterial or collector street that fronts the
development. When the development has two primary streets, the project design may
designate one of the streets as primary.
b. Developments should maximize the amount of parking located in the side or rear of
buildings and should locate buildings near their primary fronting streets.
c. Developments at intersections shall identify or emphasize their corners with significant
landscaping or similar public feature, and shall orient buildings to the street corner.
d. A clearly delineated pathway or route shall show the connection to all principal building
or business entrances to adjacent sidewalks or trails.
5. Pedestrian Access:
a. Developments shall provide a continuous walkway connection at least five feet in width
from the public sidewalk or right-of-way to the customer entrances of all principal
buildings on the site. Developments adjacent to multi-use trails shall provide a direct
connection from the trail to the development’s internal pedestrian circulation system.
For trails that are proposed in the city’s comprehensive plan but are not yet
constructed, the development plan shall make provisions for a connection to the trail,
and shall be responsible for constructing the connection when the trail becomes
available.
b. Multi-building developments shall provide clear and safe walkways at least five feet in
width that connect all buildings on the site. Buildings not intended for routine customer
access or intended solely for drive-up services are excluded from this requirement.
c. Where the required walkways specified in this section cross drives, parking aisles, or
other vehicular ways, the crosswalks shall be distinguished from driving surfaces by
the use of durable, low-maintenance surface materials such as concrete or brick
pavers, or scored, colored concrete. Painted concrete is not acceptable in this
application.
d. In parking lots with over 200 stalls, the required walkways specified in this section shall
be located in landscaped medians or corridors that include trees and groundcovers for
at least 50 percent of their combined length. Landscaped walkways provide credit
toward overall site landscaping requirements set forth in Article 08.
e. Sidewalks no less than eight feet in width and separated by curbs from adjacent
vehicular circulation ways shall be provided along the full length of the building along
any façade that either includes a customer entrance or adjoins a customer parking
area.
f. Pedestrian connections to adjacent developments shall be provided. If adjacent
properties are undeveloped, the development plan shall indicate how future
connections will be provided.
6. Vehicular Access:
a. Development plans shall minimize the number of access points to adjacent arterial
streets. Access from arterial streets shall be controlled and will typically be limited to
one point of access per 600 linear feet, or as otherwise determined by the City of
Plattsmouth. Developments shall make maximum use of internal cross-easements
and shared access points when possible. Cross accesses between adjacent
properties shall use traffic calming techniques to reduce speeds.
b. Main driveways and drive aisles shall provide a continuous system that connects to the
main site entrance.
c. Commercial developments are encouraged to provide means of access to residential
areas that avoid requiring residents to use arterial streets for short-distance trips.
Such connections must be designed to avoid channeling commercial traffic onto
residential streets outside of comprehensively planned, mixed-use projects.
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-8
d. When possible, shared service and delivery access should be provided between
adjacent parcels and buildings.
7. Parking:
a. Parking shall be grouped into parking blocks that are defined by pedestrian paths,
landscaping, and buildings.
b. A maximum of 400 parking stalls may be located in any one parking block.
8. Signs:
a. Attached signs shall be designed as an integral part of the building elevation and
integrated into the overall design of the building. Attached signs shall be located
above the building entrance, storefront opening, or at other locations that are
consistent with and emphasize the architectural features of a building.
b. All new commercial development shall use monument or ground signs. The width of
any vertical element over fifteen feet in height shall not exceed ten feet. Pole signs
shall not be permitted for new commercial development covered by these guidelines.
c. A landscaped base area shall be provided for monument or ground signs appropriate
to the mass and height of the sign. As a guideline, a base area of 1.5 square feet shall
be provided for each square foot of sign area. The landscaped area may include
trees, shrubs, flowering perennials, ornamental tall grass, fountains, water features,
decorative stonework, planters, sculpture, and decorative paving. Turf grass, loose
stone, or mulch are not credited for satisfying this requirement.
d. Other sign regulations and requirements are set forth in Article 10.
9. Screening:
a. Developments shall provide year-round screening of loading docks, truck parking,
outdoor storage, utility meters, HVAC equipment, trash collection and processing, and
other service functions. Screening shall be provided for 75 percent of the smaller of
the height of the feature to be screened or eight feet. Trash enclosure gates shall
furnish a steel frame with decorative steel or wood covering, or another design
acceptable to the Zoning Administrator. Chain-link fencing with inlaid wood or metal
slats shall not be considered acceptable. Screening shall be integrated into the overall
design of buildings and landscaping and fully contain the visual impact of these service
functions from adjacent public streets and neighboring properties.
b. Architectural elements, materials, colors, and design of screening walls, coverings,
and fences shall be consistent with the predominant materials, colors, and elements of
the primary building.
c. Other screening requirements are set forth in Article 08, Landscaping and Screening
Requirements.
10. Lighting:
a. All lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area, sign, or other structure shall be
arranged so as to deflect light away from any adjoining property and from public
streets through fixture type and location. When lighting is mounted to the underside of
canopies, these lights shall be recessed so that the visible light source is no lower than
the plane of the underside of the canopy.
b. The maximum height of lighting standards shall be 35 feet, unless the City grants a
specific exception as part of the application approval process.
c. Exterior lighting of buildings shall be limited to low-level incandescent spotlights,
floodlights, and similar illuminating devices hooded in such a manner that the direct
beam of any light sources will not glare upon adjacent property or public streets. The
City may approve exceptions to these requirements for sports and athletic field
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-9
lighting, flagpole lighting, public street lighting, temporary lighting for seasonal/holiday
or special events, and lighting used for public safety.
11. Building Design Guidelines:
a. Mass and Scale for Buildings over 20,000 Square Feet:
(1) Breaks shall be incorporated into the mass if the building at significant
entrances or along walls that front plazas or other significant pedestrian
features. Methods of breaks may include towers, pediments, or façade
articulations or variations; changes in the horizontal plane; or enhancements
in color and materials, consistent with the overall design of the building.
(2) Primary building facades shall meet one of the following guidelines:
1) Facades greater than 100 feet shall incorporate projections or
recesses in the wall plane with a depth of at least 3 percent of the
length of the façade and extending for at least 20 percent of the
length of the façade. Maximum uninterrupted length of wall shall
be 100 feet.
2) Facades shall display a repeating pattern of at least three cycles of
color change, texture change, material change, or expression of
structural bays with an offset of at least 12 inches from the ruling
plane of the façade.
(3) The Zoning Administrator may waive these guidelines if the applicant
demonstrates an alternative building design that in the Zoning
Administrator’s opinion provides visual interest and scale to the building.
b. Mass and Scale for Buildings over Two Stories: Building mass and architectural
elements shall differentiate between the first floor of the building and upper levels of
the façade.
c. Architectural Elements:
(1) Front facades facing a primary street shall have visible, clearly-defined
customer entrances that include at least three of the following elements:
canopies or porticos, overhangs, recesses or projections, arcades, raised
cornice parapets over the entrance door, distinctive roof forms, arches,
outdoor patios or plazas, display windows, or integral planters.
(2) At least 20 percent of the surface area of front commercial facades up to a
height of 16 feet shall be transparent.
(3) Front facades shall utilize variations in color, horizontal planes, materials,
patterns, height, and other techniques to provide visual interest and scale to
buildings.
(4) All rear and side building facades oriented to arterials, collectors, or other
streets shall be subject to all requirements for front façade design with the
exception of providing customer entrances.
(5) Other rear and side facades may use a simplified expression of the materials
and design used on other building elevations.
d. Building Materials:
(1) Permitted exterior building materials shall be high quality, durable materials
that include, but are not limited to, brick, native or manufactured stone
(Renaissance stone or similar masonry materials), integrally colored,
burnished, textured, or glazed concrete masonry units, prefinished metal
panel systems, quality metals such as copper, high quality pre-stressed
concrete systems, and drainable (water managed) EIFS (Exterior Insulation
and Finish Systems).
(2) The following exterior materials are prohibited: split shakes, rough-sawn
wood, painted concrete block, tilt-up concrete panels without an architectural
finish, field-painted or prefinished standard corrugated metal siding, standard
single- or double-tee concrete systems, or barrier type EIFS (Exterior
Insulation and Finish Systems).
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-10
(3) Materials on all sides of the building shall be consistent with materials and
colors of the front façade when visible from public streets and trails and
adjacent residential areas.
(4) These guidelines are not intended to inhibit creativity and innovation in
building design. The Zoning Administrator may permit the use of other
materials if the applicant demonstrates that the use of such materials will
result in a building that gives a sense of quality and permanence.
e. Roof Forms:
(1) Buildings with flat or slightly sloped roofs to drain shall incorporate parapets
on all facades that face a public street or residential district. Variations in
parapet height and articulation of cornice lines may be used to add interest.
(2) Roof forms shall be designed to express various building functions and
features, such as entrances.
(3) Visible roof materials shall include clay or concrete tile, tern metal,
architectural grade asphalt shingles, architectural metals, copper, natural or
synthetic slate, or similar durable materials.
(4) Mansard or false roofs shall not be used.
E. Industrial Design Guidelines within a CCD District:
1. Purpose: The purpose of industrial design guidelines for the City of Plattsmouth are to:
a. Encourage quality industrial development that produces economic development
benefits to the city while minimizing negative visual effects associated with industrial
uses.
b. Develop commercial projects that become valued places within the fabric of the city.
c. Set minimum requirements for site design and development, building design,
landscaping, and signage without discouraging creativity and flexibility in design.
d. Permit safe and convenient transportation access and circulation for motorized and
non-motorized vehicles, and for pedestrians.
e. Respect the relationship of commercial development to surrounding neighborhoods.
2. Application: The industrial design guidelines apply to all industrial development within a CCD
district.
3. Site Design Guidelines: The industrial design guidelines apply to all industrial development
within a CCD district.
a. Relationship to Landforms:
(1) Buildings shall maintain a minimum buffer of 30 feet from the edge of any
special flood hazard area on the most current flood insurance rate maps or
from the edge of any wetlands identified by the National Wetlands Inventory
or a site specific inventory of wetlands.
(2) Site design shall minimize cut-and-fill and, to the maximum degree possible,
follow the natural topography of the site.
(3) Developments shall preserve natural and scenic areas, streams and natural
drainageways, floodplains, prairies, and wetlands. Developments shall, to the
maximum degree possible, preserve individual trees or stands of trees
specified by the City of Plattsmouth’s list of recommended tree species.
Developments that remove specified trees taller than 20 feet or larger than
12 inches in diameter(measured six inches above the ground) shall replace
such trees with two (2) trees. All replacement trees must also be listed on
the list of recommended species and shall have a caliper of at least three (3)
inches.
b. Building Location and Orientation:
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-11
(1) To the maximum degree possible, the arrangement of buildings on a site
should screen operational and loading areas from view from surrounding
public streets.
(2) To the maximum degree possible, buildings should be clustered within a site.
(3) Buildings with customer entrances shall orient such entrances toward the
primary access street. Buildings that do not invite public patronage shall
maximize landscaped setbacks and buffers from the primary access street.
However, service functions, including but not limited to loading docks, truck
parking, outdoor storage, utility meters, HVAC equipment, trash collection
and processing, and other service functions, shall be oriented away from
primary access streets.
(4) Accessory structures shall not front a primary access street and shall be
oriented away from public streets, open space, or residential areas.
(5) Buildings shall be arranged and oriented so that loading docks, outdoor
storage, and truck parking and servicing areas are not visible from any of the
principal arterials identified in this section. Site designs shall maximize the
amount of landscaping in streetyards along these arterials. Customer and
employee parking areas are permitted in these streetyards, subject to other
provisions of this ordinance.
c. Pedestrian Access:
(1) Developments shall provide a continuous walkway connection at least five
feet in width from the public sidewalk or right-of-way to the customer and/or
office entrance of the development.
(2) Where the walkways required by this section cross driveways, parking aisles,
or other vehicular ways, the crosswalks shall be distinguished from driving
surfaces by the use of crosswalk striping, change in paving material, or other
durable, low-maintenance surface techniques.
d. Vehicular Access:
(1) Development plans shall minimize the number of access points to adjacent
arterial streets. Access from arterial streets shall be controlled and will
typically be limited to one point of access per 600 linear feet, or as otherwise
determined by the City of Plattsmouth. Developments shall make maximum
use of internal cross-easements and shared access points when possible.
(2) To the maximum degree possible, access routes for automobiles and trucks
shall be distinguished from one another.
(3) Drives and access points shall be directed away from residential areas.
e. Parking:
(1) Signage and site design shall distinguish employee and visitor parking areas
from truck loading and servicing areas when the project is sufficiently large to
make such separation functionally necessary.
(2) Landscaping shall be used to direct vehicles through the site, distinguish
between automobile and truck service areas, manage stormwater, and break
up the size of large impervious parking and loading areas.
f. Signs:
(1) Attached signs shall be integrated into the design of the building elevation.
(2) All new industrial development shall use monument or ground signs. The
width of any vertical element over 15 feet in height shall not exceed 10 feet.
Pole signs shall not be permitted for new commercial development covered
by these guidelines.
(3) Other sign regulations and requirements are set forth in Article 10.
g. Screening:
(1) Developments shall provide year-round screening of loading docks, truck
parking, outdoor storage, utility meters, HVAC equipment, trash collection
and processing, and other service functions if these features are visible from
adjacent public streets or neighboring residential properties. Screening shall
be provided for 75 percent of the vertical plane of these features, up to a
height of eight feet. Trash enclosure gates shall furnish a steel frame with
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-12
decorative steel or wood covering, or another design acceptable to the
Zoning Administrator. Chain-link fencing with inlaid wood or metal slats shall
not be considered acceptable. Screening shall be integrated into the overall
design of buildings and landscaping and fully contain the visual impact of
these service functions from adjacent public streets and neighboring
properties.
(2) Architectural elements, materials, colors, and design of screening walls,
coverings, and fences shall be consistent with the predominant materials,
colors, and elements of the primary building.
(3) All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened. Acceptable methods of
screening include parapet walls or a freestanding screen of a material and
color consistent with the building. Screens shall be at least the same height
as the equipment they conceal.
(4) Other screening requirements are set forth in Article 08, Landscaping and
Screening Requirements.
h. Lighting:
(1) All lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas, signs or other
structures shall be arranged so as to deflect light away from any adjoining
property and from public streets through fixture type and location.
(2) The maximum height of lighting standards shall be 35 feet, unless the city
grants a specific exception as part of the application approval process.
(3) Exterior lighting of buildings shall be limited to low-level incandescent
spotlights, floodlights, and similar illuminating devices hooded in such a
manner that the direct beam of any light sources will not glare upon adjacent
property or public streets. The city may approve exceptions to these
requirements for sports and athletic field lighting, flagpole lighting, public
street lighting, temporary lighting for seasonal/holiday or special events, and
lighting used for public safety.
4. Building Design Guidelines:
a. Mass and Scale:
(1) For buildings with office areas that exceed 3,000 square feet, the mass of the
office portion of a building shall be distinguished from the mass of the
industrial operations portion of the building. Office and/or public entrances
shall be distinguished by elements that provide both identification and scale
to the development. Techniques include but are not limited to the use of
canopies or porticos, overhangs, changes in horizontal plane, variations in
façade height and design, arches, peaked or special roof forms, and changes
in materials.
(2) At least 30 percent of the surface area of the office and customer-oriented
portion of a building shall be of transparent materials.
b. Building Materials:
(1) Permitted exterior building materials on primary exposure facades shall be
high-quality, durable materials that include, but are not limited to, brick,
native or manufactured stone (Renaissance stone or similar masonry
materials), integrally colored, burnished textured, or glazed concrete
masonry units, prefinished metal panel systems, quality metals such as
copper, high quality pre-stressed concrete systems, architecturally-treated
tilt-up concrete panels, and drainable (water managed) EIFS. Primary
exposure facades shall include any façade that is oriented to a principal
street identified in this section, all building facades that intersect the arterial
façade for a distance of 200 feet back from such intersection, and any façade
oriented to any other public street, open space, or residential area.
(2) The following materials are prohibited on any development affected by these
guidelines: split shakes, rough-sawn wood; field-painted standard corrugated
metal siding; or barrier type EIFS (Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems).
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-13
(3) Smooth-faced concrete block, tilt-up concrete, pre-engineered metal
buildings, and standard single- and double-tee concrete systems shall be
permitted only on facades that are not primary exposure facades.
(4) These guidelines are not intended to inhibit creativity and innovation in
building design. The Zoning Administrator may permit the use of other
materials if the applicant demonstrates that the use of such materials will
result in a building that gives a sense of quality and permanence.
c. Roof Forms:
(1) Visible roof materials shall include clay or concrete tile, prefinished metal,
architectural grade asphalt shingles, architectural metals, copper, natural or
synthetic slate, or similar durable materials. Membrane roof systems are
prohibited on any routinely visible portion of the roof.
(2) Mansard or false roofs shall not be used.
5-4 PUD – Planned Unit Development Overlay District
A. Purpose: The planned unit development (PUD) overlay district is intended to provide flexibility in the
design of planned projects, to encourage innovation in project design that incorporates open space and
other amenities, and to insure compatibility of developments with the surrounding urban environment.
The PUD is intended to promote developments which will be advantageous to Plattsmouth and its urban
form by permitting project design that will surpass the quality of development resulting from application of
the regulations of conventional zoning districts. The PUD district is not intended to encourage deviations
from the city’s comprehensive plan or overall development objectives. The district shall not be used to
secure approval for projects that do not conform to the city’s comprehensive plan.
B. PUD-1 and PUD-2 Districts: In order to permit maximum applicability of the PUD district, PUD-1 and
PUD-2 districts are hereby created.
1. The PUD-1 (general PUD) district is intended to accommodate large, comprehensively-planned
developments that are likely to develop over a relatively long period of time. The PUD-1 creates
special guidelines and regulations to ensure that development over time conforms to an
established master plan. The PUD-1 also may establish the preliminary and/or final plat for
those projects that require platting.
2. The PUD-2 (specific PUD) district is intended to accommodate projects for which the specific
design of individual buildings and elements may be determined. Several PUD-2 districts may be
incorporated into a single larger PUD-1 district, provided that such projects are consistent with
the overall design and development standards of the PUD-1 district.
C. Criteria for Use: The PUD district is generally intended for use in the following urban contexts.
1. Vacant Land: Areas of substantial open space where the structure of conventional zoning may
artificially limit or constrain good urban design, may restrict the achievement of the city’s
development objectives, or may not be appropriate to changes in technology or demand
consistent with the best interests of the City of Plattsmouth.
2. Community Development Areas: Areas of the city that are in need of rehabilitation or
redevelopment, including areas that may be deficient in public facilities or services. In these
situations, the PUD district may encourage private investment by recognizing the need for
flexibility that conventional zoning regulations do not provide.
3. Neighborhood Contexts: Areas in which sensitive project design is critical to maintain and
protect the value of surrounding residential neighborhoods and other sensitive or vulnerable
urban settings.
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-14
4. Large Projects: Projects that have substantial effects on their urban and rural surroundings
because of their size and scale.
5. Large areas that may be zoned prior to development by the Planning Commission and City
Council consistent with the Comprehensive Development Plan, but which require individual
project approval as development occurs.
D. Permitted Uses: A planned unit development may include residential, office, commercial, industrial, or
public land uses, subject to the requirements of the underlying zoning district. The PUD overlay district
may also be used in combination with the MU district.
E. PUD-1 (General PUD) District Application Procedures:
1. Minimum Size: The minimum size of a PUD-1 district shall be three acres.
2. Pre-Application Concept Plan: Prior to filing an application for approval of a PUD-1 district, the
applicant shall meet with the Zoning Administrator for the purpose of submitting a pre-application
concept plan. This plan shall illustrate the conceptual overall plan for the district and shall include
at a minimum the information required in the PUD district application requirements table.
3. The zoning administrator shall review and comment on the proposed concept plan and shall
provide the applicant with written comments within 30 days of submission of the concept plan.
4. The review of the concept plan shall include consideration of the following criteria:
a. Land use intensity and density.
b. Ability to provide a positive environment for intended uses, including schematic
building configurations, arrangements, and general landscaping and site design.
c. Use of open space.
d. Impact on the surrounding natural and built environment.
e. Adequacy of on- and off-site transportation and utility systems to serve the proposed
project.
f. Consistency with Plattsmouth’s Comprehensive Development Plan.
5. Following review of the pre-application concept plan, the applicant may proceed with filing a
formal application for approval of a PUD-1 district. This plan shall illustrate the development
master plan for the district and shall include at a minimum the information required in the PUD
district application requirements table.
6. A PUD-1 application shall include a development agreement establishing the development
regulations for the district unless initiated by the Planning Commission or City Council. The
development agreement shall specify the following regulations:
a. Location and quantities of various land uses.
b. Maximum floor area ratios and residential densities.
c. Maximum building and impervious coverage.
d. Front, side, and rear yard setbacks.
e. Maximum heights of proposed structures.
f. Design standards applicable to the project.
g. Incorporation of graphic development plans and drawings into the site development
regulations.
7. The Planning Commission and City Council shall review and evaluate each PUD-1 district
application. The Planning Commission and City Council may impose reasonable conditions, as
deemed necessary to ensure that a PUD shall be compatible with adjacent land uses, will not
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-15
overburden public services and facilities and will not be detrimental to public health, safety, and
welfare.
8. The Planning Commission, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon each
application. The Planning Commission may recommend amendments to PUD-1 district
applications. The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be transmitted to the City
Council for final action.
9. The City Council, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon any ordinance
establishing a PUD-1 district. Proper notice shall mean the same notice established for any
other zoning amendment.
10. In their respective reviews of the PUD-1 application, the Planning Commission and City Council
shall base decisions on findings of fact as set forth in the criteria presented in Article 12.
11. Upon approval by the City Council, the development plan and agreement shall become a part of
the ordinance creating or amending the PUD district. All approved plans shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator.
12. Issuance of Building Permits: The City shall not issue a building permit, certificate of
occupancy, or other permit for a building, structure, or use within a PUD-1 district unless it is in
compliance with the approved development agreement or any approved amendments.
13. Termination of PUD-1 District: If no substantial development has taken place in a planned unit
development district for three years following approval of the district, the Planning Commission
may reconsider the zoning of the property and may, on its own motion, initiate an application for
rezoning the property.
F. Planning Commission or City Council Initiated PUD-1 Districts: In some situations, the Planning
Commission and/or City Council may initiate or approve a rezoning of an area to a PUD-1 district without
submission of a detailed development plan. This action establishes the land uses permitted in an area
consistent with the Comprehensive Development Plan, but requires subsequent approval of specific
projects through the normal PUD-1 or PUD-2 submission or approval procedures. An application for
creation of such a PUD-1 district shall contain the following:
1. A statement describing the special characteristics of the district and the reason for its creation.
2. A map indicating the boundaries of the proposed district.
3. A generalized area development plan for the proposed district, including:
a. A land-use component, identifying proposed uses and the extent and location of each
use.
b. A transportation element, identifying any relevant vehicular, pedestrian, or bicycle
transportation improvements necessary to ultimate development of the area.
c. A utility service statement, identifying any necessary utility or infrastructure
improvements necessary to the ultimate development of the area.
d. An urban design element, if applicable, describing design frameworks, building scale
and relationships, siting, landscape design, and other guidelines relating to the specific
physical or urban environment of the proposed district.
G. PUD-2 (Specific PUD) District Application Procedures:
1. Minimum Size: A PUD-2 district may be established on a site of any size.
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-16
2. Pre-Application Concept Plan: Prior to filing an application for approval of a PUD-2 district, the
applicant shall meet with the Zoning Administrator for the purpose of submitting a pre-application
concept plan. This plan shall illustrate the conceptual overall plan for the district and shall
include at a minimum the information required in PUD application requirement table.
3. The Zoning Administrator shall review and comment on the proposed concept plan and shall
provide the applicant with written comments within 30 days of submission of the concept plan.
4. The review of the concept plan shall include consideration of the following criteria:
a. If located within a pre-existing PUD-1 district, consistency with the terms and
conditions of such district.
b. Land use intensity and density.
c. Ability to provide a positive environment for intended uses, including schematic
building configurations, arrangements, and general landscaping and site design.
d. Use of open space.
e. Impact on the surrounding natural and built environment.
f. Adequacy of on- and off-site transportation systems to serve the proposed project.
g. Architectural quality and compatibility of the proposed project with the scale and
appearance of surrounding areas.
h. Consistency with the City of Plattsmouth’s comprehensive plan.
5. Following review of the pre-application concept plan, the applicant may proceed with filing a
formal application for approval of a PUD-2 district. This plan shall illustrate the development
master plan for the district and shall include at a minimum the information required in the PUD
application requirements table.
6. The Planning Commission and City Council shall review and evaluate each PUD-2 district
application. For PUD-2 applications within a pre-existing PUD-1 district, the review shall be
limited to:
a. An evaluation of consistency with the land uses development standards and other
requirements and regulations of the PUD-1 district.
b. Detailed components of the project that were not included in the development
standards previously established under the PUD-1 district.
7. The Planning Commission, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon each
application. The Planning Commission may recommend amendments to PUD-2 district
applications. The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be transmitted to the City
Council for final action.
8. The City Council, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon any ordinance
establishing a PUD-2 planned unit development district. Proper notice shall mean the same
notice established for any other zoning amendment.
9. In their respective reviews of the PUD-2 application, the Planning Commission and City Council
shall base decisions on findings of fact as set forth in the criteria presented in Article 12. The
Planning Commission and City Council may impose reasonable conditions, as deemed
necessary to ensure that a PUD shall be compatible with adjacent land uses, will not overburden
public services and facilities and will not be detrimental to public health, safety, and welfare.
10. Upon approval by the City Council, the development plan and agreement shall become a part of
the ordinance creating or amending the PUD-2 district. All approved plans shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator.
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-17
11. Issuance of Building Permits: The City shall not issue a building permit, certificate of
occupancy, or other permit for a building, structure, or use within a PUD-2 district unless it is in
compliance with the approved development agreement or any approved amendments.
12. Changes or Modifications to Development Plans in the PUD-2 District: The Zoning Administrator
is authorized at his/her discretion to approve amendments to an approved development plan,
provided that:
a. Changes in the alignment and location of structures do not exceed ten feet in any
direction.
b. The floor area of any single building is not changed by more than 5 percent, the zoning
administration is allowed to grant one administrative amendment under these
provisions any further request will require approval of the planning commission.
c. All changes are within the allowable floor area ratios established by the project, are
consistent with the adopted PD plan, and have been approved in writing by any
applicable property owners’ association established within the boundaries of the
project.
d. Any amendment not conforming to these provisions shall be considered tantamount to
a new application and shall be submitted to the Planning Commission and City Council
according to the procedures for new applications established in this section.
13. Termination of PUD-2 District: If no substantial development has taken place in a planned
development district for three years following approval of the district, the Planning Commission
may reconsider the zoning of the property and may, on its own motion, initiate an application for
rezoning the property.
H. PUD Application Requirements Table: The following table sets forth application requirements for the
designation of PUD districts. The zoning administrator at his/her discretion may require additional
information necessary for the complete consideration of the application.
TABLE 5.1: PUD APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
Application Requirement
PUD-1
Concept
Plan
PUD-1
Application
PUD-2
Concept
Plan
PUD-2
Application
Location, size, legal description of site. ¦ ¦
Existing topography at 2’-0”intervals. ¦ ¦
Location and description of major site features, including tree masses,
drainageways, wetlands, soils. ¦ ¦
A map showing land uses within 200 feet of the boundary of the site. ¦ ¦
Location of 100-year floodplains. ¦ ¦
Generalized land use plan. ¦ ¦
Proposed types and densities of development. ¦ ¦
Generalized internal and external transportation and circulation system,
including pedestrian and bicycle system. ¦ ¦
General location and size of buildings or building footprints. ¦ ¦
Statistical summary of the project, including gross and net site area,
number of housing units by type, gross floor area of other uses, total
amount of parking, and building and impervious surface coverage. ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦
Site master plan, including general envelopes of buildings, parking,
open space, and other site features. ¦
Description and location of all use types included in the project,
including maximum floor areas devoted to each use. ¦ ¦
Location and design of vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian circulation
systems, including relationship to external transportation system. ¦ ¦
Schematic location and development standards for open space,
including conceptual landscape plan. ¦
Grading plan at 1’-0” contours, including erosion control plans. ¦ ¦
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-18
TABLE 5.1: PUD APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
Application Requirement
PUD-1
Concept
Plan
PUD-1
Application
PUD-2
Concept
Plan
PUD-2
Application
Building design standards, including height, materials, sections, and
other information required to describe the project. ¦ ¦
Location of existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers, stormwater
facilities, and water, gas, and electrical distribution systems. ¦ ¦
General locations and sizes of signs and street graphics. ¦
Location of driveways or access points adjacent to the project. ¦ ¦
Proposed site development regulations, including maximum FAR or
other density regulators, building and impervious coverage, setbacks,
maximum heights, and other design standards specific to the project. ¦
Detailed site plan, displaying specific location or building envelope limits
for all major site structures; location of open spaces; parking facilities;
and vehicular circulation. ¦
Exterior building elevations and floor plans. ¦
Detailed open space and landscape plan. ¦
Utility plans for all proposed utility improvements. ¦
Location, size, style, and lighting of signage, including directional and
signage control. ¦
Location and design of proposed site lighting. ¦
Proposed public and private ownership boundaries, including proposed
private lots and common ownership areas. ¦ ¦
Preliminary plat if applicable. ¦
Final plat if applicable. ¦
Schedule indicating proposed phasing and scheduling of development. ¦ ¦
Deed restrictions, covenants, agreements, association bylaws, and
other documents controlling the use of property, type of construction, or
development or activities of future residents. If Required If Required
Appropriate bonds to ensure construction of public improvements. ¦ ¦
Application checklist on a form provided by the City. ¦ ¦
5-5 ED – Environmental Resources Overlay District
A. Purpose: The ED (environmental resources) overlay district enables the adoption of special performance
standards in combination with site development regulations of a base district for areas of special
environmental significance or sensitivity. These areas include hill environments, wetlands, forested areas,
areas with unique soil or drainage characteristics, lake, river, or creek districts, and other areas with
special environmental characteristics.
B. Procedure for Adoption:
1. Proposal: The creation of an ED overlay district may be initiated by the Planning Commission or
the City Council.
2. Requirements for Application: An application for the creation of an ED overlay district must
include:
a. A statement describing the proposed district's special environmental characteristics
and stating the reasons for proposal of the district.
b. A map indicating the boundaries of the proposed ED overlay district, specifying the
base district(s) included within these boundaries.
c. Supplemental site development regulations and performance standards that apply to
the proposed district.
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-19
C. Adoption of District:
1. The Planning Commission and City Council shall review and evaluate each ED overlay district
application.
2. The Planning Commission, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon each
application.
3. The Planning Commission may recommend amendments to ED district applications.
4. The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be transmitted to the City Council for
final action.
5. The City Council, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon any ordinance
establishing an ED overlay district.
6. The ordinance adopting the ED district shall include a statement of purpose, a description of
district boundaries, and a list of supplemental site development regulations and performance
standards.
7. An ordinance adopting an ED overlay district shall require a favorable vote of one more than a
simple majority of the City Council for approval if the Planning Commission recommends denial
of the ordinance.
8. Upon approval by the City Council, each ED overlay district shall be shown on the zoning map,
identified sequentially by order of enactment and referenced to the enacting ordinance.
9. Any protest against an ED overlay district shall be made and filed as provided by Section 14-
405, Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, and amendments thereto.
D. Building Permits: Building or other development permits issued by the city in an ED district shall be
consistent with the adopted ED district ordinance.
E. Conservation Standards:
1. All subdivisions located within an ED overlay district shall be developed according to
Conservation Subdivision Standards, set forth in Article 4 of the Subdivision Regulations.
2. Development that has the following minimum effects on the landscape shall require approval of
a special use permit by the City Council, after a recommendation of the Planning Commission.
a. Disturbs or grades more than 5,000 square feet of land that includes slopes in excess
of 15 percent.
b. Removes more than 5,000 square feet of tree canopy. Tree canopy is the maximum
perimeter of vegetation of any tree or group of trees that appear to grow together as
viewed from overhead.
c. Removes or is within 50 feet of a native prairie, stream, or slope in excess of 30
percent.
3. All development projects within an ED overlay district shall comply with the following criteria and
guidelines:
a. Proposed activities shall minimize erosion on the site, siltation of waterways, loss of
soils, and deterioration or damage to structures, wildlife habitat, and protective
vegetation. For projects requiring review by the City Council, the applicant shall
prepare and submit an erosion control plan.
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-20
b. Proposed projects shall minimize cut and fill necessary to support the land use.
c. Proposed activities shall avoid altering existing drainage patterns. Projects shall not
increase the volume of velocity of stormwater runoff from the site in such a way as to
exceed the capacity of existing drainageways or result in damage to the natural or built
environment. The City Council shall seek comments on proposed projects from the
Nemaha Natural Resources District.
d. The proposed activity shall not adversely affect existing water supplies caused by
reducing or impairing the size of an aquifer recharge area or disturbing or polluting the
water table.
e. Proposed activities shall preserve as much vegetation and tree cover as possible.
When large areas of tree cover are destroyed, a tree restoration plan must be
developed and implemented. At least one tree shall be replanted for each 1,000
square feet of tree cover that is removed.
f. If a project affects a wooded area that serves as a windbreak or corridor for wildlife, a
minimum wooded corridor at least 30 feet in width must be retained. This retained
area must connect remaining woodland areas.
5-6 HD – Historic Overlay District
A. Purpose: The HD (historic) overlay district enables the adoption of special performance and development
standards in combination with site development regulations of a base district for areas of special historical
or architectural significance within the City of Plattsmouth. The district recognizes the importance of
historically and architecturally significant districts to the character of Plattsmouth and provides for their
conservation.
B. Procedure for Adoption:
1. Proposal: The creation of an HD overlay district may be initiated by the Planning Board, the City
Council, or by petition of the owner or owners of 51 percent of the property area within the
proposed district.
2. Requirements for Application: An application for the creation of an HD overlay district must
include:
a. A statement describing the proposed district's special historical or architectural
characteristics and stating the reasons for proposal of the district.
b. A map indicating the boundaries of the proposed HD overlay district, specifying the
base district(s) included within these boundaries.
c. An inventory of the buildings or historically-important sites located within the
boundaries of the proposed district.
d. Supplemental site development regulations, design criteria, and performance
standards that apply to the proposed district.
C. Adoption of District:
1. The Planning Commission and City Council shall review and evaluate each HD overlay district
application.
2. The Planning Commission, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon each
application.
3. The Planning Commission may recommend amendments to HD district applications.
4. The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be transmitted to the City Council for
final action.
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-21
5. The City Council, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon any ordinance
establishing an HD overlay district.
6. The ordinance adopting the HD overlay district shall include a statement of purpose, a
description of district boundaries, and a list of supplemental site development regulations and
performance standards.
7. An ordinance adopting an HD overlay district shall require a favorable vote of 75 percent of the
members of the City Council for approval if the Planning Commission recommends denial of the
ordinance.
8. Upon approval by the City Council, each HD overlay district shall be shown on the zoning map,
identified sequentially by order of enactment and referenced to the enacting ordinance.
9. Any protest against an HD overlay district shall be made and filed as provided by Section 14-
405, Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, and amendments thereto.
D. Building Permits: Building or other development permits issued by the city in an HD district shall follow
procedures for review and approval established within the city by policy or by a Landmarks Preservation
Ordinance.
5-7 FP/FW – Floodplain/Floodway Overlay District
A. Statutory Authorization: The Legislature of the State of Nebraska has delegated the responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt zoning regulations designed to protect the public health, safety, and general
welfare. The Legislature, in Sections 31-1001 to 31-1022, R.R.S. 1943, has further assigned the
responsibility to adopt, administer, and enforce floodplain management regulations to the county, city, or
village with zoning jurisdiction over the flood-prone area.
B. Purpose: It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and
to minimize those losses described in Subsection C by applying the provisions of this ordinance to:
1. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flooding or
cause undue increases in flood heights or velocities.
2. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities which serve such uses, be
provided with flood protection at the time of initial construction.
3. Protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuitable for intended purposes because of
flood hazard.
4. Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the community to purchase flood
insurance in the National Flood Insurance Program when identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration as a flood-prone community.
C. Floodplain/Floodway Overlay Districts Findings of Fact:
1. Flood Losses Resulting from Periodic Inundation: Flood hazard areas of the City of Plattsmouth,
Nebraska, are subject to inundation which results in loss of life or property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures
for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety, and general welfare.
a. General Causes of these Flood Losses: These flood losses are caused by:
(1) The cumulative effect of obstruction in floodways causing increases in flood
heights and velocities.
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-22
(2) The occupancy of flood areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to
others which are inadequately elevated or otherwise protected from flood
damages.
b. Methods Used to Analyze Flood Hazards: This ordinance uses a reasonable method
of analyzing flood hazards which consists of a series of interrelated steps.
(1) Selection of a base flood which is based upon engineering calculations which
permit a consideration of such flood factors as its expected frequency of
occurrence, the area inundated and the depth of inundation. The base flood
selected for this ordinance is representative of large floods which are
reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on the particular
streams subject to this ordinance. It is in the general order of a flood which
could be expected to have a 1 percent chance of occurrence in any one year,
as delineated in the Federal Emergency Management Administration's flood
insurance rate maps and flood boundary and floodway map, or any
subsequent effective flood insurance studies, rate maps, and flood boundary
and floodway maps issued after the effective date of this ordinance and
adopted by the City of Plattsmouth.
(2) Calculation of water surface profiles based upon a hydraulic engineering
analysis of the capacity of the stream channel and overbank areas to convey
the base flood.
(3) Computation of the floodway required to convey this flood without increasing
flood heights more than one foot at any point.
(4) Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no obstruction is
permitted which would cause any increase in flood height.
(5) Delineation of floodway fringe, i.e., that area outside the floodway
encroachment lines but which still is subject to inundation by the base flood.
2. Land to which Ordinance Applies: This ordinance shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction
of the City of Plattsmouth identified on the current flood insurance rate map (FIRM), as
numbered and unnumbered A zone and/or within the Overlay Districts FP and FW established in
this ordinance. In all areas covered by this ordinance, no development shall be permitted except
upon a permit to develop granted by the City Council or its duly designated representative under
such safeguards and restrictions as the City Council may reasonably impose for the promotion
and maintenance of the general welfare and health of the inhabitants of the community as
contained in the City Code.
3. Enforcement Officer: The Zoning Administrator of the City of Plattsmouth is hereby designated
as the City Council's duly designated enforcement officer under this ordinance. Unless otherwise
provided by the City Council, the Lower Platte South Natural Resources District shall assist the
City of Plattsmouth on interpretation of floodplain/floodway rules and regulations. The
enforcement officer shall obtain comments from the NRD as part of his/her review of all
proposed activity in this overlay district.
4. Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries: The boundaries of the floodway and floodway
fringe overlay districts shall be determined by scaling distances on the official zoning map.
Where interpretation is needed to the exact location of the boundaries of the districts as shown
on the official zoning map, as for example where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the enforcement officer shall make the necessary
interpretation. In such cases where the interpretation is contested, the Board of Adjustment will
resolve the dispute. The base flood elevation for the point in question shall be the governing
factor in locating the district boundary on the land. The person contesting the location of the
district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to the board and to
submit his own technical evidence if he/she so desires.
5. Compliance: No development located within known flood hazard areas of the community shall
be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of
this ordinance and other applicable regulations.
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-23
6. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions: It is not intended by this ordinance to repeal, abrogate or
impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance
imposes greater restrictions, the provision of this ordinance shall prevail. All other ordinances
inconsistent with this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
7. Interpretation: In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be
held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body
and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statute.
8. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability: The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific
methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood height may be
increased by manmade or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by
debris. This ordinance does not imply that areas outside floodway and floodway fringe district
boundaries or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Plattsmouth or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that may result from reliance on this
ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made there under.
9. Application for Appeal: Where a request for a permit to develop is denied by the Zoning
Administrator, the applicant may apply for such permit or variance directly to the Board of
Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment may grant or deny such request by appropriate resolution
adopted within ten days after the date of such application to the Board of Adjustment.
D. Floodplain and Floodway Permits and Administration:
1. Permit Required: No person, firm, or corporation shall initiate any development or substantial
improvement or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate permit for
development as defined in this section.
2. Administration:
a. The Zoning Administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement the
provisions of this ordinance.
b. Duties of the Zoning Administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Review of all development permits to assure that sites are reasonably safe
from flooding and that the permit requirements of this ordinance have been
satisfied.
(2) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Notify adjacent communities and the Nebraska Department of Natural
Resources Flood Plan Management Section prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and shall submit evidence of such notification to
the Federal Insurance Administration when participating in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
(4) Notify the Lower Platte South Natural Resources District Floodplain
Management Section of any proposed construction and development activity
in floodplain areas and/or upon land situated within the floodplain/floodway
overlay zoning district.
(5) Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of
said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
(6) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved
structures.
(7) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which
the new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed.
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-24
(8) When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, the Zoning
Administrator shall be presented certification from a registered professional
engineer or architect.
3. Application for Permit: To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application, in writing,
on a form furnished for that purpose. Every such application shall:
a. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit.
b. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot, block, tract and
house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and definitely
locate the proposed building or work.
c. Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.
d. Be accompanied by plans for the proposed construction.
e. Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent who may be required to submit
evidence to indicate such authority.
f. Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the Zoning
Administrator.
E. Establishment of Zoning Districts: The mapped floodplain areas within the jurisdiction of this ordinance
are hereby divided into the two following districts - a floodway overlay district (FW) and a floodplain
overlay district (FP) as identified in the official floodplain study. Within these districts, all uses not meeting
the standards of this ordinance and those standards of the underlying zoning district shall be prohibited.
These zones shall be consistent with the numbered and unnumbered A zones as identified on the official
FIRM when identified in the flood insurance study provided by the Federal Insurance Administration.
F. Standards for Floodway Overlay District and Floodplain Overlay District:
1. No permit for development shall be granted for new construction, substantial improvement, or
other improvements including the placement of manufactured homes within the identified
floodplain unless the conditions of this section are satisfied.
2. All areas identified as unnumbered A zones by the Federal Insurance Administration are subject
to inundation of the 100-year flood; however, the water surface elevation was not provided. The
unnumbered A zones shall be subject to all development provisions of this ordinance. If flood
insurance study data is not available, the community shall utilize any base flood elevation data
currently available within its area of jurisdiction. Further, in cases of proposed development
within unnumbered A zones, the developer's engineer shall be required to conduct the
necessary studies to determine the 100-year-flood elevation and its extent in relation to such
development.
3. New construction, subdivision proposals, substantial improvement, prefabricated buildings,
placement of manufactured homes and other development shall require:
a. Design or anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads including the effect of buoyancy.
b. New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from
the systems into floodwaters, and on-site waste disposal systems be located so as to
avoid impairment or contamination.
c. Construction with materials resistant to flood damage, utilizing methods and practices
that minimize flood damages, and with electrical, heating, and ventilation that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the components during conditions of flooding.
d. All utility and sanitary facilities be elevated or floodproofed one foot above the
regulatory flood elevation. Such floodproofing is permitted only for nonresidential
properties.
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-25
e. That until a floodway has been designated, no development, including landfill, may be
permitted within the identified floodplain unless the applicant for the land use has
demonstrated that the proposed use, when combined with all other existing and
reasonably anticipated uses, will not increase the water surface elevation of the 100-
year flood more than one foot on the average cross section of the reach in which the
development or landfill is located as shown in the official floodplain study incorporated
by reference herein.
f. Storage of Materials and Equipment:
(1) The storage of processing of materials that are in time of flooding buoyancy,
flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life is
prohibited.
(2) Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if not subject to
major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if readily
removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.
g. Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured
home parks or subdivisions, be required to assure that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(2) All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, are located, elevated, and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage.
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(4) Proposals for development (including proposals for manufactured home
parks and subdivisions) of five acres or 50 lots, whichever is less, include
within such proposals the regulatory flood elevation.
G. Floodplain Overlay District Regulations:
1. Permitted Uses: Any use permitted in the underlying base district shall be permitted in the
floodplain overlay district. No use shall be permitted in the district unless the standards of § 205-
34E are met.
2. Standards for the Floodplain Overlay District:
a. Any new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures shall have
the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot above the base flood elevation.
b. Any new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot above the base flood
elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall be floodproofed
so that below such a level the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effect of buoyancy. A
registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this
subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Zoning
Administrator. Such floodproofing is permitted only for nonresidential properties.
c. All new construction and substantial improvements that fully enclosed areas below the
lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designated to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces or exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by the
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall
be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be not higher than one foot above grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings
or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-26
d. Within AH zones, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be
required in order to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
e. Manufactured Homes:
(1) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement. Manufactured homes must be anchored in accordance
with local building codes or FEMA guidelines. In the event that over-the-top
frame ties to ground anchors are used, the following specific requirements
(or their equivalent) shall be met:
(a) Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four corners of
the manufactured home with two additional ties per side at
intermediate locations, and manufactured homes less than 50 feet
long requiring one additional tie per side.
(b) Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the home with five
additional ties per side at intermediate points, and manufactured
homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side.
(c) All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of
carrying a force of 4,800 pounds.
(d) Any additions to manufactured homes shall be similarly anchored.
(2) All manufactured homes placed within an area of special flood hazard on the
community's FIRM shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that
the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above one foot above the
base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Building
Code.
f. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within the special flood hazard areas on the
community's official map shall either (i) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive
days, (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit
requirements and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes"
of this ordinance. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and
security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
3. AO Zones - Special Regulations: Located within the areas of special flood hazard are areas
designated as AO zones, these areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood
depths of one to three feet where a clearly-defined channel does not exist and where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate. Therefore, the following provisions apply with AO
zones:
a. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the
lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least
as high as one foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's
FIRM.
b. All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as one foot above the depth number
specified in feet on the community's FIRM; or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely
floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effect of buoyancy. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 205-34C(b)(2)[8].
c. Adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be required in order to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-27
H. Floodway Overlay Districts:
1. Permitted Uses: Only uses having a low flood-damage potential and not obstructing flood flows
shall be permitted within the floodway district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any
other ordinance and provided that they do not require structures fill or storage of materials or
equipment. No use shall increase the flood levels of the base flood elevation. These uses are
subject to the standards of Section 5-7G:
a. Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, nurseries, and forestry.
b. Accessory residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking, and play areas.
c. Nonresidential areas such as loading areas, parking, and airport landing strips.
d. Public and private recreational uses such as golf courses, archery ranges, picnic
grounds, parks, wildlife and nature preserves. New placement of residential structures
including manufactured homes is prohibited with the identified floodway (FW) area.
2. In Zone A unnumbered, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data available
through federal, state, or local sources in meeting the standards of this section.
I. Request for Variances from District Requirements:
1. The Board of Adjustment, as established by the City of Plattsmouth, shall hear and decide
appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance.
2. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error
in any requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this ordinance.
3. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment or any taxpayer may appeal
such decision to the district court as provided in Nebraska Statute 19-912, R.R.S. 1943.
4. In passing upon such applications, the Board of Adjustment shall consider all technical
evaluation, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this ordinance and:
a. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others,
b. The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage,
c. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the
effect of such damage on the individual owner,
d. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community,
e. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable,
f. The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for
the proposed use,
g. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development,
h. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain
management program for that area,
i. The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency
vehicles,
j. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the
floodwaters and the effect of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site, and
k. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions,
including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
5. Conditions for Variances:
a. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-28
surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level
provided that Subsection I(5)(b) through (f) below have been fully considered. As the
lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical jurisdiction required for issuing
the variance increases.
b. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
c. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood
levels along the floodway profile during the base flood discharge would result.
d. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
e. Variances shall only be issued upon (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a
determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to
the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict
with existing local laws or ordinances.
f. This application shall be given a written notice over the signature of a community
official that:
(1) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood
level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts
as high as $25.00 for $100 of insurance coverage, and
(2) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and
property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance
actions as required by this ordinance.
J. Zoning Regulations for Nonconforming Uses:
1. Continuance of Nonconforming Uses: A structure or the use of a structure or premises which
was lawful before the passage or amendment of this ordinance but which is not in conformity
with the provisions of this ordinance may be continued subject to the following conditions:
a. No such use or substantial improvement of that use shall be extended, changed,
enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity.
b. If such use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of the building
premises shall conform to this ordinance. The utility department shall notify the
Building Inspector, in writing, of instances of nonconforming uses where utility services
have been discontinued for a period of 12 months.
c. Uses or adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances shall not be entitled to
continue a nonconforming uses.
2. Replacement of Residential Uses: If any residential nonconforming use of a structure is
destroyed by any means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50
percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred within those areas
identified as floodway (FW). This limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply
with existing state or local health, sanitary, building, or safety codes or regulations or the cost of
any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State
Inventory of Historic Places.
3. Replacement of Nonresidential Uses: If any nonresidential nonconforming use of a structure is
destroyed by any means, including flood, it should not be reconstructed if the cost is more than
50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred except if it is
reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. This limitation does not include
the cost of any alteration to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, building, or safety
codes or regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-29
K. Definitions: Unless specifically defined below, words or phases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted
so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give this ordinance its
most reasonable application.
1. Actuarial Rates: Or "risk premium rates" are those rates established by the federal insurance
administrator pursuant to individual community studies and investigations which are undertaken
to provide flood insurance in accordance with 42 U.S.C. 4014 and the accepted actuarial
principles. Actuarial rates include provisions for operating costs and allowances.
2. Appeal: A request for a review of the Building Official's interpretation of any provision of this
ordinance or a request for a variance.
3. Area of Shallow Flooding: A designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate
map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual change of flooding to an average depth of one
to three feet where a clearly defined channel is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
4. Area of Special Flood Hazard: The land in the floodplain within a community subject to 1
percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
5. Base Flood Elevation: Elevation indicated in the official floodplain study as the elevation of the
100-year flood.
6. Base Flood Protection Elevation: An elevation one foot higher than the water surface elevation
of the base flood.
7. Channel: A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with a definite bed and banks
to confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water. Channel flow, thus, is that
water which is flowing within the limits of a defined channel.
8. Community: Any state or area or political subdivision thereof which has authority to adopt and
enforce floodplain management regulations for the area within its jurisdiction.
9. Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not
limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations.
10. Existing Construction (For the Purposes of Determining Rates): Structures for which the "start
of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for
FIRM's effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as “existing
structures.”
11. Flood or Flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters,
b. The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
12. Flood Fringe: That area of the floodplain, outside of the floodway, that on the average is likely to
be flooded once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one percent chance of flood occurrence in any
one year).
13. Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the flood
insurance study has delineated the flood hazard boundaries and the zones establishing
insurance rates applicable to the community.
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-30
14. Flood Insurance Study: The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary floodway map and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
15. Flood Plain Management: The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventative
measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to, emergency preparedness plan,
flood control works, and flood plain management regulations.
16. Flood Protection System: Those physical structural works constructed specifically to modify
flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood
hazard." Such a system typically includes levees or dikes. These specialized modifying works
are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
17. Floodproofing: Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary facilities, which would preclude the entry
of water. Structural components shall have the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effect of buoyancy.
18. Floodplain (FP): That area of the floodplain, outside of the floodway, that on an average is like
to be flooded once every 100 years (i.e. that has a 1 percent chance of flood occurrence in any
one year).
19. Floodway (FW): The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent portion of the
floodplain that must be reserved in order to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot at any point assuming equal
conveyance reduction outside the channel from the two sides of the floodplain.
20. Freeboard: A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of
floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that
could contribute to flood heights greater than the heights calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, clogged bridge openings, and the hydrological effect
of urbanization of the watershed.
21. Highest Adjacent Grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to
construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
22. Lowest Floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished
or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in
an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirements of this ordinance.
23. Manufactured Home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term
"manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed
on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes the term "manufactured
home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles
24. Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into
two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
25. New Construction: Structures for which the "start of construction or substantial improvement" is
commenced on or after the effective date of the FIRM.
26. One Hundred (100)-Year Flood: The base flood having a 1 percent chance of annual
occurrence.
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-31
27. Overlay District: A district which acts in conjunction with the underlying zoning district or
districts.
28. Principally Above Ground: At least 51 percent of the actual cash value of the structure is above
ground.
29. Special Flood Hazard Area: The land in the floodplain within a community subject to 1 percent
or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
30. Start of Construction: For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the
Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L97-348) includes substantial improvement, and means the
date the building permit was issued, providing the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The
actual start or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it
include the installation of street and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation of
the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure.
31. Structure: A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, as well as a
manufactured home, and a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
32. Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
33. Substantial Improvement:
a. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either:
(1) Before the improvement or repair is started, or
(2) If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage
occurred.
b. For the purpose of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur
when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or
local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
(2) Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places
or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
34. Variance: A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this ordinance which permits
construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance where specific enforcement
would result in unnecessary hardship.
35. Violation: A failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the
community’s floodplain management regulations.
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-32
5-8 AV – Aviation Overlay District
A. Purpose: This zoning district is created to be appended to a primary zoning district and provides for restrictive land
uses occurring near all public owned heliports and airports, extended out three miles in all directions from the
adjacent boundaries of the airport. The governing map shall be the current Airport Zoning Map of the given facility.
B. Zone Description
1. The Operation Zones shall be located along each existing or proposed runway, landing strip or
other portion of the air field used regularly, for the landing or taking off of airplanes and shall
begin or end at each end of each landing strip and 200 feet beyond the end of each runway and
shall be 1000 feet in width for each instrument runway or landing strip and 500 feet in width for
all other runways and landing strips.
2. The Approach Zone shall begin at the ends of their respective Operation Zones and shall extend
and expand uniformly centered along the extended center line of the respective runway or
landing strip, to the outer boundary of the Approach Zone at a rate of 30 feet of width for each
100 feet of horizontal length for the instrument runway or landing strip and 20 feet in width for
each 100 feet of horizontal length for all other runways.
a. The Inner Area of each Approach Zone shall be that portion of the Approach Zone
beginning at the end of the respective or proposed Operation Zone and extending to
the intersection of the controlling glide angle with a plane 150 feet above the highest
elevation of the end of the respective runway or landing strip.
b. The Outer Area of each Approach Zone shall be the area between the outer limit of the
Inner Area of the Approach Zone and the outer limit of the Approach Zone.
3. The Transition Zone shall be the areas bounded by the Operation Zones of the Hazard Area, the
sides of contiguous inner areas of Approach Zones and the Outer Limits of the Transition Zones;
said outer limits of the Transition Zones being the intersections, at elevations of 150 feet above
the highest elevation at the ends or edges of the closest runway or landing strip, or proposed
runway or landing strip, of a series of contiguous planes originating from bases established by
the Operation Zones of the Hazard Area and the edges of adjacent inner areas of Approach
Zones, said planes rising from their respective bases along lines perpendicular to the centerline
of the landing strip or runway at the rate of one foot vertically to seven feet horizontally to the
lines of intersections previously referred to.
4. The Turning Zones shall be comprised of all portions of the Hazard Area not contained in the
Operations Zones, Approach Zones and in the Transition Zones. The Outer Limits of the Turning
Zones shall be a series of points forming a line which is the horizontal distance of three statute
miles from the nearest points along the airport property.
C. Permitted Principal Use
1. Any permitted principal uses permitted in the Primary District, provided all buildings, structures
and obstacles meet the height requirements as established by this regulation.
D. Permitted Conditional Uses
1. Any permitted Conditional Uses in the Primary District, provided all buildings, structures and
obstacles meet height requirements as established by this regulation.
O V E R L A Y D I S T R I C T S
5-33
E. Height Requirements
1. No building, transmission line, communication line, pole, tree, smoke-stack, chimney, wires,
tower or other structure or appurtenance thereto of any kind or character shall hereafter be
erected, constructed, repaired or established, nor shall any tree or other object of natural growth
be allowed to grow:
a. In Inner areas of Approach Zones to a height above the elevation of the nearest point
on the end or proposed end of said instrument runway or landing strip in excess of
1/50, and all other runways or landing strips in excess of 1/40 of the distance from the
end of the Approach Zone (the end nearest the runway or landing strip) to said
structure of object;
b. In the Outer Area of Approach Zones and in Turning Zones to a height in excess of
150 feet above the elevation at the end of the nearest runway or landing strip.
c. In the Transition Zones to a height above the planes forming the transition slopes; and
d. In the existing or proposed Operation Zones to a height above the existing or proposed
finished grade of said runway or landing strips or surface of the ground.
F. Other Requirements
1. Any permitted use shall first receive administrative approval pursuant to Article 4, Article 6 and
Article 8 of this Regulation.
S U P P L E M E N T A L U S E R E G U L A T I O N S
6-1
06 ARTICLE SIX
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
6-1 Purpose
The Supplemental Use Regulations set forth additional standards for certain uses located within the various zoning
districts. These regulations recognize that certain use types have characteristics that require additional controls in
order to protect public health, safety, and welfare. These regulations complement the use regulations contained in
Article Four of this ordinance.
6-2 Supplemental Use Regulations: Agricultural Uses
Nothing in these provisions shall relieve any property owner or user from satisfying any condition or requirement
associated with a previous approval, special permit, variance, development permit, or other permit issued under any
local, state, or federal ordinance or statute.
A. Crop Production in Non-Agricultural Districts: Crop production is a permitted interim use in any zoning
district.
B. Horticulture and Crop Production - Retail Sales: Retail operation of garden centers or roadside stands
associated with a primary agricultural use may be permitted in the AG district, subject to the following
requirements:
1. Garden Centers:
a. A garden center is a building or premises used for the retail sale of plant materials or
items useful in the growing or display of lawns, gardens, and plants.
b. Garden centers must conform to all site development regulations for the zoning district.
c. Any garden center adjacent to a residential district must maintain a 20-foot landscaped
bufferyard, consistent with the standards established in Sections 8-8 and 8-9.
2. Roadside Stands:
a. A roadside stand is a facility used on a temporary or seasonal basis for the retail sale
of produce grown largely on adjacent or surrounding agricultural lands.
b. A roadside stand may be located within a required front yard but no closer than 40 feet
to the edge of a traveled roadway.
c. A roadside stand may operate for a maximum of 180 days in any one year.
C. Confined Animal Feeding Operations (CAFO): No new confined animal feeding operations shall be
established within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Plattsmouth.
D. Animal Production in the RR District:
1. Breeding and raising of small animals and fowl, such as birds, rabbits, chinchilla, and hamsters
is permitted in the RR district, provided that any building housing such animals shall be at least
50 feet from any property line and 25 feet from any dwelling unit on the site. Any such activity
must be located entirely within a rear yard. The raising of fowl shall be limited to 50 birds per
acre, up to a maximum of 500 birds.
2. Within the RR district, any lot of two acres and over may maintain one horse, llama, and other
hooved animal or bipedal bird. Such a lot may have one additional animal for each additional
full acre of lot area over two acres, up to a maximum total of five animals.
S U P P L E M E N T A L U S E R E G U L A T I O N S
6-2
6-3 Supplemental Use Regulations: Residential Uses
A. Two-Family Residential:
1. The second dwelling unit shall be located to the rear of the site and shall be separated from the
front dwelling unit by a minimum of 25 feet.
2. The second dwelling unit shall be served by a driveway at least ten feet in width, leading from a
public street adjacent to the lot.
3. Both structures shall meet all other setback requirements of the zoning district.
B. Multi-Family and Group Residential in CBD District: Multi-family and group residential uses are permitted
in the CB district only on levels above street level except that a unit specifically designed for occupancy by
disabled residents may be developed at street level, subject to approval of a special permit by the City
Council with the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
C. Mobile Home Residential in the MH District: Mobile home parks and mobile home residential use are
permitted in the MH district. Such use may be configured in a mobile home park or mobile home
subdivision. Following the effective date of this ordinance, no mobile home shall be located outside of a
mobile home park or mobile home subdivision. A mobile home park is subject to compliance with the
following regulations:
1. Certification:
a. A certification of compliance with all ordinances and regulations regarding mobile
home licensing, zoning, health, plumbing, electrical, building, fire protection, and any
other applicable requirements shall be required of all mobile home parks.
b. The Building Official is authorized to perform an annual inspection of any mobile home
park to ensure compliance with these regulations.
c. These regulations do not address the structural integrity of any units within a mobile
home park. Compliance with these regulations does not represent city warrant of the
structural integrity of any structure or unit in such a facility.
d. Permitted Uses: Permitted uses in the MH district are set forth in Table 4-1.
2. Permitted Accessory Uses: The following uses of land, buildings, and structures shall be
permitted within this district provided they are recognized as accessory to the performance of
use permitted in Table 4-1.
a. Open or enclosed swimming pools.
b. Recreation or community use.
c. Other accessory structures permitted in residential zoning districts.
3. Special Use Exceptions: Business offices shall be permitted in this district if management of the
mobile home park is the primary function of the office. Other uses may be permitted in
accordance with an approved plan.
4. Special Use Permit: A special use permit may be granted by the City Council upon receipt of a
recommendation from the Planning Commission for placement of mobile homes within this
district based upon appearance, wiring which meets the National Electrical Code as of the date
of manufacture, unit must be structurally stable, and meet the minimum accepted living
conditions and further shall be attached to the appropriate utilities such as gas, electricity, water
and sewer.
5. Minimum and Maximum Site Area: A mobile home park shall be considered to be one zoned lot.
The minimum area for a mobile home planned park shall be two acres.
S U P P L E M E N T A L U S E R E G U L A T I O N S
6-3
6. Minimum Yard Requirements: Yards of 20 feet shall be maintained between each separate
structure in this district. All other yards shall be maintained as stated in the approved plan.
7. Permissible Floor Area to Lot Area Ratio: The maximum permissible ratio of total building floor
area to the lot area in this district is 20 percent except that when open spaces contiguous to a lot
or lots in mobile home developments is dedicated to remain a open space, the dedicated open
space may be computed together with the lot areas to meet the required ratio for open space.
8. Additional Standards:
a. Recreation Areas: Not less than 8 percent of the gross area of every mobile home
park shall be developed as recreation areas easily accessible to all park residents.
Recreation areas may include, but are not limited to, such facilities as recreation
buildings, adult recreation areas, child play areas, and swimming pools.
b. Off-Street Loading and Parking. In addition to the provisions of Article 09, the
following shall apply:
(1) Off-street parking and storage shall be provided for sorting of park
occupants’ boats, boat trailers, pickup coaches, truck tractors, trucks over
three-fourths ton pickup size, and items of a similar nature, if permitted in the
park, in addition to and separated from the parking required elsewhere in this
chapter. Such areas shall be located so as not to be visible from adjoining
streets and screened. Temporary mobile home storage may be permitted
prior to permanent placement on the mobile home stand but shall not exceed
seven days.
c. Streets: Streets shall be provided as follows:
(1) Entrance streets shall be not less than 35 feet wide. Interior streets shall be
not less than 25 feet wide.
(2) Every dead-end street shall be provided with a cul-de-sac with not less than
an 80-foot turning diameter.
(3) All streets shall be constructed with a curb to provide for drainage.
(4) The location and design of all intersections of access streets with public
streets shall be approved by the public works department.
d. Walks: Walks shall be provided as follows:
(1) Common sidewalks shall be provided along all entrance streets and in areas
of high pedestrian traffic such as in the vicinity of community buildings and
recreation facilities. The sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide and of
asphaltic or Portland cement binder pavement.
(2) Individual walks shall be provided to connect all mobile home stands to
common sidewalks, to paved streets, or the paved driveways or parking
spaces connected to a paved street. Such individual walks shall be at least
two feet wide and of asphaltic or Portland cement binder pavement.
e. Lighting: The park street system shall be furnished with lighting units so placed and
equipped to provide the following average minimum maintained levels of illumination:
(1) Upon all parts of the park street system, 0.2 foot-candle.
(2) Upon potentially hazardous locations including major street intersections and
park entrances, 0.4 foot-candle.
f. Solid Waste Receptacles: Refuse collection stands consisting of a holder or rack
elevated at least 12 inches aboveground or on an impervious slab at ground level shall
be provided for all solid waste receptacles.
g. Height Limitation: The maximum height of any structure from ground level at the street
side shall not exceed 35 feet.
h. Storm Shelter: A storm shelter house shall be provided. There shall be a minimum of
10 square feet of storm shelter floor area for each mobile home space.
S U P P L E M E N T A L U S E R E G U L A T I O N S
6-4
9. Special Provisions: Any person requesting change of a zone to an MH district for the purpose of
developing a mobile home planned park shall submit a proper request for change in zone
together with the following documents:
a. Plan of the proposed planned park showing all utility, street, and facility improvements,
dimensions of all lots and building sites, proposed size of each lot or site, and location
with relation to existing abutting streets and facilities.
b. Proposed constitution, articles of incorporation and/or bylaws of an association of
homeowners or renters within the proposed planned park which documents will, at a
minimum, deal with pet control and garbage and trash control.
c. Detailed drawings of proposed moorings and tiedowns and utility hookups of mobile
homes where applicable.
d. Drawings and plans for individual storage buildings, office and community facilities
proposed for any planned park area for mobile homes.
10. Final zoning changes will not be granted until preliminary plans are approved and all submitted
documents are again submitted in final reproducible form. Approval of the submitted final
documents will be passed by ordinance and such approved documents will become a permanent
record and part of the zoning regulations for this district. Any deviation form the submitted and
approved final documents without due amendment by the City Council shall be a violation of
these regulations.
D. Retirement Residence:
1. Maximum floor area ratio is 0.5 for buildings up to and including three stories. The number of
living units and occupants is determined by floor area ratio rather than site area per unit
regulators. For example, the maximum gross floor area of a retirement residence on a 100,000
square foot site is 50,000 square feet.
2. Any action that would result in occupancy of the project by persons less than retirement age
requires approval of a Special Use Permit by the City Council following a recommendation by
the Planning Commission.
6-4 Supplemental Use Regulations: Civic Uses
A. Clubs: Clubs located adjacent to residential uses shall maintain a bufferyard of not less than 15 feet
along the common boundary with such residential use.
B. Daycare: Daycare facilities are permitted by special use permit in the GI zoning district only if incidental to
a permitted primary use.
C. Daycare Centers (General):
1. Each daycare center (general) must be validly licensed by either the State of Nebraska or the
appropriate governmental agency.
2. Each facility shall provide a minimum of 50 square feet of outdoor play area per child, fully
enclosed by fence or wall that is at least 42 inches but not more than 72 inches in height. Play
areas shall be easily accessible from the main facility and be free of hazards, including potential
traffic hazards.
3. Special use permit applications for general daycare centers shall specify the number and
projected ages of children to be cared for at the facility, and the number of projected full- and
part-time staff.
S U P P L E M E N T A L U S E R E G U L A T I O N S
6-5
D. Group Care Facilities and Group Homes:
1. Each group care facility or group home must be validly licensed by either the State of Nebraska
or the appropriate governmental subdivision.
2. Group homes are permitted in the CB district only on levels above street level except that a
facility specifically designed for occupancy by disabled residents may be developed at street
level, subject to approval of a special permit by the City Council with the recommendation of the
Planning Commission.
6-5 Supplemental Use Regulations: Commercial Uses
A. Auto Repair, Equipment Repair, Body Repair and Travel Center, Truck Stop, RV Storage, and Repair:
1. Where permitted in commercial districts, all repair activities must take place within a completely
enclosed building. Outdoor storage is permitted only where incidental to auto repair and body
repair, provided that such storage is completely screened so as not to be visible from residential
areas or public rights-of-way. Screening is subject to provisions of Article 08.
2. Any spray painting must take place within structures designed for that purpose and approved by
the building official.
3. All entrances and exits serving a gasoline or diesel service station, convenience store offering
fuel sales, or automobile repair shop shall be at least 150 feet from a school, public park,
religious assembly use, hospital, or residential use, as measured along any public street. Such
access shall be at least 40 feet away from the right-of-way line of any intersection.
4. All fuel pumps shall be set back at least 15 feet from any street line.
B. Auto Washing Facilities:
1. Each conveyor operated auto washing facility shall provide 100 feet of stacking capacity per
washing lane on the approach side of the washing structure and stacking space for two vehicles
on the exit side.
2. Each self-service auto washing facility shall provide stacking space for three automobiles per
bay on the approach side and one space per bay on the exit side of the building.
C. Automobile, RV, and Equipment Rental and Sales:
1. All outdoor display areas for rental and sales facilities shall be hard-surfaced.
2. Body repair services are permitted as an accessory use to automobile rental and sales facilities,
provided that such repair services shall not exceed 25 percent of the gross floor area of the
building.
D. Bed and Breakfasts: Bed and breakfasts permitted in the CB district must provide any sleeping facility
only on levels above street level except that units specifically designed and reserved for occupancy by
handicapped people may be located on the street level.
E. Campgrounds:
1. Minimum Size: Each campground established after the effective date of this title shall have a
minimum size of one acre.
S U P P L E M E N T A L U S E R E G U L A T I O N S
6-6
2. Setbacks: All campgrounds shall maintain a 50-foot front yard setback and a 25-foot bufferyard
from all other property lines.
3. Each campground must maintain water supply, sewage disposal, and water and toilet facilities in
compliance with all city ordinances, or, alternatively, be limited to use by self-contained
campers, providing their own on-board water and disposal systems.
F. Convenience Storage: When permitted in the AG, RR, and GC districts, convenience storage facilities
shall be subject to the following additional requirements:
1. The minimum size of a convenience storage facility shall be two acres.
2. Activities within the facility shall be limited to the rental of storage cubicles and the
administration and maintenance of the facility.
3. All driveways within the facility shall provide a paved surface with a minimum width of 25 feet.
4. All storage must be within enclosed buildings and shall not include the storage of hazardous
materials.
5. No storage buildings may open into required front yards.
6. Facilities must maintain landscaped bufferyards of 35 feet adjacent to any public right-of-way
and 20 feet adjacent to other property lines, unless greater setbacks are required by Article 08.
G. Construction Sales and Service: Retail home improvement stores and centers may include outdoor
storage of materials and must comply with the following conditions:
1. Architectural design and materials shall be consistent with the current or projected character of
the surrounding area.
2. All outside storage or display of merchandise or other materials or equipment shall be screened
from view at eye level from a public street or adjacent property.
3. All storage buildings with overhead doors, drive openings, or open bays and all loading areas
shall be fully screened from view at eye level from a public street or adjacent property.
4. Minimum screening shall be consistent with screening standards set forth in Article Eight.
5. All areas not occupied by buildings or landscaping shall be paved with concrete or asphalt, or
surfaced with gravel or similar treatment to reduce dust.
H. Kennels:
1. The minimum lot size shall be two acres.
2. No building or dog runs shall be located nearer than 100 feet from any property line and 500 feet
to the property line of any residential use or district.
3. All kennel facilities shall be screened around such facilities or at property lines to prevent
distracting or exciting animals. Screening shall be of a type provided by Article 08, establishing
landscape and screening standards.
I. Restricted (Adult Entertainment) Businesses: Adult entertainment businesses shall be subject to the
following restrictions, and no person shall cause or permit the establishment of any adult entertainment
business contrary to said restrictions:
S U P P L E M E N T A L U S E R E G U L A T I O N S
6-7
1. No adult entertainment business shall be open for business between the hours of 12:00 midnight
and 6:00 a.m.
2. A new adult entertainment business shall not be allowed within 1,000 feet of an existing adult
entertainment business.
3. A new adult entertainment business shall not be located within 500 feet of any residentially
zoned district or 1,000 feet of a preexisting school, public park, or place of worship.
4. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any adult entertainment businesses in existence at
the time the ordinance codified in this chapter takes effect. All nonconformances shall come into
compliance on or before, and no such nonconforming use shall be permitted to expand in size or
scope and the rights granted in this chapter shall terminate upon cessation of business, sale, or
transfer of ownership of the adult entertainment business.
5. Measurement of Distances: For the purpose of this chapter, measurements shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the main entrance of such
adult entertainment business to the point on the property line of such other business, school,
church, public park, or areas zoned for residential use which is closest to the said main entrance
of such adult entertainment business.
6. No adult entertainment business shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation
of models or any material depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas by display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening from any
public way or from any property not licensed as an adult use. No operator of an adult
entertainment business or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent, owner, or
employee of such business shall engage in any activity or conduct or permit any other person to
engage in any activity or conduct in or about the premises which is prohibited by this code or
any laws of the state or the United States.
7. No part of the interior of the adult entertainment business shall be visible from any pedestrian
sidewalk, walkway, street, or other public or semi-public area.
8. An adult entertainment business shall post a sign at the entrance of the premises, which shall
state the nature of the business and shall state that no one under the age of 18 years is allowed
on the premises. The sign shall comply with the city's sign regulations. This section shall not be
construed to prohibit the owner from establishing an older age limitation for coming on the
premises.
9. Nuisance Operation: Any adult entertainment business operated, conducted, or maintained
contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a
public nuisance, and the City Attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal
action under this chapter, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the
abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner prescribed by law, and shall take such
other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief
as will abate or remove such establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating,
conducting, or maintaining an adult entertainment business contrary to the provisions of this
chapter.
6-6 Supplemental Use Regulations: Industrial Uses
A. Resource Extraction: Resource extraction, where permitted, is subject to the following additional
requirements:
S U P P L E M E N T A L U S E R E G U L A T I O N S
6-8
1. Erosion Control: A resource extraction use may not increase the amount of storm run-off onto
adjacent properties. Erosion control facilities, including retention and sediment basins, are
required of each facility if necessary to meet this standard.
2. Surface Drainage: The surface of the use may not result in the collection or ponding of water,
unless specifically permitted by the City Council.
3. Storage of Topsoil: Topsoil shall be collected and stored for redistribution following the end of
the operation.
4. Elimination of Hazards: Excavation shall not result in a hazard to any person or property. The
following measures are required:
a. Restoration of slopes to a gradient not exceeding 33 percent as soon as possible.
b. Installation of perimeter safety screening.
c. Installation of visual screening adjacent to any property within a residential or public
use district.
5. Restoration of Landscape: The topography and soil of the resource extraction site shall be
restored and stabilized within nine months of completion of the operation. The site shall be
seeded, planted, and contoured in a way that prevents erosion. Alternatively, the site may be
used as a lake or body of water, subject to approval by the City Council with the
recommendation of the City Council and the Lower Platte South Resources District.
B. Salvage Services:
1. Screening:
a. The perimeter of each new facility shall be fully enclosed by opaque, freestanding
fencing or screen walls. Minimum height of this enclosure shall be ten feet. Any such
enclosure shall be constructed behind required landscaped bufferyards.
b. Each existing salvage services facility shall be screened as provided above within one
year of the effective date of this ordinance.
2. Storage of materials within any salvage services facility may not be higher than the height of the
surrounding screen fence or wall.
3. No salvage services use may be established within 300 feet of the nearest property line of a
residential or public use zoning district.
6-7 Supplemental Use Regulations: Miscellaneous Uses
A. Landfills:
1. Compliance with Codes: Each landfill must comply with all relevant city, county, state, or federal
codes and statutes.
2. Prevention of Hazards: No facility shall present a hazard to surrounding residents or properties.
3. Drainage and Water Supply: No landfill may modify or prevent the flow of major natural drainage
ways within the jurisdiction of the City of Plattsmouth. Landfills shall not produce a measurable
increase in pollution in any public water-based recreational facility or in any waterway or well
that is a part of a public or private water supply.
4. Minimum Separation from Residential Uses: No non-putrescible landfill may be established
within 300 feet of a developed residential or public use. No landfill involving the disposal of
S U P P L E M E N T A L U S E R E G U L A T I O N S
6-9
putrescible or septic wastes shall be established within one-fourth mile of any residential, public,
or commercial zoning district; or any state or federal highway.
5. Restoration of Site: The site of any landfill must be restored, stabilized, planted, and seeded
within six months after the end of the operation. Dissipation of waste products must be
accomplished in a manner approved by the State of Nebraska's Department of Environmental
Control.
6. Toxic Waste: The disposal of hazardous, toxic, or radioactive wastes as defined by the Federal
Environmental Protection Agency shall be prohibited within the City of Plattsmouth and its extraterritorial
jurisdiction.
B. Communication Towers:
1. In any AG, RR, UC, or GC districts, communications towers are subject to approval by the
Planning Commission after public hearing as a special permit use. Notice of the hearing shall
be provided to all owners of record of property within 300 feet of the subject property. The
Commission shall consider each of the following requirements and criteria in making its
determination:
a. A communications tower which does not comply with the height limitations in the
district bulk regulations shall be located on a lot of at least ten acres, and no reduction
in the lot size shall be permitted which would result in the lot being less than ten acres
unless such reduction is authorized by the Planning Commission.
b. A tower shall be set back from the property line of any adjoining residentially zoned
property a distance of 180 feet, unless the tower is otherwise adequately screened
from adjoining residential uses.
c. A tower and any antenna thereon shall be painted sky blue or an alternate color
compatible with the surrounding area.
d. Except for the minimum lighting, if any, necessary to comply with the airport height and
hazard zoning regulations and any applicable federal regulations, no lights may be
mounted on a tower or antenna, and the tower and antenna shall not be illuminated.
e. The height of a tower, inclusive of any antenna thereon, shall not exceed 180 feet.
f. For towers less than 180 feet in height, the applicant shall provide a certification by a
professional engineer licensed in this state that said tower is designed and constructed
to permit extension to a height of 180 feet or the maximum allowed by airport zoning
regulations and to accommodate additional antenna systems.
g. Any service building or equipment located at grade shall be adequately screened from
adjoining residential uses.
h. The applicant shall present a signed lease agreement, a recorded declaration of
covenants, or other satisfactory evidence showing that the owner/operator of a tower is
obligated to promptly remove the tower at the end of the lease term or when the
antenna thereon is no longer used, and that the site will be sodded unless otherwise
approved by the Zoning Official for compatibility with the surrounding area.
i. Any tower shall be of a monopole design without guy wires, or of an ornamental design
compatible with the surrounding area.
j. The adverse visual impact of a tower shall be minimized through careful design, siting,
landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques.
k. The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission that the need for
the tower cannot be served by an antenna on any existing structure.
2. In a UC or GC district, communications towers and antennas shall be permitted subject to
approval by the Planning Commission after public hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be
provided to all owners of record of property within 300 feet of the subject property. In its
determination, the Planning Commission shall consider all of the following:
S U P P L E M E N T A L U S E R E G U L A T I O N S
6-10
a. Any service building or equipment located at grade shall be screened from adjoining
residential uses.
b. Any tower shall be adequately set back and screened from adjoining residential uses.
In no event shall the tower be setback less than 90 feet from an adjoining residential
district.
c. The adverse visual impact of a tower shall be minimized through careful design, siting,
landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques.
d. The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City Council that the need for
the tower cannot be served by an antenna on any existing structure.
e. The applicant shall present a signed lease agreement, a recorded declaration of
covenants, or other satisfactory evidence showing that the owner/operator of a tower is
obligated to promptly remove the tower at the end of the lease term or when the
antenna thereon is no longer used, and that the site will be sodded unless otherwise
approved by the Zoning Official for compatibility with the surrounding area.
f. The height of a tower, except a tower accessory to a radio or television studio, shall
not exceed 180 feet inclusive of any antenna.
g. For towers less than 180 feet in height, the applicant shall provide a certification by a
professional engineer licensed in this state that said tower is designed and constructed
to permit extension to a height of 180 feet or the maximum allowed by the airport
zoning regulations and to accommodate additional antenna systems.
3. In a GI or HI district, except for those accessory to a permitted use which comply with the bulk
regulations, a communications tower or antenna shall comply with the following:
a. A tower shall be set back from the property line of any adjoining residentially zoned
property a distance of 90 feet.
b. A tower and any antenna thereon shall be painted sky blue or an alternate color
approved by the zoning official which minimizes the visibility of the tower.
c. Except for the minimum lighting, if any, necessary to comply with the airport height and
hazard zoning regulations and any applicable federal regulations, no lights may be
mounted on a tower or antenna, and the tower and antenna shall not be illuminated.
d. The height of a tower, except a tower for a radio or television studio, shall not exceed
180 feet inclusive of any antenna.
e. For towers less than 180 feet in height, the applicant shall provide a certification by a
professional engineer licensed in this state that said tower is designed and constructed
to permit extension to a height of 180 feet or the maximum allowed by the airport
zoning regulations and to accommodate additional antenna systems.
f. The applicant shall provide a certification by a professional engineer licensed in this
state that any tower is designed to permit a second antenna system of comparable
size to be added to the tower above or immediately below the original antenna system.
g. Any service building or equipment located at grade shall be screened from adjoining
residential uses. If such service building or equipment is to be enclosed by a fence
other than a board fence, such fence shall be screened from the street and adjoining
residential uses.
h. The applicant shall present a signed lease agreement, a recorded declaration of
covenants, or other satisfactory evidence showing that the owner/operator of a tower is
obligated to promptly remove the tower at the end of the lease term or when the
antenna thereon is no longer used, and that the site will be sodded unless otherwise
approved by the Zoning Official for compatibility with the surrounding area.
4. Non-Use/Abandonment: In the event the use of any tower or antenna has been discontinued for
a period of 60 consecutive days, the tower or antenna shall be deemed to be abandoned.
Determination of the date of abandonment shall be made by the city which shall have the right to
request documentation and/or affidavits from the tower or antenna owner/operator regarding the
issue of tower or antenna usage. Upon such abandonment, the owner/operator of the tower or
antenna or the owner of property upon which such facility is located shall have an additional 60
days within which to:
S U P P L E M E N T A L U S E R E G U L A T I O N S
6-11
a. Reactivate the use of the tower or antenna or transfer the tower or antenna to another
owner/operator who makes actual use of the tower or antenna; or
b. In the event that abandonment as defined in this regulation occurs due to relocation of
an antenna at a lower point on the antenna support structure, reduction in the affected
radiated power of the antenna or reduction in the number of transmissions from the
antennas, the operator of the tower shall have six months from the date of effective
abandonment to co-locate another service on the tower. If another service provider is
not added to the tower, then the operator shall promptly dismantle and remove that
portion of the tower which exceeds the minimum height required to function
satisfactorily. Notwithstanding the foregoing, changes which are made to personal
wireless facilities which do not diminish their essential role in providing a total system
shall not constitute abandonment; however, in the event that there is a physical
reduction in height of substantially all of the providers’ towers in the county, then all of
such providers’ towers within the county shall similarly be reduced in height.
c. Dismantle and remove the tower or antenna. If such tower or antenna is not removed
within said 60 days from the date of abandonment, the city may remove such tower or
antenna, in accordance with applicable law, at the facility owner’s and/or property
owner’s expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower or antenna, then this
provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower or antenna.
d. At the earlier of 60 days from the date of abandonment without reactivation or upon
completion of dismantling and removal, city approval for the tower or antenna shall
automatically expire.
C. Wind Energy Conservation Systems (WECS):
1. The distance from all lot lines or any building or power line to any tower support base of a
WECS shall be equal to the sum of the tower height and the diameter of the rotor. A reduction
of this requirement may be granted as part of a special use permit approval if the City Council,
after recommendation by the Planning Commission, finds that the reduction is consistent with
public health, safety, and welfare.
2. The distance between the tower support bases of any two WECS shall be the minimum of five
rotor lengths, determined by the size of the largest rotor. A reduction of this requirement may be
granted as part of a special use permit approval if the City Council, after recommendation by the
Planning Commission, finds that the reduction does not impede the operation of either WECS.
3. Any tower or rotor shall maintain a distance of at least 100 horizontal feet from any structure,
power line, or antenna located on another property.
4. The WECS operation shall not interfere with radio, television, computer, or other electronic
operations on adjacent properties.
5. A fence eight feet high with a locking gate shall be placed around any WECS tower base, or the
tower climbing apparatus shall begin no lower than 12 feet above ground.
6. The height of the WECS may exceed the height restrictions of the base district by up to 50
percent. The bottom tip of any rotor must be at least 10 feet above any area accessible to
pedestrians.
6-8 Supplemental Use Regulations: Accessory Uses
A. Home Occupations: Home occupations are permitted as an accessory use in residential units subject to
the following conditions:
1. External Effects: No noise, odors, bright lights, storage, or other external effects attributable to
the home occupation shall be noticeable from any adjacent property or public right-of-way.
S U P P L E M E N T A L U S E R E G U L A T I O N S
6-12
2. Employees: A home occupation may not employ individuals other than the residents of the
dwelling unit.
3. Service Traffic: Deliveries or service by commercial vehicles or trucks over ten tons licensed
weight is prohibited.
4. The home occupation shall be clearly incidental to or secondary to the residential use of the
premises.
5. There shall be no outside operation, storage, or display of materials or products.
6. One sign advertising the business is allowed, attached to the residence. Such sign shall not
exceed one square foot in total area. Freestanding signs are not permitted.
7. Not more than one-half of the area of one floor level of the dwelling or accessory building shall
be used for such business, including the storage of materials or products.
B. Permitted Accessory Uses - Residential Uses: Residential uses may include the following accessory
uses, activities, and structures on the same lot.
1. Private garages and parking for the residential use.
2. Recreational activities and uses by residents.
3. Home occupations, subject to Section 6-8A of these regulations.
4. Residential convenience services for multiple-family uses or mobile home parks.
5. Garage sales, provided that the frequency of such sales at any one location shall not exceed
one during a continuous two-month period or four sales during any 12-month period.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses - Civic Use Types: Guidance services and health care use types are permitted
in the GI and HI zoning districts only as accessory uses to a primary industrial use.
D. Permitted Accessory Uses - Other Use Types: Other use types may include the following accessory uses,
activities, and structures on the same lot:
1. Parking for the principal use.
2. Manufacturing or fabrication of products made for sale in a principal commercial use, provided
that such manufacturing is totally contained within the structure housing the principal use.
3. Services operated for the sole benefit of employees of the principal use.
E. Permitted Accessory Uses - Agricultural Use Types:
1. Garden centers and roadside stands, subject to the regulations set forth in Section 6-2B.
2. Other uses and activities necessarily and customarily associated with the purpose and functions
of agricultural uses.
6-9 Supplemental Use Regulations: Outdoor Storage
Outdoor storage is prohibited in all zoning districts except the GI and HI zoning districts, except as provided in this
section.
S U P P L E M E N T A L U S E R E G U L A T I O N S
6-13
A. Agricultural Use Types: Outdoor storage is permitted only where incidental to agricultural uses.
B. Civic Use Types: Outdoor storage is permitted only where incidental to maintenance facilities.
C. Commercial Use Types:
1. Outdoor storage is permitted only where incidental to agricultural sales and service; auto rentals
and sales; construction sales; equipment sales and service; stables and kennels; and surplus
sales.
2. Outdoor storage is permitted where incidental to body repair, provided that such storage is
completely screened at property lines by an opaque barrier, as set forth in Article 08. This
provision shall apply to any body repair use established after the effective date of this ordinance.
D. Industrial and Miscellaneous Use Types:
1. Light Industry within the CB district zoning district may not include outdoor storage.
2. Outdoor storage is permitted where it is incidental to light industry outside of the CB district,
general industry, heavy industry, resource extraction, salvage services, warehousing, and
construction yards. Any such outdoor storage is subject to screening requirements set forth in
Section08.
3. Outdoor storage is permitted where incidental to landfills.
6-10 Supplemental Use Regulations: Temporary Uses
A. Purpose: These provisions are intended to permit occasional, temporary uses and activities, when
consistent with the objectives of the Zoning Ordinance and compatible with surrounding uses. They are
further intended to prevent temporary uses from assuming the character of permanent uses.
B. Temporary Use Types: The following temporary uses are permitted, subject to the regulations contained
within these sections:
1. Model homes or apartments, if contained within the development to which they pertain.
2. Development sales offices. Such offices may remain in place until 90 percent of the lots or units
within the development are sold and may not be located within a mobile home or manufactured
home/structure.
3. Public assemblies, displays, and exhibits.
4. Commercial circuses, carnivals, fairs, festivals, or other transient events, provided that events
are located on property owned by the sponsoring non-profit organization, or are located within a
CB or more-intensive zoning district.
5. Outdoor art shows and exhibits.
6. Christmas tree or other holiday-related merchandise sales lots, provided that such facilities are
not located in a residential zoning district.
7. Construction site offices, if located on the construction site itself.
8. Outdoor special sales, provided that such sales operate no more than three days in the same
week and five days in the same month, and are located in commercial or industrial zoning
districts.
S U P P L E M E N T A L U S E R E G U L A T I O N S
6-14
9. Construction batch plants, provided that:
a. No plant may be located within 600 feet of a developed residential use, park, or
school.
b. The facility is located no more than one mile from its job site. The Building Official may
extend this distance to two miles, if such extension avoids use of local streets by plantrelated
vehicles.
c. Hours of operation do not exceed 12 hours per day.
d. The duration of the plant's operation does not exceed 180 days
10. Additional temporary uses that the Building Official determines to be similar to the previously
described uses in this section.
C. Required Conditions of All Temporary Uses:
1. Each site shall be left free of debris, litter, or other evidence of the use upon its completion or
removal.
2. The Building Official may establish other conditions which he/she deems necessary to ensure
compatibility with surrounding land uses.
D. Permit Application and Issuance:
1. An application to conduct a temporary use shall be made to the Building Official and shall
include at a minimum a description of the proposed use, a diagram of its location, information
regarding hours and duration of operation, and other information necessary to evaluate the
application.
2. The Building Official may authorize a temporary use only if he/she determines that:
a. The use will not impair the normal operation of a present or future permanent use on
the site.
b. The use will be compatible with surrounding uses and will not adversely affect the
public health, safety, and welfare.
3. The duration of the permit shall be explicitly stated on the permit.
4. Decisions of the Building Official may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment.
S U P P L E M E N T A L S I T E D E V E L O P M E N T R E G U L A T I O N S
7-1
07 ARTICLE SEVEN
SUPPLEMENTAL SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
7-1 Purpose
The supplemental site development regulations recognize the existence of special conditions that cannot comply
literally with the site development regulations set out for each zoning district. Therefore, these regulations qualify or
modify the district regulations of this title and provide for specific areas of exception.
7-2 Setback Adjustments
A. Lots Adjoining Alleys: In calculating the depth of a required side or rear yard setback for a lot adjoining a
dedicated public alley, one-half of the alley may be credited as a portion of the yard. However, no
residential structure may be nearer than three feet to the near side of the alley.
B. Exceptions to Openness of Required Yards: Every part of a required yard shall be open and unobstructed
from finished grade upward, except as specified herein.
1. Window sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves, flues and chimneys, and ornamental features may
project two feet into a required yard.
2. Terraces, patios, uncovered decks, and ornamental features which have no structural element
more than two feet above or below the adjacent ground level may project ten feet into a required
yard. However, all such projections must be set back at least three feet from an adjacent side lot
line; or 20 feet from any street property line.
3. Fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, and balconies opening to fire towers may project a
maximum of 3-1/2 feet into required yards, provided that they do not obstruct the light and
ventilation of adjacent buildings.
4. For buildings constructed upon a front property line, a cornice may project into public right-ofway.
Maximum projection is the smaller of four feet or 5 percent of the right-of-way width.
5. In commercial districts, a canopy may extend into a required front yard, provided that the canopy
is set back at least five feet from the front property line, covers less than 15 percent of the area
of the required front yard, and has a vertical clearance of at least eight feet six inches.
6. Accessory Buildings:
a. Accessory buildings in residential districts, including private garages, may be located a
minimum of five feet from the side or rear lot line if set back 60 feet or more from the
front lot line. Any such accessory building must be located at least six feet from the
main structure.
b. Accessory structures on a lot under one acre in size devoted to single- or two-family
use, which are not attached to the principal building, shall in the aggregate occupy no
more than 30 percent of the rear yard, and shall in the aggregate be no larger than
1,000 square feet in area. However, this subsection shall not be interpreted to prohibit
the construction of an accessory structure having an aggregate area of not more than
576 square feet on a minimum rear yard.
c. Accessory buildings shall utilize exterior materials and building design consistent with
the character or the primary structure.
7. Lamp posts with a maximum height of ten feet, and flag poles up to maximum height of base
district may be located within required yards, provided they are set back at least five feet from
property lines.
S U P P L E M E N T A L S I T E D E V E L O P M E N T R E G U L A T I O N S
7-2
C. Setback Adjustments: These provisions apply if 50 percent or more of the buildings on that blockface
have front yard setbacks less than those required for the specific district.
1. If a building is to be built on a parcel of land within 100 feet of existing buildings on both sides,
the minimum front yard shall be the mean setbacks of the adjacent buildings.
2. If a building is to be built on a parcel of land within 100 feet of an existing building on one side
only, the minimum front yard shall be the setback of the adjacent building.
3. If a building is to be built on a parcel of land not within 100 feet of an existing building on either
side, then the minimum front yard shall be the mean setback of all existing buildings on the
blockface.
D. Rear Yard Exceptions - Residential Uses: When an irregular lot is used for residential purposes, the rear
yard may be measured as the average horizontal distance between the building and rear lot line, provided
that the minimum setback shall not be less than 60 percent of the rear yard required by the zoning district.
E. Double Frontage Lots: Residentially zoned double frontage lots on a major street, and with no access to
that street, may have a 25-foot minimum front yard setback along said street. All other double frontage
lots must provide full front yard setbacks from each adjacent street.
F. Parabolic Antennas:
1. Parabolic antennas which are accessory to a primary use and are designed to receive radio or
television signals from satellites shall not be located within any street yard of the primary use.
2. Such antennas shall be located no less than fifteen feet from the property line of an adjacent
property within a residential zoning district.
7-3 Height Exceptions
These provisions allow exceptions to the height limit of any zoning district in certain situations.
A. Vertical Projections: Chimneys, cooling towers, building mechanical equipment, elevator bulkheads, fire
towers, grain elevators, non-parabolic receiving antennas, tanks, solariums, steeples, penthouses not
exceeding 25 percent of total roof area, flag poles, stage towers or scenery lofts, and water towers may
exceed the height limit of any district by not more than 25 percent.
B. Radio Towers:
1. Radio towers, operated by licensed amateur radio operators, may exceed the height limit of any
district by not more than 25 percent. This exception does not apply to parabolic antennas
designed to receive signals from satellites.
2. Such radio towers shall not be located within any street yard of the primary use, and shall be
located no less than 110 percent of the tower's height from a property line of an adjacent
property within any zoning district.
C. Wind Energy Conservation Systems (WECS): Wind energy conservation systems are exempt from the
height restrictions of the base district.
D. Special Permit Uses: The City Council with the recommendation of the Planning Commission may grant
an exception from the height limit for a zoning district for a special permit use, as part of its approval of
that use. The limit or extent of this exception shall be a specific part of the special use permit.
S U P P L E M E N T A L S I T E D E V E L O P M E N T R E G U L A T I O N S
7-3
E. Federal Aviation Administration Rules: No structure may be built in any zoning district which exceeds the
maximum height permitted under the rules of the Federal Aviation Administration. These rules describe
the glide angles and operational patterns for any airport within the planning jurisdiction of the City of
Plattsmouth.
7-4 Exceptions to Site Development Regulations for Cluster and Conservation Subdivisions
A. Purpose: Section 4 of the Subdivision Chapter of the Land Development Ordinance provides for cluster
and conservation subdivisions. Creative subdivisions allow for greater flexibility in the design and
development of subdivisions, in order to produce innovative residential environments, provide for more
efficient use of land, protect topographical features, and encourage the preservation of common area and
open space. These special regulations and exceptions apply only to subdivisions.
B. Area and Yards for Individual Lots:
1. Individual lots within a creative subdivision are exempt from minimum lot area or yard setback
requirements set forth elsewhere in this ordinance, unless provided for by the regulations for a
specific zoning district. A creative subdivision must be planned and developed as a common
development. A minimum separation of ten feet shall be established for all residential structures
not attached to one another.
2. Any private garage oriented to or facing a public street or private way internal to the creative
subdivision must be set back a minimum of 25 feet from that public street or private way.
C. Coverage and Landscaping Requirements: Individual lots in a creative subdivision are exempt from
maximum building and impervious coverage limitations and street yard landscaping requirements
established for the zoning district. However, the subdivision as a whole, including streets, walks, and
access ways, must comply with the building and impervious coverage regulations for its zoning district.
7-5 Fence Regulations
A. Location Restriction: Unless otherwise provided by this title or other sections of the Plattsmouth Municipal
Code, no fence shall be built on any lot or tract outside the surveyed lot lines.
B. Required Openings: Unless otherwise provided by this title or other sections of the Plattsmouth Municipal
Code, any fence built on residential property within required front or street side yards shall contain
openings constituting no less than 50 percent of the surface area of the fence.
C. Sight Obstruction: No solid fence permitted or required by this title or other sections of the Plattsmouth
Municipal Code shall be built within a triangle formed by the adjacent side lines of two intersecting streets
and a line connecting points 30 feet on each leg from their point of intersection.
D. Facing: The finished surfaces of any fence shall face toward adjacent properties and street frontage.
E. Residential Fences: Fences constructed within residential districts or on land used for residential
purposes are subject to the following provisions.
1. Height: The maximum height of a fence within a required front yard or street side yard setback
shall be four feet. The maximum height for any fence outside of a required front yard shall be six
feet.
2. Exception for Street Side Yards: On corner lots, a fence built along the street side yard in
conformance with the required street yard setback may have a maximum height of six feet.
3. Exception to Openness Requirement: Fences built on residential property outside of required
front or street side yards may exceed 50 percent closed construction.
S U P P L E M E N T A L S I T E D E V E L O P M E N T R E G U L A T I O N S
7-4
4. Exception for Front Yards of Double Frontage Lots: A fence built within the required front yard of
a double frontage lot may be a maximum of six feet in height and may exceed 50 percent closed
construction if such lot fronts an arterial street or expressway, as defined in the Comprehensive
Development Plan of the City of Plattsmouth; and if such frontage does not provide primary
access to the property.
5. Materials: Fences shall be constructed of wood, chain-link, PVC, resin/plastic, stone, or masonry
materials only. Wood fences shall utilize standard building lumber only. Barbed wire and/or
electrified fences are not permitted, and are defined as any fence that includes in its material
barbs, blades, razors, electric current, or other features specifically designed to injure or abrade
an individual or animal who attempts to negotiate the fence.
F. Office, Commercial, and Industrial Fences: Fences constructed in commercial and industrial districts are
subject to the following special provisions:
1. LC, UC, and CB Districts: The maximum height of a fence in the LC, UC, or CB districts may not
exceed six feet.
2. GC, GI, and HI Districts: The maximum height of a fence within a required front yard or street
side yard setback shall be six feet. The maximum height for a fence outside of required front
yard or street side yard setbacks shall be ten feet.
7-6 Appeals
Denial, revocations, or cancellations of a building permit based on the provisions of this section may be appealed to
the Board of Adjustment, as set forth in Article 12.
L A N D S C A P I N G A N D S C R E E N I N G R E G U L A T I O N S
8-1
08 ARTICLE EIGHT
LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING REGULATIONS
8-1 Purpose
The landscaping and screening regulations provide additional guidance on the development of sites within
Plattsmouth by addressing landscaping and screening requirements. They are designed to improve the appearance
of the community, buffer potentially incompatible land uses from one another, and conserve the value of properties
within the City of Plattsmouth.
8-2 Applicability
The provisions of this article shall apply to all new development on each lot or site upon application for a building
permit, except for the following:
A. Reconstruction or replacement of a lawfully existing use or structure following a casualty loss.
B. Remodeling, rehabilitation, or improvements to existing uses or structures which do not substantially
change the location of structures, parking, or other site improvements.
C. Additions or enlargements of existing uses or structures which increase floor area or impervious coverage
area by less than 20 percent. Where such additions or enlargements are 20 percent or greater, these
provisions shall apply only to that portion where the new development occurs.
8-3 Landscaping Plan Review Procedure
A. Administration and Enforcement:
1. The Zoning Administrator shall administer and enforce this chapter. The City Council may direct
other persons to assist him/her.
2. If the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee shall find that any of the provisions of this
chapter are being violated, he/she shall notify, in writing, the person responsible for such
violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it.
He/she shall take action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with or to prevent
violation of its provisions.
B. Landscaping Plan Review Required:
1. Landscaping plan review is required for all developments requesting actions regarding
rezonings, building or other development permits, and minor and major subdivisions. The review
will be performed by the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee. A landscaping plan is not
required for individual single-family units.
2. Landscaping plan review is initiated at the time of application for a plat or permit. Compliance
with these landscape requirements must be complete prior to issuance of a certificate of zoning
compliance or certificate of occupancy for the structure.
3. No building or grading permit shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee
except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, unless he/she receives a written order
from the Board of Adjustment in the form of an administrative review, special exception, or
variance as provided by this chapter.
L A N D S C A P I N G A N D S C R E E N I N G R E G U L A T I O N S
8-2
C. Submittal for Landscaping Plan Approval: Submittal shall include the following information:
1. Drawings at a scale no smaller than 1 inch = 50 feet. Drawings shall include north arrows,
scale, street address, street names, and the name and address of the person or firm preparing
the plan.
2. Calculations of the entire site area, the area required for landscaping by this ordinance,
including street landscape borders, streetyards, public right-of-way, bufferyards, perimeter and
interior parking lot landscaping, and the required quantities of trees, shrubs, groundcover, and
other materials required within these landscaped areas.
3. Overall site plan, indicating location of major site features, structures, parking, site circulation,
public streets and rights-of-way, pedestrian circulation, site amenities, and other features.
4. Existing plant materials, including location, size, species, and condition, and indication whether
existing materials will remain or be removed.
5. Planting plan, including location of all materials, size, and scientific and common name of each
material. The planting plan includes the location and type of all ground covers, including nonliving
materials, and all other landscape features and structures.
6. Location and design of all screening elements required by this ordinance.
7. Grading plan showing berms, landforms, and stormwater management facilities, with contours
shown at no less than two-foot intervals.
8. A development obligation statement that establishes the responsibility of the developer to install
landscaping and irrigation according to these regulations.
8-4 Landscaping Requirements
Landscaping shall be required adjacent to each street property line and within street yards and street side yards as
set forth below.
TABLE 8.1: REQUIRED LANDSCAPED AREA IN STREETYARDS
Zoning District Street Landscape Border
Minimum Percentage of
Area of First 100 Feet of
Streetyard to be
Landscaped
AG 35 Feet 80% of Entire Street Yard
RR 35 Feet 75% of Entire Street Yard
R-1 20 Feet 65% of Entire Street Yard
R-2 15 Feet 55% of Entire Street Yard
R-3 15 Feet 50% of Entire Street Yard
MH 35 Feet 65% of Entire Street Yard
LC 15 Feet 25%
UC
5% of the Depth of the Streetyard;
50% of the Landscaped Area
between Curb and Sidewalk may be
Counted Toward this Requirement 25%
CB No Requirement 20%
GC 10 Feet 20%
BP 20 Feet 15%
GI 10 Feet 10%
HI No Requirement 0%
Note: Paving is not permitted within side yard setbacks of a lot, in conformance with this § 205-58.
L A N D S C A P I N G A N D S C R E E N I N G R E G U L A T I O N S
8-3
8-5 Landscaping Materials and Installation Standards
A. Official List of Recommended and Prohibited Plant Materials: Plantings shall be used in any required
landscaped areas or bufferyards consistent with the City of Plattsmouth landscaping standards, provided
through the Planning Department. All plant materials shall conform in size, species and spacing with this
section of the ordinance.
B. Use of Inorganic Landscaping Materials: No artificial trees, shrubs, plants, or turf shall be used to fulfill
the minimum requirements for landscaping. Inorganic materials, such as stone or decorative pavers, may
be used, provided that such material does not comprise more than 35 percent of the minimum required
landscaped area. Other concrete and/or asphalt pavement surfaces may not be used within the minimum
required landscaped area, except for walkways less than five feet in width.
C. Supplements to the Recommended List of Plant Materials: The recommended list of plant materials has
been compiled using the latest research data available. Plants other than those listed may be used to
fulfill minimum landscaping requirements as approved by the Zoning Administrator. To be considered for
approval, a proposed plant material must be submitted for review with the following information:
1. Common name and scientific name of plant material.
2. Habitat, geographic climate range and whether plant is native to this region.
3. Growing characteristics, including evergreen or deciduous, height, and spread at maturity.
4. Suitability for different landscape uses and applications.
5. Susceptibility to disease and tolerance of environment: heat, drought, and pollution stress.
6. Fruit-bearing characteristics which may be hazardous in pedestrian and parking area.
D. Encouragement of Native Landscaping Materials: The use of suitable native plant materials is
encouraged to fulfill landscaping requirements. Native plants, or those plants which occur naturally in this
region, have shown greater adaptability to the seasonal and climate changes which occur in this region.
E. Installation Standards:
1. Basic plant materials standards shall include the following:
a. Evergreen Trees: Minimum height of six feet.
b. Shrubs: Minimum two-gallon size container, or the equivalent height and/or spread.
c. Ground Cover Shrubs: Minimum spacing upon installation of 18 inches on center.
d. Deciduous Shade Trees: Minimum caliper (diameter) of two inches as measured six
inches above the ground.
e. Ornamental Deciduous Trees: Minimum caliper (diameter) of two inches as measured
six inches above the ground.
2. All other specifications shall conform to the American Standards for Nursery Stock, published by
the American Association of Nurserymen for that type of tree or shrub at the time of installation.
3. All plant material shall be installed free of disease and in a manner that ensures the availability
of sufficient soil and water to sustain healthy growth.
4. All plant material shall be planted with a minimum of six inches of organic soil and mulched to a
depth of three inches.
L A N D S C A P I N G A N D S C R E E N I N G R E G U L A T I O N S
8-4
F. Minimum spacing of plant materials shall be as follows:
1. Tree Spacing along Streets: Minimum of one tree for every 50 linear feet of street landscape
border.
2. Spacing of Trees: Spacing consistent with generally accepted species spread dimension at
maturity defined by American Standards for Nursery Stock, or a minimum of one tree for every
50 feet, whichever is less.
3. Ground Cover Shrubs: Minimum spacing upon installation of 18 inches on center.
4. Ground Cover Turf: Immediate and complete coverage of area within the season.
5. Ground Cover, Creeping: Spacing adequate to provide complete coverage in three years.
G. Supplemental Installation Requirements for Shrubs:
1. Shrubs shall be installed in a manner that promotes ease of maintenance and quality
appearance.
2. All shrubs shall be installed in designed beds or naturalized settings containing a minimum of
three inches of organic or inorganic mulch, contained by some form of edging, with an
underlayment of landscape fabric.
3. Shrub installations beyond mere shrub beds, such as may contain ground covers, native
perennials or seasonal annuals, may be approved without these features at the discretion of the
Zoning Administrator, upon demonstration of quality design and a maintenance contract/
commitment.
8-6 Maintenance Responsibility
The owner of the property, his/her successors, heirs, assigns shall be responsible for the proper maintenance of all
required landscaped areas. Landscaping shall be maintained continuously, including all necessary watering,
weeding, pruning, pest control and replacement of dead or diseased plant material. Replacement of dead and
diseased material shall be of the same type and size set forth on the approved landscaping plan. Replacement shall
occur within the present planting season or may be deferred to the next planting season by the Zoning
Administrator to accommodate unfavorable weather conditions. In no case shall replacement time exceed one year.
8-7 Performance Guaranties and Surety
As a condition of issuance of a certificate of occupancy and/or certificate of zoning compliance, the City Council
shall require and accept the following:
A. A landscaping performance bond, letter of credit, cash escrow, or other guaranty filed with the Zoning
Administrator in a form acceptable to the city, in an amount of 120 percent of the estimated cost of the
landscape improvement or erosion control installation. Exemptions to this requirement include singlefamily
dwellings and duplex units exclusively.
B. The performance guaranty amount and requirement, along with the permitted time for installation, shall be
included as a condition for final occupancy of the structure. The time period may be extended by the City
Council, upon the recommendation by the Zoning Administrator.
C. If said improvement is not installed within one year of issuance of certificate of occupancy or
commencement of operations, the developer or owner shall grant the City of Plattsmouth permission to
enter upon the land to install required landscaping and/or screening, and the city shall retain said surety.
L A N D S C A P I N G A N D S C R E E N I N G R E G U L A T I O N S
8-5
D. Prior to the release of any surety, the developer/owner shall sign an agreement to maintain all required
landscaped areas, bufferyards, and screening, as provided by the city.
E. Failure to install necessary soil erosion control measures devices prior to site development activity may
result in the Zoning Administrator's revoking the grading permit to stop site work.
8-8 Bufferyard Provisions
These provisions apply when a use is established in a more-intensive zoning district (District A) which is adjacent to
a less-intensive zoning district (District B). The owner, developer, or operator of the use within District A shall install
and maintain a landscaped bufferyard on his/her lot or site, as set forth in this section. Bufferyard requirements
apply only to those districts indicated in Table 8.2.
A. The bufferyard dimensions set forth in this section apply to zoning districts which share a common lot line
or are adjacent but separated by an intervening alley.
B. When a street separates adjacent zoning districts requiring a bufferyard, the size of the bufferyard shall be
one-half the required bufferyard set forth in this section.
C. Each required bufferyard must be entirely landscaped and free of paved areas, accessways, storage, or
other disturbances.
TABLE 8.2: BUFFERYARD REQUIREMENTS (FEET)
District B: Less Intensive Adjacent District
AG* RE* R-1 R-2 R-3 MH
LC 10 10 10 10 10 10
GC 30 30 20 20 20 20
BP 30 30 20 20 20 20
GI 30 40 40 40 40 40
More
Intensive
District
HI 60 60 60 60 60 60
Note 1: Buffer requirements do not apply to single-family or duplex residential uses established in District A.
Note 2: Buffer requirements adjacent to AG and RE districts apply only when the AG and RE districts have
residential uses established either by use or approved subdivision, or are designated for residential uses by the
city’s comprehensive plan.
Note 3: When an alley separates adjacent zoning districts requiring a bufferyard, the size of the bufferyard shall
be one-half the required bufferyard set forth in the table above.
Note 4: Each required bufferyard must be entirely landscaped in accord with the provisions of Section 8-5, and
otherwise free of paved areas, access ways, storage, or other disturbances.
8-9 Screening Standards
A. Application: Screening is required between adjacent zoning districts indicated in the bufferyard
requirements when one or more of the following conditions in the more intensive zoning district is directly
visible from and faces either the boundary of the less intensive zoning district or a public right-of-way:
1. Outdoor storage areas or storage tanks, unless otherwise screened.
2. Loading docks, refuse or trash collection points or dumpsters, and other service areas.
3. Major machinery or areas housing a manufacturing process.
4. Major on-site traffic circulation areas or truck and/or trailer parking.
5. Sources of glare, noise, or other environmental effects.
6. Bailing or stockpiling of cardboard or other shipping or packaging materials.
L A N D S C A P I N G A N D S C R E E N I N G R E G U L A T I O N S
8-6
B. Screen Design. A screen of at least six feet in height, including walls, fences, berming, or landscaping
shall be provided that prevents direct visibility of the conditions listed in this section from less intensive
uses or public streets. The screen may include the following:
1. A wood, brick, stone, concrete masonry, PVC, stucco, or concrete fence or wall at least six feet
in height, with a minimum opacity of 75 percent.
2. A vegetative screen, using evergreen or deciduous materials, capable of providing a
substantially opaque, hedge-like barrier and attaining a minimum height of six feet within four
years of planting.
3. An alternative vegetative screen that provides two overstory deciduous trees and four evergreen
trees per 100 linear feet of property line.
4. A landscaped earth berm with a maximum slope of three to one, which, if used alone, rises to no
less than six feet above the existing grade of the lot line separating the zoning districts.
5. Any combination of these methods that achieves a cumulative height of six feet.
C. Screening shall not adversely affect surface water drainage.
D. The finished side of any fence or wall providing screening shall always be oriented toward the public
street or adjacent property.
E. Screening may be interrupted to provide access drives to service areas or for loading purposes to
buildings. Such breaks or interruptions shall not exceed 20 percent of the length of the required screened
area.
8-10 Parking Facility Landscaping
Unless otherwise noted, each parking facility shall comply with the following regulations:
A. Each parking lot shall provide a minimum landscaped buffer of ten feet along any street property line.
B. Each parking structure shall be considered a structure and subject to the setback and landscaping
requirements for its respective zoning district.
C. Each parking facility that abuts a residential district without an intervening street or alley shall provide a
ten foot landscaped buffer along its common property line with the residential district.
D. Any non-residential parking facility that abuts property in a residential district shall provide a landscape
screen, or earth berm not less than six feet in height, but otherwise compliant with the provisions of
Section 8-9, for the length of the common boundary. A grade change, terrace, or other site or design
feature which blocks the sight line of headlights into a residential property may satisfy this requirement,
subject to the determination of the Zoning Administrator.
E. Each unenclosed parking facility of over 6,000 square feet shall provide interior landscaped area equal to
no less than 5 percent of the total paved area of the parking facility. No more than 40 spaces may be
provided in a single row of parking without an intervening planting bed or island. Planting beds may also
be used to define pedestrian or vehicular traffic flows within the lot. The minimum sizes of a planting bed
or landscaped island shall be 8 feet by 17 feet, or 150 total square feet. Parking facilities within the LI and
GI districts shall be exempt from any interior landscaping requirement. Licensed automobile dealerships
are not considered to be unenclosed parking facilities for the purposes of this ordinance, and therefore do
not require interior landscaping as set forth in this section.
L A N D S C A P I N G A N D S C R E E N I N G R E G U L A T I O N S
8-7
F. Interior landscaping shall be credited toward the satisfaction of overall landscaping requirements set forth
in this section.
G. Landscaping or screening installed in any required landscaped area shall not obstruct the view from the
off-street parking facility to any driveway approach, street, alley, or sidewalk. Landscaping shall further
not obstruct any views among parking spaces and circulation ways, or visibility between vehicles and
pedestrians.
8-11 Planting Requirements
This section establishes the amount of landscaping required in each of the landscape situations set forth by this
ordinance.
A. Street Landscape Border: One deciduous tree and five shrubs, one deciduous tree and one evergreen
tree, or 1.5 deciduous trees for each 500 square feet of required area.
B. First 100 Feet of Streetyard Landscaping: One deciduous tree and five shrubs, one deciduous tree and
one evergreen tree, or two deciduous trees for each 1,000 square feet of required area. All landscaping
within the street landscape border shall be credited toward satisfying this requirement.
C. Public Arterial and Collector Rights-of-Way: One tree for every 50 linear feet of right-of-way. At least 50
percent of all trees planted shall be deciduous trees.
D. Bufferyard: One deciduous tree and two evergreen trees for each 1,000 square feet of required area.
Vegetative screens shall be credited toward satisfaction of this requirement.
E. Parking Lot Peripheral and Bufferyard Landscaping: One deciduous tree and five shrubs, one deciduous
tree and one evergreen tree, or two deciduous trees for each 500 square feet of required area.
F. Parking Lot Interior Landscaping: One deciduous tree for each 20 parking spaces within the parking lot.
G. Residential Development: Two deciduous shade or evergreen trees, one in the front yard and one in the
rear yard, shall be installed per single-family, townhouse, duplex, attached single-family or two-family
dwelling unit. The trees shall be installed within two years of the start of construction.
H. Multi-Family (High-Density Residential Areas) Development: Provide one deciduous shade or evergreen
tree, or two ornamental trees, and three shrubs for every dwelling unit. These requirements are in addition
to street yard or buffer yard landscaping requirements.
I. Variety of Landscaping: A variety of tree and shrub species shall be utilized to provide visual, four-season
interest. Not more than one-third of the required number of trees and shrubs may be comprised of any
one species and at least one-third of the required plants should be a coniferous or evergreen species.
8-12 Tree Replacement
Each landscaping plan shall include an inventory of existing trees on the site. Developments that remove specified
trees taller than 20 feet or larger than 12 inches in diameter(measured six inches above the ground) shall replace
such trees with two (2) trees. All replacement trees must also be listed on the list of recommended species and
shall have a caliper of at least three (3) inches. All replacement trees shall be consistent with the requirements of
this article.
8-13 General Landscape Provisions
A. Obstruction of View: Landscaping or screening installed in any landscaped area shall not obstruct the
view from or to any driveway approach, street, alley, or sidewalk.
L A N D S C A P I N G A N D S C R E E N I N G R E G U L A T I O N S
8-8
B. Earth Berm Locations: All earth berm locations shall be reviewed by the Public Works Director or his/her
designee to determine the effect of the berms on drainage and public utilities.
C. Exceptions: A development may continue to comply with the bufferyard and screening requirements in
effect at the time of issuance of its original permit, regardless of whether an adjacent lot or site is
subsequently rezoned to a less intensive district that would otherwise require compliance with bufferyard
or screening provisions.
O F F - S T R E E T P A R K I N G
9-1
09 ARTICLE NINE
OFF-STREET PARKING
9-1 Purpose
The off-street parking regulations require that developments provide parking in proportion to the need created by
each use. The regulations further establish standards for the functional design of parking facilities. These
regulations are intended to accommodate vehicles in a functionally satisfactory manner and to minimize external
effects on neighboring properties.
9-2 Applicability
A. Applicability: Off-street parking shall be provided for any new building constructed, for new uses or
conversions of existing buildings, or for enlargements of existing structures.
B. Exemptions: Any use within the CB (central business) district is exempt from the off-street parking
requirements provided by Section 9-3. Any off-street parking facility constructed in the CB district after the
effective date of this ordinance must comply with the design standards set forth in this article.
9-3 Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements
A. Parking facilities for each use shall be provided in accord with the minimum requirements set forth in
Table 9-1.
B. Computation:
1. When a computation of required parking results in a fraction of 0.5 or greater, the requirement
should be rounded up to the next whole number.
2. Unless otherwise indicated, parking requirements are based on gross floor area. Gross floor
areas for the purpose of this calculation exclude any interior space used for the parking or
loading of vehicles.
3. When parking requirements are computed on the basis of capacity, capacity shall be determined
by the building code in effect for the City of Plattsmouth at the time the use is established.
TABLE 9.1: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Agricultural Use Types
Horticulture One space per 1,000 square feet of sales area.
Crop Production No requirement.
Animal Production No requirement.
Commercial Feedlots No requirement.
Residential Use Types
Single-Family Residential Two spaces per dwelling unit.
Duplex Residential Two spaces per dwelling unit.
Two-Family Residential Two spaces per dwelling unit.
Multi-Family Residential One and one-half spaces per dwelling unit; one and one-half space per two units for elderly housing.
Group Residential One space for each two residents.
Mobile Home Residential Two spaces per dwelling unit.
Civic Use Types
Administration One space per 500 square feet.
Cemetery No requirement.
Clubs One space per four-person capacity.
Convalescent Services One space per four beds.
Cultural Services One space per 1,000 square feet
O F F - S T R E E T P A R K I N G
9-2
TABLE 9.1: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Day Care Services One space per five-person capacity + one space per employee of largest shift.
Group Care Facility One space per four-person capacity + one space per employee of largest shift.
Group Home One space per four-person capacity + one space per employee of largest shift.
Guidance Services One space per 300 square feet
Health Care One space per 300 square feet plus one space per employee of largest shift.
Maintenance Facilities See Schedule A.
Parks and Recreation No requirement.
Postal Facilities See Schedule A.
Primary Education One space per employee of largest shift plus ten stalls for visitors.
Public Assembly One space per four-person capacity.
Religious Assembly One space per four-person capacity in largest assembly area.
Safety Services One space per employee of maximum shift plus one stall per 1,000 square feet.
Secondary Education One space per employee of maximum shift + one space for each 11th and 12th grade students.
Utilities One space per employee of maximum shift.
Commercial Use Types
Agricultural Sales/Service See Schedule A
Auto Rental and Sales See Schedule A.
Auto Service Three times service capacity.
Body Repair Four spaces per repair stall.
Business Support Services One space per 500 square feet.
Campground One space per camping unit.
Cocktail Lounge One space per 200 square feet.
Commercial Recreation One space per four-person capacity.
Communications Services One space per 500 square feet.
Construction Sales See Schedule A.
Consumer Services One space per 300 square feet.
Convenience Storage One space per ten storage units.
Equipment Sales/ Service See Schedule A.
Food Sales One space per 300 square feet.
General Retail Services One space per 250 square feet.
Liquor Sales One space per 300 square feet.
Lodging One space per unit.
Personal Improvement One space per 300 square feet.
Personal Services One space per 500 square feet.
Pet Services One space per 500 square feet.
Restaurants (Drive-In) One space per 50 square feet of customer service area.
Restaurants (General) One space per 3 person capacity in dining area.
Stables/ Kennels One space per employee plus one stall per 5,000 square feet of site area.
Surplus Sales See Schedule A.
Veterinary Services One space per 500 square feet.
Office Use Types
General Offices One space per 300 square feet.
Medical Offices Three spaces per staff doctor or dentist.
Miscellaneous Use Types
Broadcasting Tower No requirement.
Non-Putrescible Landfill No requirement.
All Landfills No requirement.
Industrial Use Types
Agricultural Industries See Schedule A.
Light Industry See Schedule A.
General Industry See Schedule A.
Heavy Industry See Schedule A.
Railroad Facilities See Schedule A.
Resource Extraction One space per employee on largest shift.
Salvage Services See Schedule A.
Warehousing See Schedule A.
Construction Yards See Schedule A.
O F F - S T R E E T P A R K I N G
9-3
C. Schedule A: This schedule sets forth minimum off-street parking requirements for uses with elements that
have different functions and operating characteristics.
TABLE 9.2: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS - SCHEDULE A
Function of Element Requirement
Office or Administration One Space per 400 Square Feet
Indoor Sales, Display, or Service Area One Space per 500 Square Feet
Outdoor Sales, Display, or Service Area One Space per 2,000 Square Feet
Equipment Servicing or Manufacturing One Space per 1,000 Square Feet
Indoor or Outdoor Storage or Warehousing One Space per 5,000 Square Feet
9-4 Adjustment for Special Permit Uses and Planned Mixed Use Projects
A. For uses subject to a special permit use approval, the Planning Commission and City Council may adjust
the minimum requirements of this section, in order to provide design, usability, attractiveness, or
protection to adjoining uses. Such adjustments may increase the amount of parking, or increase site
development standards above the minimum requirements required by this ordinance.
B. In mixed-use projects, different uses may have complementary parking requirements. This can result in a
parking requirement that is less than the sum of parking required for each use and added separately. The
Zoning Administrator may authorize an adjustment to the total parking requirement for separate uses
located as part of a common development, or for separate uses located on adjacent sites and served by
common parking facilities. All parking facilities subject to the mixed use adjustment must be located in a
common facility, equally accessible and usable to all served uses.
9-5 Parking Facility Location
A. Residential Parking:
1. Off-street parking for residential uses shall be located on the same lot or site as the use.
2. Off-street parking areas for any multifamily residential uses shall be at least six feet from any
main building and shall not be located within a required front yard or street side yard.
B. Non-Residential Parking: Off-street parking for nonresidential uses shall be located on the same lot or
site as the use or within 300 feet of that use if the parking site is within a zoning district that permits the
off-street parking use type. Control of ownership or use rights to the remote off-street parking must be
demonstrated as a condition of permission.
9-6 Parking for People with Disabilities
A. Each off-street parking facility shall provide the number of parking spaces set forth below designed and
designated for use by people with disabilities. Every eighth parking space shall be van-accessible.
Design criteria and dimensions shall be in accordance with Federal Register, Volume 56, No. 144.
Parking facilities for single-family, duplex, two-family, and mobile home residential uses are exempt from
this requirement.
B. Spaces designated for people with disabilities shall have a minimum width of eight feet and an
immediately adjacent access aisle of not less than 60 inches. Each handicapped space shall provide the
shortest accessible route to an accessible building entrance, and shall not require users to walk or wheel
behind parked cars. Such spaces shall be designated with an upright sign exhibiting the universal symbol
for accessibility by the handicapped. All such spaces shall be designed in compliance with the standards
of the Americans with Disabilities Act.
O F F - S T R E E T P A R K I N G
9-4
C. Van Accessible Stalls: One in every eight accessible spaces, but not less than one, shall be served by an
access aisle with a minimum width of 96 inches and shall be designated as "van accessible."
TABLE 9.3: ACCESSIBLE PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Number of Stalls
Number of Required
Accessible Spaces
Number of
Stalls
Number of Required
Accessible Spaces
1-25 1 201-300 7
26-50 2 301-400 8
51-75 3 401-500 9
76-100 4 501-1,000 2% of Total
101-150 5 1,001 and Over 20, Plus 1 for Each 100
151-200 6 Stalls over 1,000
9-7 Bicycle Parking
A. Each parking facility providing 50 spaces or more shall provide parking accommodations for bicycles as
provided below:
TABLE 9.4: BICYCLE PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Number of Parking Stalls Required Bicycle Spaces
50-99 5
100-149 8
150-200 10
Over 200 Two Additional Spaces for Each 50 Parking Stalls
B. Bicycle parking facilities shall include bicycle racks secured to prevent easy removal, bicycle lockers, or
bicycle posts or bollards expressly designed for the secure storage.
C. The location of bicycle parking facilities shall be at least as convenient to the main entrance of the primary
use as the most convenient automobile parking not reserved for use by disabled people.
D. Bicycle parking should be located to prevent hazards or obstructions to the normal flow of pedestrians into
a use.
9-8 Off-Street Parking Design Standards
A. Dimensions:
1. Standard parking stalls shall be 9 feet wide and 18 feet long.
2. Parking facilities may provide up to 25 percent of their total stalls as designated compact stalls.
Compact parking stalls shall be a minimum of 8.5 feet wide and 16 feet long.
B. Pavement and Drainage:
1. Off-street parking facilities shall be hard-surfaced (asphalt or concrete) and maintained with
materials sufficient to prevent mud, dust, or loose material.
2. Off-street parking facilities shall be designed and built to prevent the free flow of water onto
adjacent properties or public rights-of-way. Parking lot design shall make maximum use of
techniques that reduce the flow and velocity of storm water, such as bio-swales, grading, and
on-site retention and detention.
C. Landscape and Screening Requirements: Landscape and screening requirements for parking facilities
are set forth in Article 08.
O F F - S T R E E T P A R K I N G
9-5
D. Entrances and Exits:
1. Adequate access to each parking facility shall be provided by means of clearly defined and
limited driveways or access points. Such driveways shall be designed to direct non-residential
traffic away from residential areas.
2. Parking facilities other than driveways for single-family, duplex, two-family, or mobile home
residential uses must permit vehicles to enter streets in a forward position.
E. Safety Features:
1. Parking facilities shall be designed to provide visibility of and between pedestrians and vehicles
when circulating within or entering or leaving the facility, and shall not create blind, hidden, or
hazardous areas.
2. Circulation patterns shall be designed in accord with accepted standards of traffic engineering
and safety.
F. Maintenance: All parking facilities shall be maintained to assure the continued usefulness and
compatibility of the facility. Acceptable maintenance includes keeping the facility free of refuse, debris,
and litter; maintaining parking surfaces in sound condition; and providing proper care of landscaped areas.
G. Adjustment: For uses subject to special use permit approval, the City Council, with the recommendation
of the Planning Commission, may adjust the minimum requirements of this section, in order to provide
design, usability, attractiveness, or protection to adjoining uses in a manner equal to or greater than the
minimum requirements of this article.
9-9 Off-Street Loading
A. Loading Requirement: Any use which involves the receipt or distribution of freight, merchandise, supplies,
vehicles, or equipment as part of its typical operation shall provide and maintain adequate space for offstreet
loading and circulation. Loading areas shall be designed to avoid undue interference with the public
use of streets and sidewalks.
B. Loading spaces for each use requiring them shall be provided in accord with the minimum requirements
set forth in Table 9-5.
C. Design Standards:
1. Each loading space shall be at least 10 feet wide by 50 feet long, with a vertical clearance of at
least 14 feet.
2. Paving of loading spaces and access areas shall be permanent, durable and free of dust.
3. Off-street loading areas are subject to the landscaping and buffering requirements for parking
facilities set forth in this article.
TABLE 9.5: OFF-SITE LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Gross Floor Area of Use
(Square Feet)
Number of Required
Loading Spaces
5,000 or Less None
5,001-25,000 1
25,001-75,000 2
Larger than 75,000 3
O F F - S T R E E T P A R K I N G
9-6
9-10 Stacking Requirements for Drive-Through Services
A. Commercial establishments providing drive-in or drive-through services shall provide minimum on-site
stacking distance as provided below.
TABLE 9.6: STACKING REQUIREMENTS
Type of Operation Minimum Stacking Space
Financial Services with Drive-Up
Tellers
Four Vehicles per Window or Kiosk
Financial Services with Drive-Up ATM Four Vehicles per ATM Station
Self-Service or Automatic Car Wash Entrance: Four Vehicles per Bay
Exit: One Vehicle per Bay
Fast Food Restaurant* Without Menu Boards: Four Vehicles in Front of
Service Windows;
With Separate Menu Boards and Service
Windows: A Sum of Eight Vehicles Behind the
Menu Board Plus Eight Behind the First Service
Window
Drive-Up Pharmacies, Dry Cleaning, or
Other Drive-Up Personal Services
Two Vehicles per Service Window
Gas Stations Two Vehicles per Pump
Gated Parking Lot, Community One Vehicle per Gate or Door on Local Streets;
Entrance, or Overhead Door Two Vehicles per Gate or Door on Collector
Streets
Note: Minimum vehicle lane shall be 12 feet. Vehicle length = 20 feet.
* May be increased based on site plan review.
B. The Planning Director may adjust these requirements for specific projects, provided that the applicant can
present a traffic study prepared by a professional traffic engineer demonstrating that such reduction is
appropriate to the function of the project. A reduction must also be recommended by the City Engineer.
C. All drive-through services must provide adequate alternative runaround access for vehicles not in a drivethrough
queue.
9-11 Parking for Personal and Recreational Vehicles
A. Applicability: This section permits the parking of personal vehicles on a single lot in a residential district
subject to specific conditions. Personal vehicles include passenger cars, vans, pick-up trucks, recreational
vehicles, trailers less than 40 feet in length, and boats.
B. Location of Parking:
1. Parking is permitted within any enclosed structure when such structure conforms to the
regulations of its zoning district.
2. Parking is permitted outside of an enclosed structure in the side yard behind the line of the
required front yard setback or in the rear yard.
3. Parking is permitted outside of an enclosed structure within the required front yard setback,
subject to the following conditions:
a. The parking space is provided on a paved, hard-surfaced or graveled driveway, or
paved pad adjacent to the driveway.
b. The vehicle is parked perpendicular to the front curb.
c. The vehicle does not encroach on public right-of-way.
O F F - S T R E E T P A R K I N G
9-7
C. Special Provisions for Recreational Vehicles: Parking and storage of recreational vehicles, trailers, and
boats is subject to the following additional conditions:
1. The vehicle is maintained in a clean, well-kept state.
2. If the vehicle is equipped with liquefied petroleum gas containers, such containers must meet
the current standards of the Interstate Commerce Commission, the United States Department of
Transportation, or the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. Any valves must be closed at
all times that the vehicle is not in preparation for immediate use. Leaks in containers must be
repaired immediately.
3. The vehicle may be used only by non-paying guests for a maximum of three consecutive days or
14 days during any calendar year.
4. The vehicle may not be permanently connected to utility lines.
5. The vehicle may not be used for the storage of goods, materials, or equipment other than those
items which pertain to the use of the vehicle.
6. The length of the vehicle shall not exceed twenty feet if the vehicle is parked or stored in a
required front yard or street side yard. Longer vehicles may be parked or stored within rear
yards or interior side yards behind the required front yard setback.

S I G N R E G U L A T I O N S
10-1
10 ARTICLE TEN
SIGN REGULATIONS
10-1 Purpose
The sign regulations provide standards for communicating information in the environment of the City of Plattsmouth
and its jurisdiction. The regulations recognize the need to protect public health, safety, and welfare; to maintain the
city's attractive appearance; to provide for adequate business identification, advertising, and communication of
information; and to encourage the fair enforcement of sign regulations.
10-2 Definition of Terms
The following definitions shall be used for terms contained in this chapter that are not otherwise defined in the
Plattsmouth Municipal Code or in this Zoning Ordinance:
A. Abandoned Sign: A sign, including sign face and supporting structure, which refers to a discontinued
business, profession, commodity, service, or other activity or use formerly occupying the site; or which
contains no sign copy on all sign faces for a continuous period of six months.
B. Attached Sign: A sign which is structurally connected to a building and/or depends upon that building for
support.
C. Awning and Awning Sign: A temporary or movable shelter supported entirely from the exterior wall of a
building and composed of non-rigid materials, except for a supporting framework. An awning sign is a
message printed on such a shelter.
D. Banner: Material with a printed message or graphic secured or mounted from a structure in such a way as
to allow wind movement.
E. Building Marker: An historic or commemorative plaque, or a building name or cornerstone carved into a
masonry surface.
F. Business Center Identification Sign: A sign which identifies a building or group of commercial buildings in
single ownership or control, sharing parking and access.
G. Canopy: A projecting non-movable structure cantilevered or suspended from a building, supported by the
main structural members to which it is attached, and used only as a roof or fixed shelter.
H. Canopy Sign: A sign which is attached or made an integral part of a canopy.
I. Clearance: The distance from the bottom of a sign face elevated above grade and the grade below.
J. Detached Sign: A sign which is self-supporting and structurally independent from any building.
K. Directional Sign: A sign which serves only to designate the location or direction of any area or place.
L. Double-Faced Sign: A sign consisting of no more than two parallel faces supported by a single structure.
M. Flag, Business: A flag displaying the name, insignia, emblem, or logo of a profit-making entity.
N. Flag, Public: A flag displaying the name, insignia, emblem, seal, or pattern of a nation, state, county,
municipality, or nonprofit organization.
S I G N R E G U L A T I O N S
10-2
O. Frontage: The length of a property line of any one premise abutting and parallel to a public street, private
way, or court.
P. Ground Sign: A detached on-premise sign built on a freestanding frame, mast, or pole(s) with a clearance
no greater than three feet.
Q. Illumination: Lighting sources installed for the primary purpose of lighting a specific sign or group of signs.
R. Informative Sign: An on-premise sign that provides an instruction or direction to the public, but contains
no other advertising, message, or decoration.
S. Marquee: A permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by a building and extending over
public right-of-way.
T. Maximum Permitted Sign Area: The maximum permitted combined area of all signs allowed on a specific
property.
U. Monument Sign: An on-premise freestanding sign with the appearance of a solid base. The width of such
base shall be at least 75 percent of the width of the sign.
V. Moving Sign: A sign which conveys its message through rotating, changing, or animated elements.
W. Nonconforming Sign: A sign that was legally erected prior to the adoption of this chapter but which
violates the regulations of this chapter.
X. Pole Sign: An on-premise sign built on a freestanding frame, mast, or pole(s) with a clearance greater
than three feet, and where the support encompasses less than 75 percent of the width of the sign.
Y. Portable Sign: Any sign supported by frames or posts rigidly attached to bases not permanently attached
to the ground or a building and capable of being moved from place to place.
Z. Premise Identification Sign: Any sign which pertains to the use of a premises and which contains
information about the owner or operator of that use, the type of business being conducted or the principal
band name of a commodity sold on the premises, and other information relative to the conduct of the use.
AA. Premises: A tract of one or more lots or sites which are contiguous and under common ownership or
control.
BB. Projecting Sign: A sign other than a wall sign that is attached to and projects from a building face.
CC. Residential Sign: A small detached or attached sign located on a residential premise, conveying a
message communicated by the owner of the property.
DD. Roof Sign: Any sign or part of sign erected upon, against, or directly above a roof or on top of or above
the parapet or cornice of a building.
1. Integral Roof Sign: A roof sign positioned between an eave line and the peak or highest point
on a roof, substantially parallel to the face of a building.
2. Above-Peak Roof Sign: A roof sign positioned above the peak of a roof or above a parapet or
cornice.
EE. Sign: A symbolic, visual device fixed upon a building, vehicle, structure, or parcel of land which is intended
to convey information about a product, business, activity, place, person, institution, candidate, or political
idea.
S I G N R E G U L A T I O N S
10-3
FF. Sign Type: A functional description of the use of an individual sign. Includes owner identification,
advertising, directional, electronic message, and temporary.
GG. Street Facade: Any separate external face of a building, including parapet walls and omitted wall lines,
oriented to and facing a public street, private way, or court. Separate faces oriented in the same direction
or within 45 degrees of one another are considered part of the same street facade.
HH. Temporary Signs: A sign, flag, banner, pennant, or valance constructed of light weight materials which is
not permanently attached to building or land, and which is intended for display for a limited period of time.
II. Wall Sign: A sign attached to and parallel with the side of a building.
JJ. Window Sign: A sign painted on or installed inside a window for the purpose of viewing from outside the
premises.
KK. Zone Lot: A parcel of land in single ownership that is large enough to meet the minimum zoning
requirements of its zoning district and can provide such yards and other open spaces that are required by
the site development regulations.
10-3 General Sign and Street Graphics Regulations
A. Compliance: Each sign or part of a sign erected within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Plattsmouth
must comply with the provisions of this chapter and of other relevant provisions of the City of
Plattsmouth's Municipal Code.
B. Resolution of Conflicting Regulations: This chapter is not meant to repeal or interfere with enforcement of
other sections of the City of Plattsmouth's Municipal Code. In cases of conflicts between code sections,
state or federal regulations, the more restrictive regulations shall apply.
C. Prohibited Signs: The following signs are prohibited in all zoning districts:
1. Signs painted on or attached to rocks, trees, or other natural objects.
2. Signs or sign structures which resemble or conflict with traffic control signs or devices, which
mislead or confuse persons traveling on public streets, or which create a traffic hazard.
3. Signs on public property, unless specifically authorized by the appropriate public agency.
4. Signs which create a safety hazard by obstructing the clear view of pedestrians or vehicles, or
which obscure official signs or signals.
5. Abandoned Signs: Any abandoned sign must be removed within six months of date of
abandonment.
6. Portable signs, including signs painted, mounted, or printed on parked vehicles and trailers.
7. Signs that are not clean or in substantial good repair, or are not affixed to a sound structure.
8. Signs advertising activities that are illegal under federal, state, or local laws and regulations.
D. Exempt Signs: The following signs are permitted in any zoning district and are exempt from other
provisions of this chapter:
1. Bulletin boards for religious assembly or school uses, provided that they have a maximum sign
area of 20 square feet and are not located in a required sign setback.
S I G N R E G U L A T I O N S
10-4
2. Real estate signs.
3. Official signs authorized by a government or governmental subdivision which give traffic,
directional, or warning information.
4. Seasonal decorations for display on private or public property.
5. On-premise construction signs.
6. Temporary signs for grand openings or special events.
7. Works of graphic art painted or applied to building walls which contain no advertising or
business identification messages.
8. Residential signs under four square feet in size.
9. Neighborhood or subdivision identification signs under 50 square feet.
10. Street numbers.
11. Signs which are not visible from a public right-of-way, private way, or court or from a property
other than that on which the sign is installed.
E. Bufferyards: No sign other than on-premise directional signs shall be placed within any bufferyard
required by Article Eight, Landscaping and Screening Regulations, except bufferyards adjacent to
intervening major streets.
F. Vision-Clearance Area: No sign may project into or be placed within a vision-clearance area defined by a
triangle with legs of 40 feet from the point at which the curbs or edges of two intersecting streets, private
ways, or courts or an intersecting street, private way, or court and driveway meet.
10-4 General Regulations: Basic Design Elements for On-Premise Signs
A. Wall Signs and Graphics: Wall signs and graphics are subject to the following general regulations.
1. A wall sign shall not extend more than 30 inches from the wall to which it is attached.
2. A wall sign must be parallel to the wall to which it is attached.
3. A wall sign may not extend beyond the corner of the wall to which it is attached, except where
attached to another wall sign, it may extend to provide for the attachment.
4. A wall sign may not extend beyond its building's roof line.
5. A wall sign attached to a building on its front property line may encroach upon public right-ofway
by no more than 18 inches. Such a wall sign shall provide minimum clearance of eight feet
six inches.
6. For the purpose of calculating permitted sign areas pursuant to this chapter, signs painted on
the walls of buildings shall be considered wall signs.
7. Where permitted, canopy signs are counted as wall signs when calculating total permitted sign
area.
S I G N R E G U L A T I O N S
10-5
B. Projecting Signs and Graphics: Projecting signs and graphics are subject to the following general
regulations.
1. The maximum projection of any projecting sign shall be as follows:
a. Six feet, six inches (6’-6”) over public sidewalks less than 12 feet wide;
b. Eight feet (8’-0”) over public sidewalks 12 feet wide or more, or over private property.
2. A projecting sign may be no closer than two feet from the vertical plane of the inside curb line.
3. Each projecting sign must maintain at least the following vertical clearances:
a. Eight feet, six inches (8’-6”) over sidewalks; except that a canopy may reduce its
vertical clearance to 7 feet, 6 inches;
b. Ten feet (10’-0”) for signs located outside of driveways or parking areas, but within
three feet of such areas; or within 50 feet of the right-of-way lines formed by the
intersection of two or more streets;
c. Fourteen feet (14’-0”) over parking lots;
d. Eighteen feet (18’-0) over alleys or driveways.
4. No projecting sign extending three feet or more from a property line may be located within 22
feet of any other projecting sign extending three feet or more from a property line.
5. Projecting signs must minimize visible support structure and may not expose guy wires, cables,
turnbuckles, angle iron, or other similar external support structure.
C. Pole Signs: Pole signs, where permitted, are subject to the following general regulations:
1. Each pole sign must maintain at least the following vertical clearances:
a. Eight feet, six inches (8’-6”) over sidewalks;
b. Fourteen feet (14’-0”) over parking lots;
c. Eighteen feet (18’-0) over alleys or driveways.
2. Permitted pole signs may revolve at a rate not to exceed six revolutions per minute.
D. Roof Signs: Roof signs are subject to the following regulations:
1. Where permitted, integral roof signs may be used interchangeably with wall signs.
2. Integral roof signs may not exceed the permitted height for pole signs.
3. An integral roof sign must be mounted parallel to the wall of the building that it faces.
10-5 General Regulations: Other Design Elements
A. Illumination: Lighting, when installed, must be positioned in such a manner that light is not directed onto
an adjoining property or onto a public street or highway.
B. Marquees and Marquee Signs: Signs placed on, attached to, or constructed on a marquee are subject to
the maximum projection and clearance regulations of projecting signs.
C. Banners:
1. A banner sign projecting from a building may not exceed the wall height of the building.
S I G N R E G U L A T I O N S
10-6
2. Maximum projection for any banner is five feet, with a minimum clearance of ten feet.
3. Maximum size of a banner is the lesser of twice the permitted size of a projecting sign or 120
square feet.
D. Clocks: For the purposes of this chapter, clocks are not considered a moving sign.
P = Permitted for All Uses P(C) = Permitted for Civic Uses N = Not Permitted
TABLE 10.2: MAXIMUM PERMITTED SIGN AREA FOR ZONE LOT BY ZONING DISTRICT
The Maximum Permitted Area for all signs on a premises excluding incidental signs,
building marker signs, and flags shall not exceed the lesser of the following:
Zoning District AG
RR
R-1
R-2
R-3
MH LC UC CBD BP GC
GI
HI
Square Feet of Signage per
Linear Foot of Frontage N/A N/A N/A .50 .75 1.0 1.0 2.0 2.0
100 200 200 300 300 400
Maximum Total Square Feet Note 1 Note 2 Note 3 Note 4 Note 4 Note 5
Note 1: 100 square feet for civic or commercial uses, four square feet for residential uses.
Note 2: 32 square feet for civic uses, four square feet for residential uses.
Note 3: 75 square feet for project identification signs for multi-family or mobile home developments and for civic
uses; four square feet for other residential uses.
Note 4: Maximum limits apply to non-residential premises only. On premises with a primary residential use, 75
square feet for project identification signs for multi-family developments, four square feet for other residential uses.
Note 5: One business center identification sign with a maximum area of 150 square feet is permitted subject to the
regulations set forth by Table 10-3.
TABLE 10.1: PERMITTED SIGNS BY TYPE AND ZONING DISTRICT
Sign Type AG RR R-1 R-2 R-3 MH LC UC CBD GC BP GI HI
Detached Signs
Residential P P P P P P P P N N N N N
Business Identification P P P (C) P (C) P P P P P P P P P
Incidental P (C) P (C) P (C) P (C) P P (C) P P P P P P P
Ground P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Pole N N N N N N N N N N N N N
Attached Signs
Awning N N N N P P P P P P P P P
Banner N N N N N N P P P P P P P
Building Marker P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Canopy N N N N N N P P P P P P P
Business Identification P P (C) P (C) P (C) P P P P P P P P P
Incidental P (C) P (C) P (C) P (C) P P P P P P P P P
Marquee N N N N N N P P P P P P P
Projecting N N N N N N N P P P P P P
Roof, Integral N N N N N N P P P P P P P
Roof, Above Peak N N N N N N N N N P N P P
Wall P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Window N N N N N N P P P P P P P
Miscellaneous
Flag P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Portable N N N N N N N N N N N N N
S I G N R E G U L A T I O N S
10-7
TABLE 10.3: PERMITTED SIGNS BY NUMBERS, DIMENSIONS, AND LOCATION
Each individual sign shall comply with the regulations for maximum quantity,
maximum size, minimum setbacks, and height limits shown in this table:
Zoning District AG
RR
R-1
R-2
R-3
MH LC UC CBD
GC
(Note 1) BP
GI
HI
Detached Signs
Number Permitted
Per Premise 1 1 1 1 N/A 1 N/A NA N/A
Per Feet of Frontage N/A N/A N/A N/A 1 Per 300 N/A 1 Per 200 1 Per 200 1 per 200
Maximum Size*
(Square Feet) 100* 32* 75* 75* 100* 100 150 150 200
Maximum Height
(Feet) 25 10 10 15 25 25 35 35 35
Front Yard Setback
(Feet) 25 5 10 10 10 0 5 5 0
Side Yard Setback
(Feet) 10 10 10 10 5 0 5 5 0
Attached Signs
Maximum Size*
(Square Feet) 100 32* 75* 75 100 100 150 200 200
Percentage of
Street Facade N/A N/A N/A 20% 20% 20% 25% 25% 25%
* For those uses only permitted a sufficient maximum sign area in Table 10-2.
Note 1: In addition to its total permitted sign area, each premises used for a business center may have one
detached center identification sign, subject to the following conditions:
A. The maximum area for a center identification sign shall be 150 square feet.
B. No center identification sign shall be within 300 feet of any other center identification sign or within 150
feet of any other detached sign on the same or adjacent premises.
C. The sign shall display no more than the name and location of the business center.
D. Each sign shall be subject to all other regulations for detached signs or graphics set forth in this article.
10-6 Specific Regulations for Zoning Districts
This section sets forth regulations and design standards for signs and graphics for each zoning district.
10-7 Measurement of Regulators
A. Maximum Permitted Sign Area: Maximum permitted sign area for a premise is set forth as a numerical
limit or as a function of the frontage of the premises on a street or private way. For properties with
frontage on more than one street or private way, the total frontage shall be calculated as the longest
frontage plus one-half the length of all additional frontages.
B. Sign Area:
1. Sign area includes the entire area within the perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the sign,
excluding any structure essential for support or service of the sign, or architectural elements of
the building.
2. The area of double-faced signs is calculated on the largest face only.
3. The sign area for ground signs, monument signs, and architectural sign bands is calculated as
the area enclosing the extreme limits of the copy only.
S I G N R E G U L A T I O N S
10-8
4. In the case of individual letters mounted to a wall, only the total area of the letters themselves is
included within the sign area.
C. Height: The height of a sign is measured from the average grade level below the sign to the topmost point
of the sign or sign structure.
D. Setback: The setback of a sign is measured from the property line to the supporting frame, mast, pole, or
base of the sign.
10-8 Permitted Sign Types by Zoning Districts
Table 10-1 sets forth the sign types permitted within each zoning district of the City of Plattsmouth.
10-9 Maximum Permitted Sign Area
Table 10-2 sets forth the maximum sign area permitted within each zoning district of the City of Plattsmouth.
10-10 Permitted Signs by Numbers, Dimensions, and Location
Table 10-3 sets forth the maximum permitted numbers of signs per premise; the maximum permitted dimensions of
each sign; and the required setbacks for detached signs.
10-11 General Permit Procedures
A. Applicability: Any installation, modification, or expansion of any sign which is not exempt from the
provisions of this article shall be subject to the following permit procedure prior to installation.
B. Applications: All applications for sign permits shall be submitted to the Building Official in accordance with
application specifications established by the Building Official.
C. Fees: Each application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by any applicable fees, which shall be
established by the City Council from time to time by resolution.
D. Action: Within seven work days of the submission of a complete application for a sign permit, the Building
Official shall either:
1. Issue the sign permit, if the sign conforms to the provisions of this article.
2. Reject the sign permit if the sign(s) that is the subject of the application fails in any way to
conform with the requirements of this article.
E. Permit Expiration: If a sign is not constructed in accordance with an approved permit within six months of
the date of approval, such permit shall lapse.
F. Maintenance of Valid Sign Permit: The owner of a property containing signs requiring a permit under this
ordinance shall at all times maintain in force a sign permit for such property. Sign permits shall be issued
for individual zone lots, notwithstanding the fact that a particular zone lot may be included with other zone
lots in a common signage plan.
G. Assignment of Sign Permits: A current and valid sign permit shall be freely assignable to a successor as
owner of the property or holder of a business license for the same premises.
S I G N R E G U L A T I O N S
10-9
10-12 Repair or Modification of Nonconforming Signs
A. Any nonconforming sign which presently is or becomes structurally damaged or deteriorated, or is altered
by more than 50 percent of its replacement cost, shall be either removed or altered so as to comply with
this article.
B. For business centers pre-existing on the effective date of this ordinance which do not conform to the total
permitted sign area provisions of this article, individual signs may be replaced, modified, or substituted
prior to December 31, 2007. Each sign shall conform to the applicable regulations for individual signs and
shall be installed so as to reduce the total amount of the nonconformance.
10-13 Discontinuance of Nonconforming Signs
Within any zoning district, all on-premise signage must comply fully with the provisions of the ordinance, unless
otherwise provided, by December 31, 2007.

N O N C O N F O R M I N G D E V E L O P M E N T
11-1
11 ARTICLE ELEVEN
NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT
11-1 Purpose
Article Eleven shall be known as the nonconforming development regulations. The purposes of these regulations are:
A. To allow for reasonable use of legally created lots of record which do not meet current minimum
requirements for their respective zoning districts.
B. To provide for reasonable use of legally constructed structures which do not meet current site
development regulations for their respective zoning districts.
C. To allow for the reasonable continuation of legally established uses which do not meet current use
regulations for their respective zoning districts.
D. To allow for the reasonable continuation of legally established uses which do not meet current use
regulations for their respective zoning districts.
E. To limit the continuation and provide for the gradual replacement of nonconforming uses.
11-2 Regulations Additive
Regulations for nonconforming uses are in addition to regulations for nonconforming structures. In the event of a
conflict, the most restrictive regulation shall apply.
11-3 Nonconforming Lots
A. Pre-Existing Lots of Record: Nonconforming lots of record existing at the time of the adoption of this
chapter shall be exempt, unless otherwise provided, from the minimum lot area and lot width requirements
of each zoning district. Such lots may be developed with any use allowed by the regulations for the district
and must comply with all other site development regulations set forth by the Zoning Ordinance.
B. Reductions Due to Public Acquisition: If a portion of a legally existing lot in any district is acquired for
public use, the remainder of this lot shall be considered a conforming lot.
11-4 Nonconforming Structures
These regulations apply to buildings and structures which were constructed legally under regulations in effect
before the effective date of this ordinance.
A. Continuation: A lawful nonconforming structure existing on the effective date of this title may be
continued, repaired, maintained, or altered, subject to the provisions of this section.
B. Additions or Enlargements to Nonconforming Structures:
1. A lawful nonconforming structure may be added to or enlarged if the addition satisfies one or
more of the following conditions:
a. The enlargement or addition, when considered independently of the existing building,
complies with all applicable setback, height, off-street parking, and landscaping
requirements.
b. The nonconforming building and impervious surface coverages on the site are not
increased and the building, after the addition, conforms to height and off-street parking
regulations applicable to its zoning district.
N O N C O N F O R M I N G D E V E L O P M E N T
11-2
c. The addition projects no further into a required side yard setback than the existing
building, the length of the side wall of the addition is the smaller of 25 feet or 50
percent of the length of the existing nonconforming side wall, and the enlarged building
complies with building and impervious coverage, front and rear yard setbacks, and
height regulations applicable to its zoning district.
2. No permitted addition to a nonconforming structure may place a wall within ten feet of a window
of an adjacent pre-existing residential structure.
3. Nonconforming buildings shall be limited to one addition or enlargement pursuant to these
regulations.
C. Moving of Nonconforming Structures: A lawful nonconforming building or structure shall not be moved in
whole or in part to another location on its lot unless every part of the structure conforms to all site
development regulations applicable to its zoning district.
D. Repair of Nonconforming Structures: A lawful nonconforming building damaged by fire, explosion, storm
or other calamity, except flood damages, may be repaired and reconstructed provided there is no increase
in the degree of nonconformity. Repair and reconstruction within the designated floodplain shall be in
conformance with floodplain development regulations.
E. Conversion of a Conforming Building: A conforming building shall not be changed in any way that will
result in a nonconforming development.
F. Applicability of Landscaping and Screening Regulations: A pre-existing structure, building, or
development shall be exempt from Article Eight, Landscaping and Screening Regulations. However, any
expansion of such structure, building, or development or any adjacent new development onto property
that is or becomes vacant on or after the effective date of this ordinance shall be subject to Article Eight.
11-5 Nonconforming Uses
A. Continuation of Nonconforming Uses: Any nonconforming use lawfully existing on the effective date of
this ordinance may continue, subject to the limitations of this section.
B. Enlargement of Nonconforming Uses: A building or structure housing a lawful nonconforming use may not
be added to or enlarged.
C. Abandonment of Nonconforming Use: If any structure or property used as a lawful nonconforming use
becomes vacant or unused for a continuous period of six months, any subsequent use must conform to all
use regulations applicable to the property's zoning district.
D. Change of Use: A lawful nonconforming use may be changed only to a use type permitted in a zoning
district that is equal or less intensive than that normally required for the previous use.
E. Allowance for Repairs: Repairs and maintenance of a structure occupied by a nonconforming use may be
made, provided that no structural alterations are made other than those required by law.
F. Damage or Destruction of Structures: Should a structure occupied by a lawful nonconforming use be
damaged to the extent that the cost of restoration exceeds 50 percent of the replacement cost of the
structure, the nonconforming use shall no longer be permitted.
G. Nonconforming Uses and Conditional and Special Use Permits: A lawful pre-existing use which would
require a special use permit in its zoning district shall be presumed to have the appropriate permit and
shall be considered a conforming use. The use shall be subject to the regulations governing lapses or
revocation of permits, set forth in Article Twelve.
A D M I N I S T R A T I O N A N D P R O C E D U R E S
12-1
12 ARTICLE TWELVE
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
12-1 Purpose
The administration and procedures provisions establish the methods for implementation of the Zoning Ordinance.
These provisions include procedures for reviewing specific uses within certain zoning districts, amending the Zoning
Ordinance, and granting variances.
12-2 Zoning Enforcement Officer
A. Role Filled by Building Official: The role of the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be filled by the City of
Plattsmouth Building Official.
B. Powers and Duties: The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall exercise the following powers and duties:
1. The Zoning Enforcement Officer or the officer's designees shall exercise all enforcement
powers, including, but not limited to, investigation of complaints of zoning violations, issuance of
notices to violators, and preparation and submission to the City Attorney reports of those zoning
violations which continue unabated after exhaustion of reasonable administrative remedies
toward their abatement, for such legal action as the facts of each report may require.
2. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall determine the use type for any use.
3. In all cases in which the city commences court action, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
cooperate with the City Attorney by performing such additional investigative work as the City
Attorney shall require.
4. The Zoning Enforcement Officer or the officer's designee shall attend the meetings of the
Planning Commission and the Board of Adjustment as requested by those bodies, shall
investigate and review all cases presented to the Board of Adjustment, and shall advise that
body on those cases upon request.
5. If the City Attorney, after analysis of the report, institutes legal proceedings, the Zoning
Enforcement Officer will cooperate fully with the legal department in the perfecting of such
proceedings.
12-3 Site Plan Review Procedure
A. Purpose: The site plan review procedure provides for the administrative review in addition to plan review
required by other sections of the Plattsmouth Municipal Code of projects that have potentially significant
effects on traffic circulation or a significant effect on land uses in adjacent neighborhoods. The procedure
provides for review and evaluation of site development features and possible mitigation of unfavorable
effects on surrounding property.
B. Administration: The Building Official shall review, evaluate, and act on all site plans submitted pursuant to
this procedure. Site plan actions of the Building Official related to enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance
may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment. All appeals regarding actions of the Building Official
unrelated to the Zoning Ordinance may be appealed to the Planning Commission and City Council.
C. Uses Requiring Site Plan Review: The following selected uses shall follow the site plan review procedure
prior to the issuance of a building permit, unless they are otherwise subject to a special use permit
procedure for specific zoning districts:
1. Multiple-family residential developments with 20 or more dwelling units.
A D M I N I S T R A T I O N A N D P R O C E D U R E S
12-2
2. Educational facilities.
3. Automotive washing.
4. Automotive sales.
5. Any use including drive-in services.
6. Any commercial, industrial, or office building providing over 15,000 square feet in building area.
7. Any industrial use adjacent to a residential zoning district.
D. Application Requirements: An application for a site plan review may be filed by the owners of a property
or the owners' authorized agent with the Building Official. The application shall include the following
information:
1. Name and address of the applicant.
2. Owner, address, and legal description of the property.
3. A description of the nature and operating characteristics of the proposed use.
4. A site plan, drawn to a scale sufficient to permit adequate review and dimensioned as
necessary, showing the following information:
a. The date, scale, north point, title, name of owner, and name of person preparing the
site plan.
b. The location and dimensions of boundary lines, easements, and required yards and
setbacks of existing and proposed buildings and site improvements.
c. The location, size, and use of proposed and existing structures on the site.
d. The location of all proposed site improvements, including parking and loading areas,
pedestrian and vehicular access, sewers, sidewalks, utilities, service areas, fencing,
screening, landscaping, and lighting.
e. Location of any major site feature, including drainage and contours at no greater than
five foot intervals.
f. Any other information that may be required for review by the Building Official.
E. Administrative Action and Appeal: The Building Official must act upon each complete application within
ten working days of filing. An applicant may appeal a zoning determination made as part of the site plan
review to the Board of Adjustment within ten days of the action. The Board of Adjustment shall consider
the appeal at the first available meeting after the filing of the appeal.
F. Review and Evaluation:
1. The Building Official shall review and approve the site plan based on the criteria established in
Table 12-1 and conformance with applicable regulations in this Zoning Ordinance.
2. The Building Official shall make the following findings before approval of the site plan:
a. The proposed development, together with any necessary modifications, is compatible
with the criteria established in Table 12-1.
b. Any required modifications to the site plan are reasonable and are the minimum
necessary to minimize potentially unfavorable effects.
c. The site plan conforms to the Zoning Ordinance.
A D M I N I S T R A T I O N A N D P R O C E D U R E S
12-3
G. Modification of Site Plan: The Building Official may require modification of a site plan as a prerequisite for
approval. Required modifications may be more restrictive than base district regulations and may include,
but not be limited to, additional landscaping or screening, installation of erosion control measures,
improvement of access or circulation, rearrangement of structures on the site, or other modifications
deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare.
H. Term and Modification of Approval:
1. A site plan approval shall become void two years after the date of approval, unless the applicant
receives a building permit and diligently carries out development prior to the expiration of this
period.
2. The Building Official may approve an application to modify a previously approved site plan if
he/she determines that the modification does not affect findings related to the criteria set forth in
Table 12-1.
3. The Building Official may revoke a site plan approval if he/she determines that the development
is not complying with the terms and conditions of the approval. Such revocation may be
appealed to the Board of Adjustment.
4. Approval to Run with Land: An approval pursuant to this section shall run with the land until the
expiration date of such approval.
12-4 Special Use Permit Procedure
A. Purpose: The special use permit procedure provides for public review and discretionary City Council
approval for uses within zoning districts which have unusual site development or operating characteristics
that could adversely affect surrounding properties.
B. Administration: The Planning Commission shall review and evaluate each application and transmit its
recommendation to the City Council. The City Council shall review, evaluate, and act upon all applications
submitted pursuant to this procedure.
C. Application Requirements: An application for a special use permit may be filed by the owners of a
property or the owners' authorized agent with the Building Official. The application shall include the
following information:
1. Name and address of the applicant.
2. Owner, address, and legal description of the property.
3. A description of the nature and operating characteristics of the proposed use.
4. Any graphic information, including site plans, elevations, or other drawings necessary to
describe the proposed use to approving agencies.
D. Approval Process:
1. The Planning Commission, following proper notice, shall hold a public hearing on each special
use permit and, following such public hearing, shall recommend action to the City Council
2. The City Council, after publication and public hearing, shall act on the special use permit. If the
Planning Commission recommends denial of the special use permit, a majority plus one of the
City Council is required for approval. The City Council may apply any reasonable conditions to
the approval of the permit.
A D M I N I S T R A T I O N A N D P R O C E D U R E S
12-4
E. Criteria for Review: The Planning Commission and the City Council shall review and approve the site plan
based on the criteria established in Table 12-1 and conformance with applicable regulations in this Zoning
Ordinance.
TABLE 12.1: CRITERIA FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW AND SPECIAL USE PERMITS
APPLICATION TO
CRITERIA
Site
Plan
Review
Special
Use
Permit
Land Use Compatibility
Development Density Site area per unit or floor area ratio should be similar to surrounding uses
if not separated by major natural or artificial features X
Height and Scale
Height and Bulk Development should minimize differences in height and building size from
surrounding structures. Differences should be justified by urban design
considerations. X X
Setbacks Development should respect pre-existing setbacks in surrounding area.
Variations should be justified by site or operating characteristics. X X
Building Coverage Building coverage should be similar to that of surrounding development if
possible. Higher coverage should be mitigated by landscaping or site
amenities. X X
Site Development
Frontage Project frontage along a street should be similar to lot width. X X
Parking and
Internal Circulation
Parking should serve all structures with minimal conflicts
between pedestrians and vehicles. X X
All structures must be accessible to public safety vehicles. X X
Development must have access to adjacent public streets and ways.
Internal circulation should minimize conflicts and congestion at public
access points. X X
Landscaping Landscaping should be integral to the development, providing street
landscaping, breaks in uninterrupted paved areas, and buffering where
required by surrounding land uses. Parts of site with sensitive
environmental features or natural drainage ways should be preserved. X X
Building Design Architectural design and building materials should be compatible with
surrounding areas or highly visible locations. X
Operating Characteristics
Traffic Capacity Project should not reduce the existing level of traffic service on adjacent
streets. Compensating improvements will be required to mitigate impact on
street system operations. X X
External Traffic Effects Project design should direct non-residential traffic away from residential
areas. X X
Operating Hours Projects with long operating hours must minimize effects on surrounding
residential areas. X X
Outside Storage Outside storage areas must be screened from surrounding streets and less
intensive land uses. X X
Public Facilities
Sanitary Waste Disposal Developments within 500 feet of a public sanitary sewer must connect to
sewer system. Individual disposal systems, if permitted, shall not adversely
affect public health, safety, or welfare. X X
Sanitary sewer must have adequate capacity to serve development. X X
Storm Water Management Development should handle storm water adequately to prevent
overloading of public storm water management system. X X
Development should not inhibit development of other properties. X X
Development should not increase probability of erosion, flooding,
landslides, or other run-off related effects. X X
Utilities Project must be served by utilities. X X
Comprehensive Plan Projects should be consistent with the comprehensive development plan of
Plattsmouth. X
A D M I N I S T R A T I O N A N D P R O C E D U R E S
12-5
F. Scope of Approval: The City Council may, at its discretion, apply a special use permit to a specific owner
or applicant. The City Council may establish special site development or operational regulations as a
condition for approval of a special use permit.
G. Lapse and Revocation of Permit:
1. A special use permit shall become void two years after its effective date if the applicant has not
carried out development or occupancy during that period.
2. The City Council may revoke a special use permit should the operation of the use subject to
such permit violate the conditions under which the permit was granted.
H. Previously Approved Permits: Any special use approved under regulations in effect before the effective
date of this ordinance shall be considered to have a valid special use permit; subject to requirements
imposed at the time of its approval.
12-5 Amendment Procedure
A. Purpose: The amendment procedures describe the methods by which changes may be made in the text
of the Zoning Ordinance (text amendment) and/or the official boundaries of zoning districts (rezoning).
B. Initiation of Amendments:
1. Text amendments may be initiated by the Planning Commission or City Council.
2. Rezonings or changes to the zoning map may be initiated by a property owner or authorized
agent, the Planning Commission, or the City Council.
C. Rezoning Application Requirements: An application for a rezoning shall be filed with the Building Official.
The application shall include the following information:
1. Name and address of the applicant.
2. Owner, address, and legal description of the property.
3. A description of the reason for the rezoning application and the nature and operating
characteristics of the proposed use.
4. Any graphic information, including site plans, elevations, or other drawings, necessary to
describe the proposed use to approving agencies.
D. Amendment Process:
1. The Planning Commission, following ten days notice, shall hold a public hearing on each
proposed text or rezoning and, following such public hearing, shall recommend action to the City
Council.
2. The City Council, after publication and public hearing, shall act on the proposed amendment: If
the Planning Commission recommends denial of the amendment, a majority plus one of the City
Council is required for approval.
A D M I N I S T R A T I O N A N D P R O C E D U R E S
12-6
E. Required Notice and Publication: Prior to consideration of amending, supplementing, changing,
modifying, or repealing this ordinance by the governing body, notice of public hearings shall be provided
as follows:
1. Notice: A notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on or near the property upon which
action is pending. Such notice shall be not less than 18 inches in height and 24 inches in width
with a white background and black letters not less than one and one-half inches in height. Such
posted notice shall be so placed upon such premises that is easily visible from the street and
shall be so posted at least ten days before the date of such hearing. It shall be unlawful for any
person to remove, mutilate, destroy, or change such posted notice prior to such hearing.
2. Publication: At least ten days before the date of hearing, the City Clerk shall have published in a
daily newspaper having a general circulation in the City of Plattsmouth a notice of the time,
place, and subject matter of such hearing.
12-6 Extension of the Extra-Territorial Jurisdiction
Upon the automatic extension of the two-mile extra-territorial jurisdiction due to annexation, the City Council with
the recommendation of the Planning Commission, shall zone properties within the newly established jurisdiction
concurrent with adoption of the annexation ordinance. The zoning shall consider the Comprehensive Development
Plan of the City of Plattsmouth and the present use of the land.
12-7 Building Permits and Certificates of Zoning Compliance
A. Administration and Enforcement:
1. The Building Official shall administer and enforce this ordinance. The City Council may direct
other persons to assist him/her.
2. If the Building Official shall find that any of the provisions of this ordinance are being violated,
he/she shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of
the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He/she shall order discontinuance of
illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal
additions, alterations, or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or
shall take any other action authorized by this ordinance to ensure compliance with or to prevent
violation of its provisions.
B. Building Permits Required: No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or
structurally altered without a permit therefore issued by the administrative official. No building permit shall
be issued by the administrative official except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, unless
he/she receives a written order from the Board of Adjustment in the form of an administrative review,
special exception, or variance as provided by this ordinance.
C. Application for Building Permit:
1. All applications for building permits shall include plans if applicable in duplicate drawn to scale,
showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes and
locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any; and the location and dimensions of the
proposed building or alteration. The application shall include such other information as lawfully
may be required by the administrative official, including existing or proposed building or
alterations; existing or proposed uses of the building and land; the number of families,
housekeeping units, or rental units the building is designed to accommodate; conditions existing
on the lot; and such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with, and
provide for the enforcement of, this ordinance.
A D M I N I S T R A T I O N A N D P R O C E D U R E S
12-7
2. One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the administrative official, after
he/she shall have marked such copy either as approved or disapproved and attested to same by
his/her signature on such copy. One copy of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the
administrative official.
D. Certificates of Zoning Compliance for New, Altered or Non-Conforming Uses: It shall be unlawful to use
or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter
created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a
certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued therefore by the administrative official stating that
the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this ordinance.
E. Expiration of Building Permit:
1. If the work described in any building permit has not begun within 180 days from the date of
issuance thereof, said permit shall expire; it shall be cancelled by the administrative official, and
written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected.
2. If the work described in any building permit has not been substantially completed within two
years of the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and be cancelled by the
administrative official, and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together
with notice that further work as described in the cancelled permit shall not proceed unless and
until a new building permit has been obtained.
3. The expiration date of a building permit may be established for a period longer than two years if
established at the time that such permit is issued by the city. The Building Official may, at his/her
discretion extend the expiration period of the building permit.
F. Construction and Use to be as Provided in Applications, Plans, Permits, and Certificates of Zoning
Compliance: Building permits or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of plans and
applications approved by the administrative official authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction
set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Use,
arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed violation of this ordinance,
and punishable as provided by section hereof.
12-8 Schedule of Fees, Charges, and Expenses
A. The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses and a collection procedure for
building permits, certificates of zoning compliance, appeals, and other matters pertaining to this
ordinance.
B. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the administrative official, and may be altered or
amended only by the City Council.
C. Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any
application or appeal.
12-9 Board of Adjustment
A. Establishment and Procedure:
1. A Board of Adjustment is hereby established to provide relief in situations of hardship or to hear
appeals as provided by this section. A property owner may appeal an administrative decision,
notice, order, or interpretation of the Building Official if he/she claims that such decision
incorrectly interprets or applies the provisions of this ordinance.
A D M I N I S T R A T I O N A N D P R O C E D U R E S
12-8
2. Appeals shall be made to the Board of Adjustment through the office of the City Clerk in written
form as determined by the Clerk.
B. Rules and Regulations:
1. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules and regulations in accordance with this ordinance
and the laws of the State of Nebraska regarding zoning for first-class cities as amended from
time to time.
2. The concurring vote of four out of five members of such board as so composed shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any administrative
official, or to decide in favor of the appellant on any matter upon which it is required to pass
under any zoning ordinance, or to effect any variation in such ordinance.
C. Proceedings of the Board of Adjustment: The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules necessary to the
conduct of its affairs and in keeping with the provisions of this ordinance. Meetings shall be held at the call
of the chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. Such chairman, or, in his absence,
the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings and
records shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of
each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact.
12-10 Powers and Duties of the Board of Adjustment
The Board of Adjustment shall have only the following powers and duties:
A. Administrative Review: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order,
requirement, decisions or determination made by the Building Official in the enforcement of this ordinance.
B. Variances - Conditions Governing Applications – Procedures: To authorize upon appeal in specific cases
such variance from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing
to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this resolution would result in unnecessary
hardship and so that the spirit or the resolution shall be observed and substantial justice done. A variance
from the terms of this resolution shall not be granted by the Board of Adjustment unless and until:
1. A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating:
a. That strict application of the zoning ordinance will produce undue hardship.
b. That such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning
district and in the same vicinity.
c. That the authorization of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent
property and the character of the district will not be changed by the granting of the
variance.
d. That granting the variance requested is based upon reason of demonstrable and
exceptional hardship as distinguished from variations for purposes of convenience,
profit, or caprice.
2. Notice of public hearing shall be given.
3. A public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or by agent or by attorney.
4. The Board of Adjustment shall make findings that the requirements of Section 12-10 (b)(5) have
been met by the applicant for a variance.
5. The Board of Adjustment shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application
justify the granting of the variance, and that the variance will make possible the reasonable use
of the land, building, or structure.
A D M I N I S T R A T I O N A N D P R O C E D U R E S
12-9
6. The Board of Adjustment shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in
harmony with the general purpose and intent of this resolution, and will not be injurious to the
neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
C. Conditions for Grant of Variance:
1. In granting any variance, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and
safeguards in conformity with this resolution. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when
made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this
resolution and punishable under Section 12-15 of this ordinance.
2. Under no circumstances shall the Board of Adjustment grant a variance to allow a use not
permissible under the terms of this resolution in the district involved, or any use expressly or by
implication prohibited by the terms of this resolution in said district.
3. No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district and no
permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures, or buildings in other districts shall be
considered grounds for the issuance of a variance.
D. Board has Powers of Administrative Official on Appeals; Reversing Decisions of Administrative Official: In
exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board of Adjustment may, so long as such action is in
conformity with the terms of this resolution, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decisions, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of
the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken.
E. The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirements,
decision, or determination of the administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter
upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance, or to effect any variation in the application of this
ordinance.
12-11 Appeals from the Board of Adjustment
Any person or persons, or any board, taxpayer, department, board or bureau of the county aggrieved by any
decision of the Board of Adjustment may seek review of such decision by the District Court for the County in the
manner provided by the laws of the State and particularly by 19-912 R.R.S. 1943 (Reissue 1977), and amendments
thereto.
12-12 Duties of Building Official, Board of Adjustment, City Council, and Courts on Matters of Appeal
A. It is the intent of this ordinance that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented
to the administrative official, and that such questions shall be presented to the Board of Adjustment only
on appeal from the decision of the administrative official, and that recourse from the decisions of Board of
Adjustment shall be to the courts as provided by law.
B. Under this ordinance, the City Council shall have only the duties:
1. of considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or permits, or the repeal of this
ordinance as provided by law, and
2. of establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in Section 12-8 of this ordinance.
12-13 Severability Clause
Should any section or provision of this resolution be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the resolution as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared
to be unconstitutional or invalid.
A D M I N I S T R A T I O N A N D P R O C E D U R E S
12-10
12-14 Complaints Regarding Violations
Whenever a violation of this resolution occurs, or is allowed to have occurred, any person may file a written
complaint. Such complaints stating fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the Building Official. He/she
shall record properly such complaint immediately, investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this
resolution.
12-15 Penalties for Violation
Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions of any article or section of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a violation. Unless otherwise specified in the particular article or section for which the person
stands convicted of violating, the penalty for such violation shall be in any amount not to exceed one hundred
($100.00) dollars and/or imprisonment for any length of time not to exceed 30 days, at the discretion of the court.
Every 24 hours in which a violation of this chapter continues shall be considered a separate and distinct violation
(Ref. 16-246 RS Nebraska).
