Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 4-3-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-10]
§ 1-1.1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Neb. RS § 16-247, the ordinances and certain
resolutions of the City of Seward, as codified by General Code, and
consisting of the Charter1 and Chapters 1 through 410, together with an
Appendix, shall be known collectively as the "Municipal Code of the City of
Seward," hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever reference is made in any
of the ordinances and resolutions contained in the "Municipal Code of the
City of Seward" to any other ordinance or resolution appearing in said Code,
such reference shall be changed to the appropriate chapter title, chapter
number, article number or section number appearing in the Code as if such
ordinance or resolution had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-1.2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of the 1976 Code and ordinances and resolutions in force immediately
prior to the enactment of the Code by this ordinance, are intended as a
continuation of such ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the City Council of the City of Seward, and it is the intention
of said City Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of
former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be deemed repealed
or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-1.3 below.
§ 1-1.3. Repeal of inconsistent enactments.
Except as provided in § 1-1.4, Enactments saved from repeal; matters not
affected, below, all portions of the 1976 Code and ordinances, or parts of
such code or ordinances, inconsistent with the provisions contained in the
Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed as of the adoption and
filing of this ordinance; provided, however, that such repeal shall only be
to the extent of such inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the City of
Seward which is not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be
deemed to remain in full force and effect.
§ 1-1.4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-1.3 of this ordinance shall not
affect the following classes of ordinances, rights and obligations, which are
hereby expressly saved from repeal:
1. Editor's Note: The Charter is on file in the City offices.
§ 1-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1.4
1:3
§ 1-1.5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of this
ordinance or of any ordinance or resolution included in this Code now
or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate
the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof directly
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the City of Seward prior to the effective date of
this ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement
of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the City of Seward
or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the City of Seward.
D. Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement
or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the City of Seward.
E. Any ordinance or resolution of the City of Seward providing for the
laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening,
establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or
other public place within the City of Seward or any portion thereof.
F. Any ordinance or resolution of the City of Seward appropriating money
or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money
or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the City of
Seward or other instruments or evidence of the City's indebtedness.
G. Ordinances or resolutions authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property, or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any ordinance relating to salaries and compensation.
K. Any ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for City employees.
M. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the City.
N. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to September 19, 2017.
§ 1-1.4 SEWARD CODE § 1-1.5
1:4
involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-1.6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Seward and shall remain there for use and examination
by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this
ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the City Clerk
of the City of Seward by impressing thereon the Seal of the City of Seward,
and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said City Clerk
to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all
times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication of this
ordinance, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-1.7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Municipal Code of
the City of Seward" or any new ordinances or resolutions, when enacted
or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the City to be
a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code so
that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include
such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be published as amendments and
supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this ordinance shall affect the
status of any ordinance or resolution contained herein, and such ordinances
or resolutions may be amended, deleted or changed from time to time as
the City Council deems desirable.
§ 1-1.8. Code to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the City of Seward required to be
filed in the office of the City Clerk for use by the public. All changes in
said Code and all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the City Council
subsequent to the enactment of this ordinance in such form as to indicate
the intention of said City Council to be a part of said Code shall, when finally
enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of copies
of such changes, ordinances or resolutions until such changes, ordinances
or resolutions are published as supplements to said Code book.
§ 1-1.9. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who alters or tampers with the Code of the City of Seward in any
manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the City of Seward
to be misrepresented thereby, or who violates any other provision of this
§ 1-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1.9
1:5
ordinance, shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty,
of the Municipal Code.
§ 1-1.10. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances and resolutions for
publication as the Code of the City of Seward, no changes in the
meaning or intent of such ordinances and resolutions have been made,
except as provided for in Subsection B hereof. In addition, certain
grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive changes were
made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the intention of
the City Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as
if the ordinances and resolutions had been previously formally amended
to read as such.
B. In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A
attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become
effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter and section
number references are to the ordinances and resolutions as they have
been renumbered and appear in the Code.)2
2. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-1.10B, the chapters, parts and sections that were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, repealed) 4-3-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-10." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in
the City offices.
§ 1-1.9 SEWARD CODE § 1-1.10
1:6
ARTICLE II
Corporate Seal
[Adopted as Ch. 1, Art. 5, of the 1976 Code]
§ 1-2.1. Custody; inscription.
The Official Corporate Seal of the municipality shall be kept in the office of
the Municipal Clerk, and shall bear the following inscription: "Seal, City of
Seward, Nebraska, Incorporated April 5, 1870." (Neb. RS 16-115)
§ 1-2.2. Use.
The Municipal Clerk shall affix an impression of the Official Seal to all
warrants, licenses, permits, ordinances, and all other official papers issued
by order of the governing body and countersigned by the Municipal Clerk.
§ 1-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2.2
1:7

ARTICLE III
General Penalty
[Adopted as Ch. 1, Art. 13, of the 1976 Code]
§ 1-3.1. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-17-1996 by Ord. No.
31-963]
Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions of this Code
shall be deemed guilty of a violation of a municipal ordinance. Unless
otherwise specified in the particular article or section which the person
stands convicted of violating, the penalty for such violation shall be in any
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs; and
in default of said payment, the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during
or on which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.(Neb. RS 16-246)
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 1-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3.1
1:9

ARTICLE IV
Enforcement and Arrest
[Adopted as Ch. 6, Art. 6, of the 1976 Code; amended 2-21-1995 by
Ord. No. 17-95; 11-17-1998 by Ord. No. 46-98; 8-4-2004 by Ord. No.
18-04]
§ 1-4.1. Authority to enforce laws.
Every municipal law enforcement officer has the power and authority to
enforce the laws of this state and the municipality or otherwise perform
the functions of that office anywhere within his or her primary jurisdiction.
"Primary jurisdiction" means that geographic area within the territorial
limits of the municipality.
§ 1-4.2. Authority beyond primary jurisdiction.
Any municipal law enforcement officer who is within this state, but beyond
his or her primary jurisdiction, has the power and authority to enforce
the laws of this state or any legal ordinance of any city or incorporated
village or otherwise perform the functions of his or her office, including
the authority to arrest and detain suspects, as if enforcing the laws or
performing the functions within his or her primary jurisdiction in the
following cases:
A. Any municipal law enforcement officer, if in a fresh attempt to
apprehend a person suspected of committing a felony, may follow such
person into any other jurisdiction in this state and there arrest and
detain such person and return such person to the officer's primary
jurisdiction;
B. Any municipal law enforcement officer, if in a fresh attempt to
apprehend a person suspected of committing a misdemeanor or a traffic
infraction, may follow such person anywhere in an area within 25 miles
of the boundaries of the officer's primary jurisdiction and there arrest
and detain such person and return such person to the officer's primary
jurisdiction;
C. Any municipal law enforcement officer has such enforcement and arrest
and detention authority when responding to a call in which a local,
state, or federal law enforcement officer is in need of assistance. A "law
enforcement office in need of assistance" shall mean:
(1) A law enforcement officer whose life is in danger; or
(2) A law enforcement officer who needs assistance in making an
arrest and the suspect:
(a) Will not be apprehended unless immediately arrested;
(b) May cause injury to himself or herself or others or damage to
property unless immediately arrested; or
§ 1-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4.2
1:11
§ 1-4.3. Drug or alcohol violations.4
When probable cause exists to believe that a person is operating or in
the actual physical control of any motor vehicle, motorboat, personal
watercraft, or aircraft while under the influence of alcoholic liquor or of
any drug or otherwise in violation of Neb. RS 28-1465, 28-1466, 28-1472,
37-1254.01, 37-1254.02, 60-4, 163, 60-4, 164, 60-6, 196, 60-6, 197, 60-6,
211.01, or 60-6, 211.02, a municipal law enforcement officer has the power
and authority to do any of the following or any combination thereof:
§ 1-4.4. Disasters and emergencies.
If municipal law enforcement personnel are rendering aid in their law
enforcement capacity outside the limits of the municipality in the event of
a disaster, emergency, or civil defense emergency or in connection with
any program of practice or training for such disaster, emergency, or civil
defense emergency when such program is conducted or participated in by
the Nebraska Emergency Management Agency or with any other related
training program, the law enforcement personnel have the power and
(c) May destroy or conceal evidence of the commission of a crime;
and
D. If the municipality, under the provisions of the Interlocal Cooperation
Act (Neb. RS 13-801 et seq.) or the Joint Public Agency Act (Neb. RS
13-2501 et seq.), enters into contract with any other municipality or
county for law enforcement services or joint law enforcement services,
law enforcement personnel may have such enforcement authority
within the jurisdiction of each of the participating political subdivisions
if provided for in the agreement. Unless otherwise provided in the
agreement, the municipality shall provide liability insurance coverage
for its own law enforcement personnel as provided in Neb. RS 13-1802.
A. Transport such person to a facility outside of the law enforcement
officer's primary jurisdiction for the appropriate chemical testing of the
person;
B. Administer outside of the law enforcement officer's primary jurisdiction
any post-arrest test advisement to the person; or
C. With respect to such person, perform other procedures or functions
outside of the law enforcement officer's primary jurisdiction which are
directly and solely related to enforcing the laws that concern a person
operating or being in the actual physical control of any motor vehicle,
motorboat, personal watercraft, or aircraft while under the influence of
alcoholic liquor or of any other drug or otherwise in violation of Neb. RS
28-1465, 28-1466, 28-1472, 37-1254.01, 37-1254.02, 60-4, 163, 60-4,
164, 60-6, 196, 60-6, 197, 60-6, 211.01, or 60-6, 211.02. (Neb. RS
29-215)
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 1-4.2 SEWARD CODE § 1-4.4
1:12
authority to enforce the laws of this state or any legal ordinances or
resolutions of the local government where they are rendering aid or
otherwise perform the functions of their office, including the authority to
arrest and detain suspects, as if enforcing the laws or performing the
functions within their primary jurisdiction. The municipality shall self-insure
or contract for insurance against any liability for personal injuries or
property damage that may be incurred by it or by its personnel as the result
of any movement made pursuant to this section.
(Neb. RS 81-829.65, 29-215)
§ 1-4.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4.4
1:13
Chapter 7
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
§ 1-4.4 SEWARD CODE § 1-4.4
1:14
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 7-1.1. Corporate existence; governing laws.
The City of Seward, Nebraska is hereby found and declared to be a City of
more than 5,000 persons. The municipality shall be governed by the laws of
Nebraska regulating Cities of the First Class. (Neb. RS 16-101)
§ 7-1.2. Service of process. [Amended 8-21-1984 by Ord. No. 16-84]
All process affecting the municipality may be served by personal, residence,
or certified mail service upon the Chief Executive Official or the Clerk. [Neb.
RS 16-115, 25-510.02(2)]
§ 7-1.3. Powers.5
The municipality is a body corporate and politic. It shall have the power to
sue and be sued; to purchase, lease, lease with option to buy or acquire by
gift or devise, and to hold real and personal property within or without the
corporate limits of the municipality, and real estate sold for taxes for the
use of the municipality in such manner and upon such terms and conditions
as may be deemed in the best interests of the municipality; to sell and
convey, exchange, or lease any real or personal property owned by the City,
including park land, in such manner and upon such terms and conditions
as may be deemed in the best interests of the City, except that real estate
owned by the City may be conveyed without consideration to the State
of Nebraska for state armory sites or, if acquired for state armory sites,
shall be conveyed in the manner strictly as provided in Neb. RS 18-1001
to 18-1006; to make all contracts and do all other acts in relation to the
property and concerns of the City necessary to the exercise of its corporate
powers; and to exercise such other and further powers as may be conferred
by law. (Neb. RS 16-201)
§ 7-1.4. Codification of ordinances.
The municipality shall have the power to revise the ordinances of the
municipality from time to time and publish the same in book form. The
revision shall be evidenced by a general codification ordinance which shall
embrace all ordinances preserved as changed or added to and perfected by
revision and shall embrace all the ordinances of every nature preserved,
and be a repeal of all ordinances in conflict with such revision. All
ordinances in force at the time of the codification shall continue in force for
the purpose of all rights acquired, fines, penalties, forfeitures, and liabilities
incurred. (Neb. RS 16-247)
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 7-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-1.5
1:15
§ 7-1.5. Emergency Succession Act.
In accordance with the term and conditions of the Nebraska General
Emergency Succession Act, the governing body hereby declares that it
is necessary and advisable to invoke the provisions of said Act in the
municipality. The provisions of the Act are binding on the office of the
municipal government, whether now in office or hereafter elected or
appointed. (Neb. RS 84-1101 through 84-1117)
§ 7-1.5 SEWARD CODE § 7-1.5
1:16
Chapter 12
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cemetery — See Ch. 19.
Meetings — See Ch. 78.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 85.
Personnel — See Ch. 95.
§ 7-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-1.5
1:17

ARTICLE I
Standing Committees
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Art. I, of the 1976 Code]
§ 12-1.1. Aging Services Commission.6 [Added 6-18-1991 by Ord.
No. 16-91; amended 8-6-1991 by Ord. No. 21-91; 2-2-1999 by Ord.
No. 2-99; 2-20-2001 by Ord. No. 4-01; 2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 1-09]
A. It is the purpose of this section to authorize provision for a varied
program of group activities and services for senior citizens, and to
develop the organizational and financial support within the community
to ensure long-term stability and continuity of said program by the
utilization of all federal and state grants and funding available, and fees
and assessments from the participants of the program.
B. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, shall appoint the
initial Seward Aging Services Commission, consisting of nine members,
five of whom will serve from the appointment through the first Tuesday
in January, 1993; and four of whom shall serve from the date of their
appointment through the first Tuesday in January, 1994. Thereafter, the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, shall appoint all
future Commission members for a term of two years. No member shall
serve more than two consecutive terms. One member of the Seward
Aging Services Commission shall be a member of the City Council,
which member shall have no voting privileges.
C. The Seward Aging Services Commission shall serve without
compensation. At the time of its initial meeting following appointment
of its members, and on its first meeting in January of each succeeding
year, the Commission shall organize by election of a Chairperson,
Secretary and any additional officer deemed necessary, and they shall
review their duties as members of the Commission. No member may
serve in more than one office. The Secretary shall keep full and correct
minutes and record of all meetings and file the same with the Municipal
Clerk, where they shall be available for public inspection within 10
working days, or prior to the next convened meeting, whichever occurs
earlier. An additional 10 days shall be allowed for providing the minutes
in the event of the Secretary's serious illness or an emergency which
prevents him/her from writing such minutes.
D. A majority of the Seward Aging Services Commission voting members
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. It shall meet
on the second Tuesday of each month or at such other time as shall be
determined by the Commission. Special meetings may be held upon the
call of the Chairperson or any four members of the Commission, but
notice of such meeting shall be communicated to all members of the
Commission at least 48 hours prior to special meetings.
6. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 2-102 of the 1976 Code, Assignment of pending items and
subjects, as amended, which immediately preceded this section, was repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 12-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.1
1:19
§ 12-1.2. Personnel, Finance and Audit Committee. [Added
6-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2014-15]
E. The City Administrator shall hire all employees of the Seward Aging
Services Commission, including the Manager. The City Administrator,
when screening, interviewing, and hiring all employees of the Seward
Aging Services Commission, including the Manager, shall consult with
and seek input from the Chairperson of the Seward Aging Services
Commission or a person designated by the Commission. The day-to-day
supervision of employed personnel shall be the shared responsibility of
the Seward Aging Services Commission Chairperson, or a person
designated by the Commission, and the City Administrator. All actions
of the Seward Aging Services Commission shall be subject to the review
and supervision of the governing body.
F. The Commission may establish appropriate policies, plans and
proposed budgets for operation of the program, utilizing all of the
available federal and state funding, to make the program as selfsupporting
as possible from such funds and from fees and assessments
from citizens taking part in such programs.
G. All funds and financing, including gifts, grants, fees, and assessments,
shall be maintained in an account or accounts of the City of Seward for
the use and benefit of the senior citizens program.
A. The Mayor shall appoint members and Chairman of such standing
committee as the City Council may by ordinance create. The
membership of such standing committee may be changed at any time by
the Mayor. The Mayor shall be a member ex officio of the standing
committee. Upon approval of this article, the members of the standing
committee shall be appointed by the Mayor to serve until the next
organizational meeting. Thereafter all appointments shall be made by
the Mayor at the organizational meeting. Members of the standing
committee shall thereafter serve for a term of two years.
B. The following standing committee is hereby created: Personnel,
Finance and Audit Committee.
C. There will be four Councilmembers appointed to this committee.
Committee meetings will be open to the attendance of the public. An
agenda will be prepared and shall contain the time and specific place
for each meeting and with enumeration of the agenda subjects. The
Committee shall have the right to modify the agenda to include items of
an emergency nature only.
D. The City Clerk shall be responsible for posting an agenda and recording
the proceedings of the Committee meetings. The Mayor or City Council
shall be responsible for determining the necessity for a Committee
meeting and the agenda items.
§ 12-1.1 SEWARD CODE § 12-1.2
1:20
E. Responsibilities of the Personnel, Finance and Audit Committee may
include, but not be limited to, claim review, audit reviews and selection
of firms, personnel manual changes and updates, classification and pay
plans and any other subject which may be referred to it.
F. The Committee is fact-finding only and they will report to the Council
for final determination.
§ 12-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.2
1:21

ARTICLE II
Library Board
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Art. 2, §§ 2-201 through 2-203, of the 1976 Code]
§ 12-2.1. Membership, operation and duties. [Amended 10-6-1981
by Ord. No. 35-81; 6-1-1993 by Ord. No. 20-93; 6-17-1997 by Ord.
No. 25-97; 2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 1-09]
The Library Board shall be appointed by the Mayor with a majority vote
of the members of the governing body. The Board shall consist of five
members, who shall be residents of the municipality. The members of
the Library Board shall serve a four-year term of office as specified by
Nebraska Statutes. The Board shall serve without compensation and may
be required, in the discretion of the governing body, to give a bond in
a sum set by resolution of the governing body, and conditioned upon the
faithful performance of its duties. At the time of the Board's first meeting
in July of each year, the Board shall organize by selecting from its number
a Chairman and Secretary and they shall review their duties as members
of the Board. It shall be the duty of the Secretary to keep the full and
correct minutes and records of all meetings, and to file the same with
the Municipal Clerk, where they shall be available for public inspection
within 10 working days, or prior to the next convened meeting, whichever
occurs earlier. An additional 10 days shall be allowed for providing the
minutes in the event of the Secretary's serious illness or an emergency
which prevents him/her from writing such minutes. A majority of the Board
members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The
Board shall meet at such times as it may designate. Special meetings
may be held upon the call of the Chairman, or any three members of the
Board. The City Administrator or his/her designee shall serve as an exofficio
member of the Board. It shall be the duty of the Board to have
general charge of the Municipal Library and to establish appropriate rules
and regulations for the general operation and use of the same. The City
Administrator shall have supervisory authority over all employees of the
Library, including the Library Director. All actions of the Board shall be
subject to the review and supervision of the governing body. The Board
shall be responsible for making such reports and performing such additional
duties as the governing body may designate from time to time. No member
of the governing body shall serve as a member of the Library Board while
serving a term of office as a member of the governing body. No member
of the Library Board shall serve in the capacity of both the Chairman and
Secretary of the Board. (Neb. RS 51-202)
§ 12-2.2. Library operation and funding. [Amended 6-17-1997 by
Ord. No. 26-97]
The municipality owns and manages the Municipal Library through the
Library Board and City Administrator. The governing body, for the purpose
of defraying the cost of management, purchases, improvements and
maintenance of the Library, may each year levy a tax not exceeding the
maximum limit prescribed by state law, on the actual valuation of all real
§ 12-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-2.2
1:23
estate and personal property within the municipality that is subject to
taxation. The revenue from said tax shall be known as the "Library Fund"
and shall include all gifts, grants, deeds of conveyance, bequests, or other
valuable income-producing personal property and real estate from any
sources for the purpose of endowing the Municipal Library. The Library
Fund shall at all times be in the custody of the Municipal Treasurer. (Neb.
RS 51-201, 51-202, 51-211)
§ 12-2.3. Annual report. [Amended 4-5-2005 by Ord. No. 20-05]
The Library Board shall, on or before the second Monday in February in
each year, make a report to the City Council of the condition of its trust
on the last day of the prior fiscal year. The report shall show all money
received and credited or expended; the number of materials held, including
books, video and audio materials, software programs, and materials in
other formats; the number of periodical subscriptions on record, including
newspapers; the number of materials added and the number withdrawn
from the collection during the year; the number of materials circulated
during the year; and other statistics, information, and suggestions as the
Library Board may deem of general interest or as the City Council may
require. The report shall be verified by affidavit of the President and
Secretary of the Library Board. (Neb. RS 51-213)
§ 12-2.2 SEWARD CODE § 12-2.3
1:24
ARTICLE III
Planning Commission
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Art. 3, of the 1976 Code; amended 3-6-1979 by
Ord. No. 1158; 11-2-1993 by Ord. No. 43-93; 8-2-1994 by Ord. No.
42-94; 1-16-1996 by Ord. No. 47-95; 2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 1-09]
§ 12-3.1. Membership; terms; vacancies.
The Planning Commission shall consist of nine regular members who shall
represent, insofar as is possible, the different professions or occupations
in the municipality and shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the
approval of a majority vote of the members elected to the City Council.
Two of the regular members may be residents of the area over which
the municipality is authorized to exercise extraterritorial zoning and
subdivision regulation. When there is a sufficient number of residents in
the area over which the municipality exercises extraterritorial zoning and
subdivision regulation, one regular member of the Commission shall be
a resident from such area, if it is determined by the City Council that a
sufficient number of residents reside in the area subject to extraterritorial
zoning and subdivision regulation, and no such resident is a regular
member of the Commission, the first available vacancy on the Commission
shall be filled by the appointment of such an individual. For purposes of
this section, a "sufficient number of residents" shall mean 1,000 residents.
The term of each regular member shall be three years, except that three
regular members of the first Commission shall serve for terms of one year,
three for terms of two years, and three for terms of three years. All regular
members shall hold office until their successors are appointed. Any member
may, after a public hearing before the City Council, be removed by the
Mayor with the consent of a majority vote of the members elected to the City
Council for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office, or other
good and sufficient cause. Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the
expiration of term shall be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired portion of
the term.
§ 12-3.2. Compensation; organization; powers and duties.
A. All regular members of the Commission shall serve without
compensation and shall hold no other municipal office except when
appointed to serve on the Board of Adjustment as provided in Neb. RS
19-908. All members of the Commission may be required, in the
discretion of the Mayor and City Council, to give bond in a sum set by
resolution of the City Council, and conditioned upon the faithful
performance of their duties. At the time of the Commission's first
meeting in June of each year, the Commission shall organize by
selecting from its membership a Chairman and Secretary, and they shall
review their duties as members of the Commission. It shall be the duty
of the Secretary to keep the full and correct minutes and records of all
meetings and to file the same with the Municipal Clerk, where they
shall be available for public inspection within 10 working days, or prior
to the next convened meeting, whichever occurs earlier. An additional
§ 12-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-3.2
1:25
§ 12-3.3. Alternate members.
The Mayor, with the approval of a majority vote of the elected members of
the City Council, shall appoint one alternate member to the Commission.
The alternate member shall serve without compensation and shall hold no
other municipal office. The term of the alternate member shall be three
years, and he or she shall hold office until his or her successor is appointed
and approved. The alternate member may be removed from office in the
same manner as a regular member. If the alternate member position
becomes vacant other than through the expiration of the term, the vacancy
shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term by the Mayor with the
approval of a majority vote of the elected members of the City Council. The
alternate member may attend any meeting and may serve as a voting and
participating member of the Commission at any time when less than the full
number of regular Commission members is present and capable of voting.
(Neb. RS 19-924 through 19-929)
10 days shall be allowed for providing the minutes in the event of the
Secretary's serious illness or an emergency which prevents him/her
from writing such minutes. The Commission shall be funded by the
City Council from time to time out of the general fund. A number of
Commissioners equal to a majority of the number of regular members
appointed to the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of any business. Special meetings may be held upon the call
of the Chairman, or any three members of the Commission.
B. It shall be the duty of the Commission to make and adopt plans for the
physical development of the municipality, including any areas outside
its boundaries which, in the Commission's judgment, bear relation to
the planning of the municipality. All actions by the Commission shall be
subject to the review and supervision of the Mayor and City Council.
Recommendations from the Commission shall be received by the City
Council within 60 days after the Commission begins consideration of a
matter relating to the Comprehensive Development Plan, capital
improvements, building codes, subdivision development, the
annexation of territory, or zoning. The Commission shall be responsible
for making such reports and performing such other duties as the Mayor
and City Council may, from time to time, designate.
C. No member of the City Council or other municipal official, except where
otherwise specifically provided, shall serve as a member of the
Commission while serving any other term of office. No member of the
Commission shall serve in the capacity of both the Chairman and
Secretary of the Commission.
§ 12-3.2 SEWARD CODE § 12-3.3
1:26
ARTICLE IV
Parks and Recreation Commissioners
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Art. 5, §§ 2-501 and 2-502, of the 1976 Code]
§ 12-4.1. Membership, operation, powers and duties. [Amended
4-6-1993 by Ord. No. 11-93; 9-19-1995 by Ord. No. 37-95; 6-17-1997
by Ord. No. 27-97; 2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 1-09]
A. The governing body shall appoint the Board of Parks and Recreation
Commissioners. The Board shall consist of nine members, who shall be
residents of the municipality. The members of the Board shall serve a
three-year term of office unless reappointed. The Board shall serve
without compensation and may be required, in the discretion of the
governing body, to give a bond in a sum set by resolution of the
governing body, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of its
duties. At the time of the Board's first meeting in January of each year,
the Board shall organize by selecting from its number a Chairman and
Secretary and they shall review their duties as members of the Board. It
shall be the duty of the Secretary to keep the full and correct minutes
and records of all meetings, and to file the same with the Municipal
Clerk, where they shall be available for public inspection within 10
working days, or prior to the next convened meeting, whichever occurs
earlier. An additional 10 days shall be allowed for providing the minutes
in the event of the Secretary's serious illness or an emergency which
prevents him/her from writing such minutes. A majority of the Board
members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The
Board shall meet at such times as it may designate. The City
Administrator or his/her designee shall serve as an ex-officio member of
the Board. It shall be the duty of the Public Works Superintendent to
take the immediate charge of all parks belonging to the municipality. All
recreational facilities shall be under the direct charge of the Recreation
Director. The municipal swimming pool shall be under the immediate
charge of the Recreation Director and Water/Wastewater
Superintendent. The Board shall develop and recommend to the Mayor,
City Council and City Administrator appropriate rules and regulations
for the use, care and general operation of the same. The Board shall
also make recommendations regarding recreation program planning
and fees, and shall study and promote needs for park and recreation
facility improvements. All employees of the municipality doing work in
or for the municipal park shall be under the supervision and direction of
the Public Works Superintendent.7
B. The Park and Recreation Commissioners shall make recommendations
to the Mayor, Council and City Administrator on contracts of any nature
involving an expenditure in accordance with the policies of the City
Council, and to the extent that funds may be provided for such
purposes.
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 12-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-4.1
1:27
§ 12-4.2. Park operation and funding.
The municipality owns and operates the municipal parks and other
recreational areas through the Board of Parks and Recreation
Commissioners. The governing body, for the purpose of defraying the cost
of the care, management, and maintenance of the municipal park, may
each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state
law, on the actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within
the corporate limits that is subject to taxation. The revenue from said tax
shall be known as the "Parks and Recreation Fund" and shall remain in the
custody of the Municipal Treasurer.
C. The Board shall be responsible for making such reports and performing
such other duties as the governing body may, from time to time,
designate. No member of the governing body shall serve as a member
of the Parks and Recreation Commission while serving a term of office
as a member of the governing body.
(Neb. RS 16-696)
§ 12-4.1 SEWARD CODE § 12-4.2
1:28
ARTICLE V
Cemetery Board
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Art. 6, § 2-601, of the 1976 Code; amended
6-17-1997 by Ord. No. 28-97; 2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 1-09]
§ 12-5.1. Membership.
The governing body shall appoint the Cemetery Board which shall consist
of six members who are residents of the municipality and who shall serve
without compensation for a term of three years. Two members shall be
appointed each year and may be required, in the discretion of the governing
body, to give a bond in a sum set by resolution of the governing body, and
conditioned upon the faithful performance of their duties. (Neb. RS 12-401
through 12-403)
§ 12-5.2. Officers.
At the first meeting in June of each year, the Board shall organize by
selecting from its membership a Chairman and Secretary, and they shall
review their duties as members of the Board. The Secretary shall keep the
full and correct minutes and records of all meetings and file the same with
the Municipal Clerk, where they shall be available for public inspection
within 10 working days, or prior to the next convened meeting, whichever
occurs earlier. An additional 10 days shall be allowed for providing the
minutes in the event of the Secretary's serious illness or an emergency
which prevents him/her from writing such minutes.
§ 12-5.3. Operation; powers and duties.
A majority of the Board members shall constitute a quorum for the purpose
of doing business. The Board shall meet at such times as it may designate.
Special meetings may be held upon the call of the Chairman or any three
members of the Board. The City Administrator or his/her designee shall
serve as an ex-officio member of the Board. The management and
supervision of the municipal cemetery shall be under the direct control
of the Public Works Superintendent. The Board shall be responsible for
the general operation and care of the municipal cemetery with the power
and authority to limit and regulate the number of cemetery lots that may
be owned by the same person; to prescribe rules for enclosing, adorning,
and erecting monuments and tombstones on cemetery lots; and to prohibit
any diverse or improper use thereof; provided no religious tests shall be
made as to the ownership of lots, the burial therein, and the ornamentation
of graves. The Board shall develop and recommend to the Mayor, City
Council and City Administrator rules and regulations for the proper use of
the cemetery and prescribe penalties and fines for violations thereof. The
Board shall also study and recommend the development, expansion and
improvement of cemeteries. All revenue received from the sale of lots, gifts,
or by devise shall be used for the care, management and administration of
the cemetery. All actions of the Board shall be subject to the review and
supervision of the governing body and it shall be responsible for making
§ 12-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-5.3
1:29
such reports and performing such additional duties as the governing body
may designate.
§ 12-5.4. Limitations on membership.
No member of the governing body shall serve as a member of the Board
while serving a term of office as a member of the governing body. No
member of the Cemetery Board shall hold more than one Cemetery Board
office.
§ 12-5.3 SEWARD CODE § 12-5.4
1:30
ARTICLE VI
Housing Authority
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Art. 7, of the 1976 Code]
§ 12-6.1. Membership, operation and duties.
A. The governing body shall appoint five persons who shall constitute the
Housing Authority, and such persons shall be called the
"Commissioners." One Commissioner shall be appointed each year.
Each Commissioner shall serve a five-year term of office or until his
successor is duly appointed; provided that all vacancies shall be filled
for the unexpired terms. A certificate of the appointment or
reappointment of any Commissioner shall be filed with the Municipal
Clerk, and such certificate shall be conclusive evidence of the proper
appointment of such Commissioner. A Commissioner shall receive no
compensation for his services, but he shall be entitled to the necessary
expenses, including travel expenses, incurred in discharge of his duties.
Three Commissioners shall constitute a quorum of the Authority for the
purpose of conducting its business, exercising its powers, and for all
other purposes. Action may be taken by the Authority upon the vote of
the majority of the Commissioners present unless in any case the
bylaws of the Authority shall require a larger number. The
Commissioners shall elect a Chairman and Vice-Chairman from among
the Commissioners and shall have the power to employ an Executive
Director, who shall serve as ex-officio Secretary of the Authority. The
Authority may also employ legal counsel, or it may call upon the chief
law officer of the municipality, for such services as it may require. It
may employ technical experts and such other officers, agents, and
employees as it may require and shall determine their qualifications,
duties, compensations, and terms of office. The Authority may delegate
such other powers and duties to its agents or employees as it may deem
proper. During his tenure, and for one year thereafter, no
Commissioner, officer, or employee of the Municipal Housing Authority
shall voluntarily acquire any interest, direct or indirect, in any project
or in any property included or planned to be included in any project, or
in any contract or proposed contract relating to any housing project. If
any such Commissioner, officer, or employee involuntarily acquires any
such interest, or voluntarily or involuntarily acquired any such interest
prior to appointment or employment as Commissioner, officer, or
employee, he shall immediately disclose his interest in writing to the
Authority, and such disclosure shall be entered upon the minutes of the
Authority, and he shall not participate in any action by the Authority
relating to the property or contract in which he has any such interest;
provided that nothing herein shall apply to the acquisition of any
interest in notes or bonds of the Authority issued in connection with any
housing project, or to the execution of agreements by banking
institutions for deposit or handling of funds in connection with a project
or to act as trustee under any trust indenture, or to utility services, the
rates for which are fixed or controlled by a governmental agency. The
§ 12-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-6.1
1:31
§ 12-6.2. Continued existence of prior housing agency. [Added
11-21-2000 by Ord. No. 54-00]
Mayor may remove a Commissioner for neglect of duty or misconduct
in office in the manner prescribed hereinafter. The Mayor shall send
a notice of removal to such Commissioner, which notice shall contain
a statement containing the charges against him. Unless such
Commissioner files with the Clerk, within 10 days from the receipt of
such notice, a request for a hearing before the governing body, the
Commissioner shall be deemed as removed from office. If a request for
a hearing is filed with the Clerk, the governing body of the municipality
shall hold a hearing at which the Commissioner shall have the right to
appear in person or by counsel and the governing body shall determine
whether the removal shall be disapproved or upheld. If the removal is
disapproved, the Commissioner shall continue to hold his position.
B. The Housing Authority shall keep an accurate account of all its
activities and of all its receipts and disbursements and shall make a
report to the governing body on all such information.
(Neb. RS 71-1572 et seq.)
A. The local housing authority established under prior state law and in
existence on January 1, 2000, shall have continued existence as a
housing agency under the Nebraska Housing Agency Act (Neb. RS
71-1572 et seq.).
B. The local housing agency shall conduct its operations consistent with
the Nebraska Housing Agency Act. All property, rights in land,
buildings, records, and equipment and any funds, money, receipts, or
assets of the authority belong to the agency as successor. All
obligations, debts, commitments, and liabilities of the authority are
obligations, debts, commitments, and liabilities of the successor agency.
C. Any resolution by the authority and any action taken by the authority
prior to January 1, 2000, with regard to any project or program which is
to completed within or to be conducted for a twelve-month period
following January 1, 2000, and which resolution or action is lawful
under state law as it existed prior to January 1, 2000, is a lawful
resolution or action of the successor agency and binding upon the
successor agency and enforceable by or against the agency,
notwithstanding that such resolution or action is inconsistent with, not
authorized by, or prohibited under the provisions of the Nebraska
Housing Agency Act.
D. All Commissioners of the local housing agency and all officers, legal
counsel, technical experts, directors, and other appointees or
employees of the agency holding office or employment by virtue of any
such prior law on January 1, 2000, shall be deemed to have been
appointed or employed under the Nebraska Housing Agency Act.
§ 12-6.1 SEWARD CODE § 12-6.2
1:32
(Neb. RS 71-1576)
§ 12-6.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-6.2
1:33

ARTICLE VII
Plumbing Examiners
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Art. 8, of the 1976 Code]
§ 12-7.1. Membership; authority to create and enforce rules and
regulations. [Amended 10-19-1982 by Ord. No. 34-828]
There is hereby created an Examining Board for Plumbers, which shall
consist of four members, to be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the City Council, one of whom shall be the Chief Health Officer
of the City, the Plumbing Inspector of the City, one journeyman plumber
and one master plumber. The members of the Examining Board shall hold
office for a period of three years, and shall serve without pay, and shall be
subject to removal from office for cause by the District Court of Seward
County, Nebraska. Should a vacancy occur, a new member to fill such a
vacancy shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the City Council. All members of the Examining Board shall be residents
or live within the zoning jurisdiction of the City. The Plumbing Inspector,
journeyman plumber and master plumber members shall be licensed
plumbers. The Plumbing Inspector shall be Secretary of the Examining
Board and shall have custody of all records of the same. Each member of
the Board shall give bond in a sum set from time to time by the City Council.
The Examining Board is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to
prescribe, amend and enforce rules and regulations pertaining to this Code
for the registration of plumbers. (Neb. RS 18-1901 through 18-1909)
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 12-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-7.1
1:35

ARTICLE VIII
Airport Authority
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Art. 9, of the 1976 Code]
§ 12-8.1. Membership; scope of authority. [Amended 10-4-1988 by
Ord. No. 21-88]
The Airport Authority Board shall have the full and exclusive jurisdiction
and control over all facilities owned or hereafter acquired by the
municipality for the purpose of aviation operation, air navigation, and air
safety operation. The Board is a body corporate and politic, constituting
a public corporation, and an agency of the municipality. The Board shall
consist of five members. Members of the Board shall be nominated and
elected in the manner provided by law for the election of other elected
officials and shall take office at the same time as the officers of the City in
each municipal election year. Members of the Board shall be residents of the
municipality and shall serve a term of six years. Two members of the Board
shall be elected in each municipal election year; provided that in each third
election year, one member only shall be elected to the Airport Authority
Board. Any vacancy on the Board resulting from any other cause than the
expiration of a term of office shall be filled by temporary appointment by
the Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, until a successor can
be elected at the next general municipal election to serve the unexpired
portion of the term. A member of the Board may be removed from office
for incompetence, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. An action for
the removal of such officer may be brought, upon resolution of the City
Council, in the District Court of the County. The Board shall have such
other powers and duties as may be prescribed by state law. (Neb. RS 3-501
through 3-514)
§ 12-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-8.1
1:37

ARTICLE IX
Civic Center Commission
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Art. 10, of the 1976 Code; amended 2-17-2009 by
Ord. No. 1-09; 7-19-2011 by Ord. No. 12-11]
§ 12-9.1. Creation and purpose.
A Civic Center Commission of the City is hereby created for the purpose of
administering, managing, supervising, and operating a Civic Center for the
City of Seward, Nebraska.
§ 12-9.2. Membership.
The Commission shall consist of seven members who shall be appointed by
the Mayor, by and with the approval of a three-fourths vote of the Council,
and shall serve without compensation. The term of each member shall be
three years, except that two members of the first Commission to be so
appointed shall serve for a term of one year, two for a term of two years,
and three for a term of three years. All members shall hold office until their
successors are appointed. All members may, after a public hearing before
the Council, be removed by the Mayor, by and with the consent of a threefourths
vote of the Council for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance
in office, or for good cause. Vacancies occurring otherwise than through
the expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor.
All members of the Commission shall hold no other municipal office which
would, in the determination of the Mayor and Council, conflict with duties
of the Commissioner herein provided.
§ 12-9.3. Officers.
The officers of the Commission shall be a Chairperson, Secretary, and
Vice-Chairperson, all of whom shall be elected from its members, and the
Commission may create and fill such other offices as it may determine to
be needed to carry out its intended purposes. The term of the Chairperson
shall be one year, and such person shall be eligible for re-election. At
the first meeting of each year, the Board shall organize by selecting from
its membership a Chairman and Secretary, and they shall review their
duties as members of the Board. The Commission shall hold at least one
regular meeting every other month in the Civic Center and it shall adopt
rules for transaction of business and shall keep a public record of its
resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations. The Secretary of
the Commission shall keep the full and correct minutes and records of all
meetings and file the same with the Municipal Clerk within 10 working
days, or prior to the next convened meeting, whichever occurs earlier. An
additional 10 days shall be allowed for providing the minutes in the event
of the Secretary's serious illness or an emergency which prevents him/her
from writing such minutes.
§ 12-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-9.4
1:39
§ 12-9.4. Finances.
The funds for the equipment, accommodations, and expenses necessary
for the work of the Commission and for the operation of the Civic Center
and the financing of projects incidental thereto shall be provided for by
the income from the testamentary Trust of Jessie T. Langworthy, Deceased;
provided, however, that the Commission shall prepare and submit a budget
for approval to the Council for each fiscal year.
§ 12-9.5. Powers and duties.
It shall be the duty and function of the Commission to administer, manage
and operate the Civic Center, including the hiring of persons necessary
for such operation and civic services incidental thereto; the Commission
shall make and adopt plans for the physical development of a Civic Center
Complex in cooperation with all interested municipal departments,
including a capital improvement program which, in the Commission's
judgment, best carries out the intent and purpose of the Last Will and
Testament and Testamentary Trust of Jessie T Langworthy, Deceased;
consult and advise the Mayor and City Council, generally as to any plans,
programs or projects of development; have the power to appoint any group
to conduct studies and make surveys for the Commission. The Commission
may, with the approval of the Mayor and the City Council, negotiate
contracts with public or private bodies; expend funds from the income of
the Testamentary Trust of Jessie T. Langworthy, Deceased, appropriated
by the City Council; employ agents and employees; and upon its own
authority make arrangements consistent with its duties and functions. All
expenditures shall be submitted to and approved by the Council prior to
payment.
§ 12-9.4 SEWARD CODE § 12-9.5
1:40
ARTICLE X
Civil Service Commission
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Art. 11, §§ 2-1101 and 2-1102, of the 1976 Code;
amended in its entirety 2-18-1986 by Ord. No. 1-86]
§ 12-10.1. Scope of authority; limitations.
The Civil Service Act (Neb. RS 19-1825 et seq.) shall apply only to fulltime
police officers of the City, including any paid full-time Police Chief of
such department, and future appointees to such full-time positions. "Fulltime
police officers" shall mean police officers in positions which require
certification by the Nebraska Law Enforcement Training Center, who have
the power of arrest, who are paid regularly by the City, and for whom law
enforcement is a full-time career, but shall not include clerical, custodial, or
maintenance personnel.
A. Position creation and elimination. All positions subject to the Civil
Service Act shall be created or eliminated by the Mayor and Council.
B. Establishment of salaries and compensation. The Civil Service Act shall
not be construed to infringe upon the power and authority of the Mayor
and Council to establish salaries and compensation of all employees
within the compensation schedule or ranges established by the Mayor
and Council for the positions.
C. Payment of compensation for services. No treasurer, auditor,
comptroller, or other officer or employee of the City shall, subject to the
Civil Service Act, approve the payment of or be in any manner
concerned in paying, auditing, or approving any salary, wage, or other
compensation for services to any person subject to the jurisdiction and
scope of the Civil Service Act unless the person to receive such salary,
wage, or other compensation has been appointed or employed in
compliance with such Act.
D. City's duty to Commission. The Mayor and Council shall provide the
Commission with suitable and convenient rooms and accommodations
and cause the same to be furnished, heated, lighted, and supplied with
all office supplies and equipment necessary to carry on the business of
the Commission and with such clerical assistance as may be necessary.
It shall be the duty of the City to appropriate each fiscal year, from the
general funds of the City, a sum of money sufficient to pay the necessary
expenses involved in carrying out the purposes of such Act, including,
but not limited to, reasonable fees for any special counsel appointed by
the Commission when the City Attorney is not authorized by the Mayor
to represent the Commission. The Mayor may establish the hourly or
monthly rate of pay of such special counsel. The City shall afford the
Commission, its members and employees all reasonable facilities and
assistance to inspect all books, papers, documents, and accounts
applying or in any way appertaining to any and all positions and
employments subject to civil service and shall produce such books,
papers, documents and accounts. All City officers and employees shall
§ 12-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-10.1
1:41
§ 12-10.2. Membership, operation and duties. [Amended 7-7-1998
by Ord. No. 23-98; 2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 1-09]
There is hereby created in the City a Civil Service Commission which shall
have five members who shall each be a citizen of the United States, a
resident of such City for at least three years immediately preceding such
appointment, and an elector of the county wherein such person resides.
attend and testify whenever required to do so by the Commission, the
accused, or the Mayor.
E. Political fund contribution and political service. No person holding any
position subject to civil service shall be under any obligation to
contribute to any political fund or to render any political service to any
person or party whatsoever. No person shall be removed, reduced in
position or salary or otherwise prejudiced for refusing so to do. No
public officer, whether elected or appointed, shall discharge, promote,
demote, or in any manner change the official rank, employment, or
compensation of any person under civil service, or promise or threaten
to do so for giving, withholding, or neglecting to make any contribution
of money, services, or any valuable thing for any political purposes.
F. Obstructing examinations. No Commissioner or any other person shall
by himself or herself or in cooperation with one or more persons:
(1) Defeat, deceive, or obstruct any person in respect to the right of
examination according to the rules and regulations made pursuant
to the Civil Service Act;
(2) Falsely make, grade, estimate, or report upon the examination and
standing of any person examined or certified in accordance with
such Act or aid in so doing;
(3) Make any false representation concerning the same or concerning
the persons examined;
(4) Furnish any person any special or secret information for the
purpose of improving or injuring the prospects or chances of any
person so examined or certified to be examined or certified; or
(5) Persuade any other person or permit or aid in manner any other
person to impersonate him or her in connection with any
examination, application, or request to be so examined.
A. Appointment of members. The members of the Civil Service
Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the
Council. At the time of any appointment, not more than three members
of the Civil Service Commission, including the one or ones to be
appointed, shall be registered electors of the same political party.
§ 12-10.1 SEWARD CODE § 12-10.2
1:42
B. Members' terms of office. The first persons appointed to the Civil
Service Commission shall be for terms of two years, four years, and five
years respectively. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for five years.
C. Removal from office. Any member of the Civil Service Commission may
be removed from office for incompetency, dereliction of duty,
malfeasance in office, or other good cause by the Mayor, with the
approval of the Council, except that no member of the Civil Service
Commission shall be removed until written charges have been
preferred, due notice given such member, and a full hearing had before
the Mayor.
D. Compensation of members. Members of the Civil Service Commission
shall serve without compensation.
E. Meetings. The Civil Service Commission shall hold meetings as may be
required for the proper discharge of its duties. At the first meeting in
June of each year, the Board shall organize by selecting from its
membership a Chairman, and he/she shall review his/her duties as a
member of the Commission.
F. Chairperson. The Civil Service Commission shall annually elect one of
its members as Chairperson.
G. Secretary and Chief Examiner. The Civil Service Commission shall
appoint a Secretary and a Chief Examiner, who shall keep the records of
the Commission, preserve all reports made to it, superintend and keep a
record of all examinations held under its direction, and perform such
other duties as the Commission may prescribe. The Commission may
merge the positions of Secretary and Chief Examiner and appoint one
person to perform the duties of both positions. The Commission shall
appoint the City's Personnel Officer as Secretary and Chief Examiner, if
requested to do so by the Mayor. The Secretary and Chief Examiner
shall be subject to suspension or discharge upon the vote of a majority
of the appointed members of the Commission. The Secretary/Chief
Examiner shall keep the full and correct minutes and records of all
meetings and file the same with the Municipal Clerk within 10 working
days, or prior to the next convened meeting, whichever occurs earlier.
An additional 10 days shall be allowed for providing the minutes in the
event of the Secretary/Chief Examiner's serious illness or an emergency
which prevents him/her from writing such minutes.
H. Quorum. Three members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction
of business.
I. Powers and duties.
(1) The Commission shall adopt and promulgate procedural rules and
regulations which shall provide in detail the manner in which
examinations may be held and any other matters assigned to it by
the Mayor. At least one copy of the rules and regulations, and any
amendments, shall be made available for examination and
§ 12-10.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-10.2
1:43
reproduction by members of the public. One copy of the rules and
regulations and any amendments shall be given to each full-time
police officer.
(2) The Commission shall provide that all tests shall be practical and
consist only of subjects which will fairly determine the capacity of
persons who are to be examined to perform the duties of the
position to which an appointment is to be made and may include,
but not be limited to, tests of physical fitness and of manual skill
and psychological testing.
(3) The Commission shall provide, by the rules and regulations, for a
credit of 10% in favor of all applicants for an appointment to any
entry-level position, as defined by the Mayor, under civil service
who, in time of war or in any expedition of the Armed Forces of the
United States, have served in and been honorably discharged from
the Armed Forces of the United States and who have equaled or
exceeded the minimum qualifying standards established by the
Mayor.
(4) The Commission may conduct an investigation concerning and
report upon all matters regarding the enforcement and effect of the
Civil Service Act and the rules and regulations prescribed.
(5) The Commission may inspect all institutions, departments,
positions, and employments affected by such Act to determine
whether such Act and all such rules and regulations are being
obeyed. Such investigations may be conducted by the Commission
or by any Commissioner designated by the Commission for that
purpose. The Commission shall also make a like investigation on
the written petition of a citizen, duly verified, stating that
irregularities or abuses exist or setting forth, in concise language,
the necessity for such investigation. The Commission may be
represented in such investigations by the City Attorney, if
authorized by the Mayor. If the City Attorney does not represent the
Commission, the Commission may be represented by special
counsel appointed by the Commission in any such investigation. In
the course of the investigation, the Commission, designated
Commissioner, or chief examiner shall have the power to
administer oaths, issue subpoenas to require the attendance of
witnesses and the production by them of books, papers, documents
and accounts appertaining to the investigation, and to cause the
deposition of witnesses, residing within or without the state, to be
taken in the manner prescribed by law for like depositions in civil
actions in the courts of this state. The oaths administered and
subpoenas issued shall have the same force and effect as the oaths
administered by a District Judge in a judicial capacity and
subpoenas issued by the District Courts of Nebraska. The failure of
any person so subpoenaed to comply shall be deemed a violation of
the Civil Service Act and be punished as such. No investigation
shall be made pursuant to this section if there is a written
§ 12-10.2 SEWARD CODE § 12-10.2
1:44
accusation concerning the same subject matter against a person
in the civil service. Such accusation shall be handled pursuant to
Chapter 95, Article I, Civil Service Rules, § 95-1.3.
(6) The Commission shall provide that all hearings and investigations
before the Commission, designated Commissioner, or Chief
Examiner shall be governed by the Civil Service Act and the rules of
practice and procedure to be adopted by the Commission. In the
conduct thereof, they shall not be bound by the technical rules of
evidence. No informality in any proceedings or hearing or in the
manner of taking testimony shall invalidate any order, decision,
rule, or regulation made, approved, or confirmed by the
Commission, except that no order, decision, rule or regulations
made by any designated Commissioner conducting any hearing or
investigation alone shall be of any force or effect unless it is
concurred in by a majority of the appointed members of the
Commission, including the vote of any Commissioner making the
investigations.
(7) The Commission shall establish and maintain a roster of officers
and employees.
(8) The Commission shall provide for, establish, and hold competitive
tests to determine the relative qualifications of persons who seek
employment in any position and, as a result thereof, establish
eligible lists for the various positions.
(9) The Commission shall make recommendations concerning a
reduction-in-force policy to the Mayor and Council.
(10) The Commission shall keep such records as may be necessary for
the proper administration of the Civil Service Act.
(11) The Commission, upon request of the Mayor, shall establish and
maintain a list of names and addresses, for a period of time
established by the Mayor, of those eligible for appointment to or
promotion within the Department.
(12) The Commission, upon request of the Mayor, shall certify the
names of the persons who are the three highest on the eligible list,
following the most recent examination, and whose qualifications
have been validated by the Commission for the vacant position.
(13) The Commission shall begin and conduct all civil suits which may
be necessary for the proper enforcement of the Civil Service Act
and of the rules of the Commission. The Commission may be
represented in such suits and all investigations pursuant to the Act
by the City Attorney if authorized by the Mayor. If the City Attorney
does not represent the Commission, the Commission may be
represented by special counsel appointed by it in any particular
case.
§ 12-10.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-10.2
1:45

ARTICLE XI
Tree Board
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Art. 14, §§ 2-1401 through 2-1403, of the 1976
Code; amended in its entirety 6-1-1982 by Ord. No. 12-82]
§ 12-11.1. Establishment; membership.
There is hereby created and established a City Tree Board for the City
of Seward, Nebraska, which shall consist of five members, citizens and
residents of this City, who shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
approval of the City Council.
§ 12-11.2. Terms, compensation, duties and responsibilities; Tree
Plan. [Amended 2-1-1994 by Ord. No. 4-94]
§ 12-11.3. Operation. [Amended 2-1-1994 by Ord. No. 4-94;
10-18-2005 by Ord. No. 52-05; 2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 1-09]
At the first meeting in June of each year, the Board shall organize by
selecting from its membership a Chairman and Secretary. The Secretary
shall keep the full and correct minutes and records of all meetings and
file the same with the Municipal Clerk within 10 working days, or prior to
the next convened meeting, whichever occurs earlier. An additional 10 days
shall be allowed for providing the minutes in the event of the Secretary's
serious illness or an emergency which prevents him/her from writing such
minutes. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of
business. The Board shall meet quarterly on the second Tuesday of January,
April, July and October, with additional meetings as needed.
A. The term of the five persons to be appointed by the Mayor shall be three
years, except that the term of two of the members appointed to the first
Board shall be for only one year, and the term of two members of the
first Board shall be for two years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur
during the term of any member, his successor shall be appointed for the
unexpired portion of the term. Members of the Board shall serve
without compensation.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the Board to study, investigate, counsel
and develop a written plan for replanting, removal or disposition of
trees and shrubs in public ways, streets and alleys. Such plan will be
presented to the City Council and, upon its acceptance and approval,
shall constitute the official Comprehensive City Tree Plan for the City of
Seward, Nebraska. The Board shall review annually and update, if
needed, the Comprehensive City Tree Plan. The Board shall prepare
and present an annual work plan to the City Council for its acceptance
and approval. The Board, when requested by the City Council, shall
consider, investigate, make findings, reports and recommendations
upon any special matter(s) or questions coming within the scope of its
work.
§ 12-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-11.3
1:47

ARTICLE XII
Community Redevelopment Authority
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Art. 15, of the 1976 Code]
§ 12-12.1. Findings; establishment. [Amended 12-1-2009 by Ord.
No. 16-09]
The City Council of the City of Seward hereby finds and declares that
certain substandard and blighted areas, or portions thereof, located in
the City of Seward, may require acquisition, clearance, and disposition,
subject to use restrictions, as provided in the Community Development
Law (Neb. RS 18-2101 et seq.), since the prevailing conditions of decay
may make impracticable the reclamation of said areas by conservation
or rehabilitation; that other areas or portions thereof may, through the
means provided in the Community Development Law, be susceptible of
conservation or rehabilitation in such a manner that the conditions and evils
set forth in the Community Development Law may be eliminated, remedied,
or prevented; and that salvageable substandard and blighted areas can
be conserved and rehabilitated through appropriate public action and the
cooperation and voluntary action of the owners and tenants of property in
such areas. Therefore, the City of Seward hereby creates an authority as
defined in the Community Development Law to henceforth be known as the
"Community Redevelopment Authority of the City of Seward," with all the
power and authority granted to such authorities by the State of Nebraska
under the Community Development Law.
§ 12-12.2. Membership. [Amended 2-16-2010 by Ord. No. 4-10]
The Mayor shall, with the approval of the City Council, appoint five persons
who shall constitute the Community Redevelopment Authority. The terms of
office of the initial members of the authority initially appointed shall be for
one year, two years, three year, four years, and five years, as designated
by the Mayor making the respective appointments. As the terms of the
members of the authority expire, the Mayor, with the approval of the City
Council, shall appoint or reappoint a member of the Authority for a term of
five years to succeed the member whose term expired.
§ 12-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-12.2
1:49

ARTICLE XIII
Removal of Board and Commission Members
[Adopted 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-20]
§ 12-13.1. Removal of board and commission members.
The Mayor may, with the approval of the City Council, revoke the
appointment of any member of a board or commission created by the City of
Seward. Such revocation shall take place at a regularly scheduled meeting
of the City Council. The City Clerk shall send a notice to the last known
address of any such member 10 days prior to such meeting. Such notice
shall contain the time and place of such meeting and denote the action to
be voted on by the City Council. Any chair or presiding officer of a board
or commission of the City of Seward may request removal of a member
via a majority vote of the relevant board or commission requesting such
action. Upon such request the Mayor may place a vote for revocation of
appointment upon the next eligible City Council agenda.
§ 12-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-13.1
1:51
Chapter 19
CEMETERY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cemetery Board — See Ch. 12, Art. V.
§ 12-13.1 SEWARD CODE § 12-13.1
1:52
ARTICLE I
Operating Regulations
§ 19-1.1. Operation and funding. [Amended 6-17-1997 by Ord. No.
29-97; 10-2-2007 by Ord. No. 30-07]
A. The municipality owns and manages the municipal cemetery through
the Cemetery Board and City Administrator.9 The Mayor and Council,
for the purpose of defraying the cost of the care, management,
improvement, beautifying, and welfare of such cemeteries and the
inhabitants thereof, may each year levy a tax not exceeding 5 2/10 cents
on each $100 upon the taxable value of all the taxable property in the
municipality subject to taxation for general purposes. The tax shall be
collected and paid to the municipality as taxes for general purposes are
collected and paid to the municipality. All taxes collected for this
purpose shall constitute and be known as the "Cemetery Fund" and
shall be used for the general care, management, improvement,
beautifying, and welfare of such cemeteries and the inhabitants thereof.
The Cemetery Fund shall also include all gifts, grants, deeds of
conveyance, bequests, money, stocks, bonds, or other valuable incomeproducing
personal property and real estate from any source for the
purpose of endowing the cemetery. Warrants upon this fund shall be
drawn by the Cemetery Board and shall be paid by the Municipal
Treasurer. The City Council may issue a warrant from the Cemetery
Fund if a payment is due and the Cemetery Board is not scheduled to
meet prior to such due date to authorize the warrant.10
B. After the burial and cemetery grounds are fully paid for, the City may
set aside the proceeds of the sale of lots as a perpetual fund to be
invested as provided by ordinance. The income from the fund may be
used for the general care, management, maintenance, improvement,
beautifying, and welfare of the cemetery. The principal of the perpetual
fund may be used for the general care, management, maintenance,
improvement, beautifying, and welfare of the cemetery as long as no
more than 20% of the principal is so used in any fiscal year and no more
than 40% of the principal is so used in any period of 10 consecutive
fiscal years. The principal of the perpetual fund may also be used for the
purchase and development of additional land to be used for cemetery
purposes as long as no more than 25% of the principal is so used in any
fiscal year and no more than 35% of the principal is so used in any
period of 10 consecutive fiscal years.11
C. The City may receive money by donation, bequest, or otherwise for
credit to the perpetual fund to be invested as provided by ordinance or
as conditioned by the donor. The income therefrom may be used for the
general care, management, maintenance, improvement, beautifying,
9. Editor's Note: See Ch. 12, Art. V, Cemetery Board.
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 19-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-1.1
1:53
§ 19-1.2. Acquisition of property.
and welfare of the cemetery as the donor may designate. The principal
therefrom may be used for the general care, management,
maintenance, improvement, beautifying, and welfare of the cemetery
as the donor may designate as long as no more than 20% of the
principal is so used in any fiscal year and no more than 40% of the
principal is so used in any period of 10 consecutive fiscal years. The
principal therefrom may also be used for the purchase and development
of additional land to be used for cemetery purposes as the donor may
designate, so long as no more than 25% of the principal is so used in
any fiscal year and no more than 35% of the principal is so used in any
period of 10 consecutive fiscal years.12
D. The City Treasurer shall be the custodian of such funds, and the same
shall be invested by a board composed of the Mayor, City Treasurer, and
City Clerk.
E. This section does not limit the use of any money that comes to the City
by donation, bequest, or otherwise that is not designated to be credited
to the perpetual fund or that allows greater use for purchase or
development of additional land to be used for cemetery purposes.
(Neb. RS 12-401 through 12-403)
A. Purchase of property. The City, through its Mayor and Council, may, by
eminent domain as provided by law, condemn, purchase, hold and pay
for, in the manner provided for by law, land not exceeding 160 acres
outside the corporate limits for the purpose of the burial of the dead.
B. Gifts and devises. The Mayor and Council are empowered and
authorized to receive by gift or devise real estate for cemetery
purposes. The Mayor and Council are also empowered and authorized
to receive by gift, grant, deed or conveyance, devise or bequest from
any person, personal property of any kind or description, including
money, stocks, bonds, securities, endowments, trust funds, equipment,
supplies, records, and plats, for cemetery purposes. The Mayor and
Council are likewise empowered and authorized, for cemetery
purposes, to receive by gift, devise or bequest real and personal
property of any kind or description, including money, stocks, bonds,
securities, endowments, trust funds, equipment, supplies, records and
plats belonging to any cemetery association or associations, which said
cemetery has already been properly surveyed and platted and used for
cemetery purposes. In the event the City, through its Mayor and
Council, should desire to purchase any cemetery belonging to any
corporation, partnership, association or individual, which said cemetery
has already been properly surveyed and platted and used for cemetery
purposes, then the Mayor and Council are authorized and empowered
to purchase said cemetery.
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 19-1.1 SEWARD CODE § 19-1.2
1:54
§ 19-1.3. Improvements.
The Mayor and Council may survey, plat, map, grade, fence, ornament, and
otherwise improve all burial and cemetery grounds and avenues leading
thereto acquired or owned by the City. The Mayor and Council may
construct walks and protect ornamental trees therein, and provide for
paying the expenses thereof.
§ 19-1.4. Conveyance of lots.
§ 19-1.5. Lot transfers.
Any person who wishes to transfer a certificate may do so by surrendering
the original certificate to the Municipal Clerk, who shall issue a new
certificate upon the receipt of the recording fee set by resolution of the
governing body.13
§ 19-1.6. Permit required for burial or disinterment. [Amended
6-1997 by Ord. No. 31-97]
All persons desiring to bury a deceased person shall first be required to
file a completed death certificate with the Registrar of the County before
C. Title. Where such real estate and personal property are acquired by
gift, devise or bequest, the title shall then be in the City upon the
conditions imposed by the donor and upon acceptance by the Mayor
and Council. Where such real estate is acquired by purchase or by
virtue of the exercise of the right of eminent domain, and the personal
property is acquired by purchase, the title shall then absolutely be in
the City.
A. The governing body may convey cemetery lots by certificate signed by
the Mayor, and countersigned by the Municipal Clerk under the
Municipal Seal, specifying that the person to whom the same is issued
is the owner of the lot described therein by number for the purpose of
interment. The certificate shall give a right in fee simple to the
proprietor, his heirs, and assigns. The certificate shall then be recorded
in the office of the County Clerk.
B. The Mayor and Council may limit the number of cemetery lots which
shall be owned by the same persons at the same time. They may
prescribe rules for enclosing, adorning and erecting monuments, and
tombstones on cemetery lots. They may prohibit any diversion of the
use of such lots and any improper adornment thereof; but no religious
test shall be made as to the ownership of lots, the burial therein, or the
ornamentation of graves or of such lots.
(Neb. RS 16-243)
13.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 2-608 of the 1976 Code, Perpetual care, as amended, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 19-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-1.6
1:55
any body may be buried in the municipal cemetery. If it is impossible to
complete the certificate of death, within the legal period of time prescribed
by state law, the funeral director shall notify the Registrar and obtain his
written approval before the deceased person may be buried in the municipal
cemetery. The burial permit so issued by the Registrar shall then be filed
with the Municipal Clerk of the City. It shall be unlawful for the City, or other
person, to allow the interment of a body without first receiving such permit.
The burial permit shall then be countersigned and dated by the City. The
interment of any body shall be performed under the direct supervision of a
licensed funeral director. The applicant shall also file with the burial permit
an application containing the name, age, sex, race and cause of death of the
deceased person for the records of the Cemetery Board. Upon completion of
the requirements herein, the City shall then issue a municipal burial permit
which shall entitle the applicant to bury a deceased person in the municipal
cemetery. In the event that the removal of the body of any deceased person
is requested, the City shall issue no permit until the applicant shall have
first complied with the laws of the State of Nebraska with respect to such
disinterment. (Neb. RS 71-605)
§ 19-1.7. Reclamation of lots. [Amended 9-16-1986 by Ord. No.
1586]
When any lot has been transferred by warranty deed or by a deed conveying
a fee simple title, but there has been no burial in any such lot or subdivision
thereof and no payment of annual assessments for a period of three years,
the Cemetery Board, with the sanction of the governing body, may reclaim
the unused portion of such lot or subdivision after notifying the record
owner or his or her heirs or assigns, if known, by certified mail and
publishing notice of its intention to do so. Such notice shall be published
once each week for four weeks in a newspaper of general circulation
throughout the county in which the cemetery is located, shall describe
the lot or subdivision proposed to be reclaimed, and shall be addressed
to the person in whose name such portion stands of record or, if there
is no owner of record, to all persons claiming any interest in such lot or
subdivision. If no person appears to claim such lot or subdivision and pay all
delinquent assessments with interest within 15 days after the last date of
such publication, the Cemetery Board may by resolution reclaim such lot or
subdivision. Such reclamation shall be complete upon a filing of a verified
copy of such resolution, together with proof of publication, in the office of
the Register of Deeds.
§ 19-1.6 SEWARD CODE § 19-1.7
1:56
Chapter 28
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sales and use tax — See Ch. 350, Art. I.
§ 19-1.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-1.7
1:57

ARTICLE I
Establishment and Operation
[Amended 11-19-2002 by Ord. No. 42-02; 11-20-2012 by Ord. No.
32-12]
§ 28-1.1. Authority.
§ 28-1.2. Terms, conditions and goals.
The terms, conditions, and goals of the Economic Development Plan as
approved by the City Council are summarized as follows:
A. The City Council for the City of Seward, Nebraska approved a proposed
plan for ballot language for the City of Seward Economic Development
Plan pursuant to the Local Option Municipal Economic Development
Act (Neb. RS 18-2701 et seq.) after public hearing as provided by law.
B. The proposed plan was submitted to the voters of the City of Seward on
November 5, 2002, at the general election by the following language:
"Shall the City of Seward establish an economic development program
as described herein by appropriating annually from City sales and use
tax a maximum of $75,000 per year for a period of 10 years?"
______ YES
______ NO
A. Length of time the program will be in existence. The length of time the
program will be in existence is approximately 15 years, beginning upon
the adoption of an ordinance by the City of Seward within 45 days after
voter approval of the Economic Development Program (said ordinance
to be in conformity with the terms of such program as set out in the
original enabling resolution), and ending on March 31, 2018.
B. Years that local sources of revenue are to be collected. Collection of the
funds from local sources of revenue for the Economic Development
Program shall be for a ten-year period beginning April 1, 2003, and
ending March 31, 2013.
C. Source from which funds are to be collected. The source from which
funds are to be collected will be city sales and use tax.14
D. Total amount to be collected for the program from local sources of
revenue.
(1) The total amount to be collected from the local sources of revenue
for the full length of the program for the City of Seward will not
exceed $750,000.
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 350, Art. I, Sales and Use Tax.
§ 28-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-1.2
1:59
§ 28-1.3. Referendum results.
The County Clerk, as Election Commissioner, certified to the City that the
election results on the economic development ballot were as follows:
For: 1,085
Against: 794
§ 28-1.4. Establishment of plan.
The Local Option Municipal Economic Development Act directs that the City
of Seward shall, within 45 days after voter approval, establish the Economic
Development Plan by ordinance in conformity with the terms of the program
as set forth in Resolution No. 20-02.
§ 28-1.5. Establishment of program; term.
There is hereby established an Economic Development Program in
conformity with the Local Option Municipal Economic Development Act
and the Economic Development Plan approved by the voters of Seward,
Nebraska, on November 5, 2002, for the period from the effective date of
this chapter to March 31, 2013.
§ 28-1.6. Application Review Board.
The Economic Development Program shall have an Application Review
Board, which shall consist of six residents of the City who shall be appointed
by the Mayor and approved by the City Council and serve for terms of
three years each; provided that such appointees shall be appointed in such
fashion that their terms shall be staggered, and two members of the City
Council, appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council. Persons
(2) The total amount to be collected from local sources of revenue each
year will equal $75,000 or 10% of the proceeds from the imposition
of City sales and use tax in the amount of 1%, whichever amount is
less.
E. Proposal to issue bonds to provide funds to carry out the Economic
Development Program. The City of Seward proposes to issue bonds
pursuant to the Local Option Municipal Economic Development Act to
provide funds to carry out the Economic Development Program.
F. Additional funds to be sought from other non-City sources. Additional
funds from other non-City sources will be sought beyond those derived
from local sources of revenue.
G. Goals of the Economic Development Program. Goals of the Economic
Development Program are to create high-paying, quality jobs, attract
new capital investment, broaden the tax base, reduce reliance on
property taxes and ensure economic stability and vitality for Seward,
Nebraska.
§ 28-1.2 SEWARD CODE § 28-1.6
1:60
appointed and serving on the Application Review Board shall serve without
compensation, and shall be held harmless for any and all actions in carrying
out their responsibilities and goodwill. The City Administrator shall serve as
an ex-officio member of the Application Review Board.
§ 28-1.7. Citizens Advisory Review Committee.
§ 28-1.8. Confidentiality of information.
Information given in the course of applying for assistance under the
Economic Development Program shall be confidential. The information shall
be available only to the Program Administrator, Application Review
Committee, and the City Council, for the limited purpose of determining
eligibility for assistance under the Plan. Unauthorized disclosure of any
business information which is confidential under Neb. RS 84-712.05, as it
may be amended from time to time, shall be a Class III misdemeanor. All
persons involved in the Program must sign statements of confidentiality
regarding all personal and private submittals by qualified businesses.
A. The Mayor, subject to the approval of the City Council, shall appoint a
Citizens Advisory Review Committee of five members, which committee
will report to the City Council on its findings and suggestions with
regard to the functioning and progress of the Economic Development
Plan. The City Administrator of Seward, Nebraska shall, as Program
Administrator, serve as an ex-officio member of this committee. The
committee shall be appointed and organized pursuant to the Economic
Development Plan and the requirements of Neb. RS 18-2715, as it may
be amended from time to time. All members shall be registered voters
of the City of Seward. No member shall be an elected or appointed City
official, an employee of the City, a participant in a decision-making
position regarding expenditures of the Plan funds, an official or
employee of any financial institution participating directly in the Plan or
any qualifying business receiving assistance. At least one member shall
have experience or expertise in business finance or accounting.
B. The Citizens Advisory Review Committee shall report to the City
Council at intervals of no less than six months at a public hearing called
for that purpose.
§ 28-1.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-1.8
1:61
Chapter 32
ELECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Initiatives and referenda — See Ch. 72, Art. II. Elected officials — See Ch. 85, Part 1.
§ 28-1.8 SEWARD CODE § 28-1.8
1:62
ARTICLE I
Procedures and Requirements15
§ 32-1.1. Combined information on ballots; conduct of elections.
[Amended 1-20-1976 by Ord. No. 1043; 1-17-1978 by Ord. No. 1119;
4-5-2005 by Ord. No. 21-05]
§ 32-1.2. Preparation of ballot for general election. [Amended
10-20-1981 by Ord. No. 38-81]
A. All municipal issues and offices shall be combined on the statewide
primary and general election ballots whenever possible. The issuance of
separate ballots shall be avoided in a statewide election if municipal
offices or issues can reasonably be combined with the nonpartisan
ballot and state law does not require otherwise. All municipal elections
involving the election of officers shall be held in accordance with the
Election Act and in conjunction with the statewide primary or general
election. (Neb. RS 32-556)
B. When the municipality holds an election in conjunction with the
statewide primary or general election, the election shall be held as
provided in the Election Act. Any other election held by the municipality
shall be held as provided in the Election Act unless otherwise provided
by the charter, code, or bylaws of the municipality. (Neb. RS 16-302.01,
32-505, 32-4, 147)16
A. When more than one person becomes a candidate by filing, petition, or
write-in procedures for the same position in the primary, the County
Clerk, in preparing the official ballot for the general election, shall
place thereon the names of the persons who received the greatest
number of votes in the primary, but in no event shall the names on the
general election ballot be more than twice the number of vacancies to
be filled at the general election.
B. The County Clerk shall place the names of the candidates on the
general election ballot in the direct order according to the number of
votes received at the primary election. If no primary election was held,
the names of the candidates shall be placed upon the general election
ballot in the order of their filing.
(Neb. RS 16-302.01)
15.Editor's Note: This article was amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I) to update statutory citations to the Election Act, Neb. RS Chapter 32.
16.Editor's Note: Original §§ 1-802, Term of office, 1-803, Primary election, number of
candidates filing, and 1-805, Tie votes, of the 1976 Code, as amended, which immediately
followed this section, were repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 32-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-1.3
1:63
§ 32-1.3. Election to terms. [Amended 1-20-1976 by Ord. No. 1043;
1-17-1978 by Ord. No. 111917]
The candidates shall be placed on the general election ballot and the
candidates receiving the greatest number of votes shall be elected to terms
of the longest duration, and those receiving the next greatest number
of votes shall be elected to the remaining term or terms. The term of
office of all such member shall commence on the first regular meeting of
December following their election. Any vacancy on the Council resulting
from causes other than expiration of the term shall be filled by vote of
the remaining members as provided in Chapter 85, Part 1, § 85-1.3, of the
Seward Municipal Code. (Neb. RS 16-302.01)
§ 32-1.4. Filing of nomination for placement on ballot.
The name of a candidate shall not be printed upon the official ballot for the
election of elective officials unless he shall have filed a written application
with the County Clerk at least 60 days prior to the primary election
requesting that his name be placed upon the official ballot for such election.
(Neb. RS 32-601 et seq.)
§ 32-1.5. Filing fee.
Prior to the filing of any nomination papers, there shall be paid to the
Municipal Treasurer a filing fee which shall amount to 1% of the annual
salary for the office for which the candidate will file; provided that there
shall be no filing fee for any candidate filing for an office in which a perdiem
is paid rather than a salary, or an office for which there is a salary of
less than $500 per year. No nominating papers shall be filed until the proper
Municipal Treasurer's receipt, showing the payment of the filing fee, shall
be presented to the election officer with whom the nomination papers are
to be filed. (Neb. RS 32-608)
§ 32-1.6. Petition candidates; procedure. [Amended 9-18-1984 by
Ord. No. 33-84; 10-6-1998 by Ord. No. 30-98]
A. Placement of name on general election ballot.
(1) Any registered voter who was not a candidate in the primary
election may have his or her name placed on the general election
ballot for a partisan office by filing petitions as prescribed in this
section and Neb. RS 32-616(1) or by nomination by political party
convention or committee.
(2) Any candidate who was defeated in the primary election and any
registered voter who was not a candidate in the primary election
may have his or her name placed on the general election ballot if a
vacancy exists on the ballot under Subsection (1) of Neb. RS
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 32-1.3 SEWARD CODE § 32-1.6
1:64
§ 32-1.7. Voter qualifications.
"Electors" shall mean every person of the constitutionally prescribed age or
upwards, who shall have the right to vote for all officers to be elected to
public office, and upon all questions and proposals lawfully submitted to the
voters at any and all elections authorized or provided for by the Constitution
or the laws of the State of Nebraska, except school elections; provided that
no person shall be qualified to vote at any election unless such person shall
be a resident of the state and shall have been properly registered with the
election official of the county. (Neb. RS 17-602, 32-110, 32-115, 32-301 et
seq., 32-313)
§ 32-1.8. Wards. [Amended 4-7-1981 by Ord. No. 12-81; 7-7-1981 by
Ord. No. 27-81; 8-6-1991 by Ord. No. 20-91; 10-16-2001 by Ord. No.
27-01; 8-2-2011 by Ord. No. 14-11]
32-616(2) and the candidate files for the office by petition as
prescribed in this section.
B. Number of signatures required.
(1) The number of signatures of registered voters needed to place the
name of a candidate upon the nonpartisan ballot for the general
election shall be at least 10% of the total number of registered
voters voting for Governor or President of the United States at the
immediately preceding general election in the municipality, not to
exceed 2,000.18
(2) The number of signatures of registered voters needed to place the
name of a candidate upon the partisan ballot for the general
election shall be at least 20% of the total vote for Governor or
President of the United States at the immediately preceding
general election within the municipality, not to exceed 2,000.
C. Petitions for nomination shall conform to the requirements of Neb. RS
32-628. Petitions shall state the office to be filled and the name and
address of the candidate. Petitions for partisan office shall also indicate
the party affiliation of the candidate. Petitions shall be signed by
registered voters residing in the municipality and shall be filed with the
filing officer in the same manner as provided for candidate filing forms
in Neb. RS 32-607. Petition signers and circulators shall conform to the
requirements of Neb. RS 32-629 and 32-630. No petition for nomination
shall be filed unless there is attached thereto a receipt showing
payment of the required filing fee. The petitions shall be filed by
September 1 in the year of the general election.
(Neb. RS 156, 32-504, 32-535, 32-616 through 32-618)
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 32-1.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-1.8
1:65
A. The municipality shall redistrict as often as necessary using the most
recent Federal Census to ensure that each ward is substantially equal in
population. The municipality shall stand divided into the following
wards as set forth herein:
(1) First Ward: all that portion of the City lying and being situated
north of the line drawn along the center of Hillcrest Drive
beginning at the center of the intersection of Hillcrest Drive and
First Street in the City, and extending east to the Corporate
boundary line of said City, and east of a line drawn along the center
of First Street and then extending north to the Northern Corporate
boundary line of said City.
(2) Second Ward: all that portion of the City lying and being situated
within the following described boundary line: beginning at a point
to where the center line of Moffitt Street intersects the West
Corporate Limits, thence east following the center line of Moffitt
Street to the center line of Tenth Street, thence north along the
center line of Tenth Street to the center line of Lincoln Street,
thence east following the center line of Lincoln Street to the center
line of Third Street; thence north along the center line of Third
Street to the center line of Hillcrest Drive, thence east along the
center line of Hillcrest Drive to the center line of First Street,
thence north along the center line of First Street extended to a
point of intersection with the North Corporate Limit, thence
generally west along the North Corporate Limit to a point of
intersection with the West Corporate Limit, thence generally south
along the West Corporate Limit line to the point of beginning.
(3) Third Ward: all that portion of the City lying south of a line
beginning on the West Corporate boundary line of the City at a
point where the center line of Moffitt Street extended west would
intersect with the West Corporate boundary line, thence east along
the center line of Moffitt Street to the intersection of Moffitt Street
and Tenth Street, thence north along the center line of Tenth Street
to the center of the intersection of Tenth Street and Lincoln Street;
thence east along the center line of Lincoln Street to the
intersection of Lincoln Street and Third Street; thence south along
the center line of Third Street to the center line of Seward Street;
thence east along the center line of Seward Street extended east to
the Corporate boundary line.
(4) Fourth Ward: all that portion of the City lying and being situated
within the following described boundary line: beginning at a point
to where the center line of Hillcrest Drive intersects the East
Corporate Limits, thence west along the center line of Hillcrest
Drive to the center line of Third Street, thence south along the
center line of Third Street to the center line of Seward Street,
thence east along the center line of Seward Street and the center
line of Seward Street extended to a point of intersection with the
§ 32-1.8 SEWARD CODE § 32-1.8
1:66
§ 32-1.9. Wards and election districts. [Amended 10-21-1980 by
Ord. No. 31-8019]
The Mayor and City Council shall divide the City into not less than three
wards, as compact in form and equal in population as possible, the
boundaries of which are defined in § 32-1.8 above. Each ward shall
constitute an election district; provided that when any ward shall contain
greater than 500 legal voters, the Mayor and City Council may divide such
ward into two or more election districts. (Neb. RS 16-104)
§ 32-1.10. Ballots.
The County Clerk shall provide printed ballots for every general municipal
election, and the expense of printing and delivering the ballots and cards of
instruction shall be a charge upon the municipality. (Neb. RS 32-801 et seq.,
32-805)20
§ 32-1.11. Inability to assume office.
In any general election, where the person who received the highest number
of votes is ineligible, disqualified, deceased, or for any other reason is
unable to assume the office for which he was a candidate, and the electorate
had reasonable notice of such disability at the time of the election, the
candidate in such election who received the next highest number of votes
shall be declared elected, and shall be entitled to the certificate of election;
provided that any candidate so declared elected received not less than 35%
of the total number of votes cast for such office in the election. If any of the
qualifications of this section are not met by the candidate to be declared
elected, or reasonable notice of the winner's ineligibility is not available to
the voters, a vacancy in such office shall be declared to exist at the time of
commencement of the term and shall be filled as prescribed by law. (Neb.
RS 32-560 through 32-574)
§ 32-1.12. Recall procedure. [Amended 9-18-1979 by Ord. No. 1191;
9-18-1984 by Ord. No. 33-84; 8-4-2004 by Ord. No. 18-04]
East Corporate Limit, thence generally north along the East
Corporate Limit line to the point of beginning.
B. The establishment of the wards herein provided shall be implemented
and become effective with the next election to be held pursuant to
§ 32-1.1 of this chapter. Each ward shall constitute an election district.
A. For purposes of this section, "filing clerk" means the Election
Commissioner or County Clerk. (Neb. RS 32-1301)
B. Positions subject to recall.
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
20.Editor's Note: Original § 1-814 of the 1976 Code, Elections; Certificate of Nomination or
Election, as amended, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 4-5-2005 by
Ord. No. 21-05.
§ 32-1.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-1.12
1:67
(1) The Mayor, a member of the City Council, and any other elected
official of the City may be removed from office by recall pursuant to
Neb. RS 32-1301 to 32-1309.
(2) The recall procedure and special election provisions of such
sections shall apply to members of the City Council who are elected
by ward. Only registered voters of such member's ward may sign a
recall petition or vote at the recall election. The recall election shall
be held within the member's ward. When a member of the City
Council is nominated by ward in the primary election and elected at
large in the general election, the recall provisions shall apply to the
registered voters at the general election. (Neb. RS 32-1302)
C. Recall petition.
(1) A petition demanding that the question of removing the Mayor, a
member of the City Council, or any other elected official of the City
be submitted to the registered voters shall be signed by registered
voters equal in number to at least 35% of the total vote cast for that
office in the last general election, except that for an office for which
more than one candidate is chosen, the petition shall be signed by
registered voters equal in number to at least 35% of the number of
votes cast for the person receiving the most votes for such office in
the last general election. The signatures shall be affixed to petition
papers and shall be considered part of the petition.
(2) Petition circulators shall conform to the requirements of Neb. RS
32-629 and 32-630.21
(3) The petition papers shall be procured from the filing clerk. Prior to
the issuance of such petition papers, an affidavit shall be signed
and filed with the filing clerk by at least one registered voter. Such
voter or voters shall be deemed to be the principal circulator or
circulators of the recall petition. The affidavit shall state the name
and office of the official sought to be removed, shall include, in
typewritten form in concise language of 60 words or less, the
reason or reasons for which recall is sought, and shall request that
the filing clerk issue initial petition papers to the principal
circulator for circulation. The filing clerk shall notify the official
sought to be removed by any method specified in Neb. RS
25-505.01 or, if notification cannot be made with reasonable
diligence by any of the methods specified in Neb. RS 25-505.01, by
leaving a copy of the affidavit at the official's usual place of
residence and mailing a copy by first-class mail to the official’s last
known address. If the official chooses, he or she may submit a
defense statement in typewritten form in concise language of 60
words or less for inclusion on the petition. Any such defense
statement shall be submitted to the filing clerk within 20 days after
the official receives the copy of the affidavit. The filing clerk shall
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 32-1.12 SEWARD CODE § 32-1.12
1:68
(Neb. RS 32-1303)
notify the principal circulator or circulators that the necessary
signatures must be gathered within 30 days from the date of
issuing the petitions.22
(4) The filing clerk, upon issuing the initial petition papers or any
subsequent petition papers, shall enter in a record, to be kept in his
or her office, the name of the principal circulator or circulators to
whom the papers were issued, the date of issuance, and the
number of papers issued. The filing clerk shall certify on the papers
the name of the principal circulator or circulators to whom the
papers were issued and the date they were issued. No petition
paper shall be accepted as part of the petition unless it bears such
certificate. The principal circulator or circulators who check out
petitions from the filing clerk may distribute such petitions to
persons who may act as circulators of such petitions.
(5) Petition signers shall conform to the requirements of Neb. RS
32-629 and 32-630. Each signer of a recall petition shall be a
registered voter and qualified by his or her place of residence to
vote for the office in question.
D. Each petition paper shall conform to the requirements of Neb. RS
32-1304.
E. Filing of petition papers.
(1) The principal circulator or circulators shall file, as one instrument,
all petition papers comprising a recall petition for signature
verification with the filing clerk within 30 days after the filing clerk
issues the initial petition papers to the principal circulator or
circulators.
(2) Within 15 days after the filing of the petition, the filing clerk shall
ascertain whether or not the petition is signed by the requisite
number of registered voters. No new signatures may be added after
the initial filing of the petition papers. No signatures may be
removed unless the filing clerk receives an affidavit signed by the
person requesting his or her signature be removed before the
petitions are filed with the filing clerk for signature verification. If
the petition is found to be sufficient, the filing clerk shall attach to
the petition a certificate showing the result of such examination. If
the requisite number of signatures has not been gathered, the filing
clerk shall file the petition in his or her office without prejudice to
the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.
(Neb. RS 32-1305)
F. If the recall petition is found to be sufficient, the filing clerk shall notify
the official whose removal is sought and the City Council that sufficient
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 32-1.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-1.12
1:69
signatures have been gathered. The Council shall order an election
to be held not less than 30 days nor more than 75 days after the
notification of the official whose removal is sought above; except that
if any other election is to be held in the City within 90 days after
such notification, the Council shall provide for the holding of the recall
election on the same day. All resignations shall be tendered as provided
in Neb. RS 32-562. If the official whose removal is sought resigns before
the recall election is held, the Council may cancel the recall election
if the Council notifies the County Clerk of the cancellation at least 16
days prior to the election; otherwise the recall election shall be held as
scheduled. (Neb. RS 32-1306)23
G. The form of the official ballot at a recall election shall conform to the
requirements of Neb. RS 32-1307.
H. Recall election results and effect.
(1) If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election are against the
removal of the official named on the ballot or the election results in
a tie, the official shall continue in office for the remainder of his or
her term but may be subject to further recall attempts as provided
in Subsection I of this section.
(2) If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election are for the removal
of the official named on the ballot, he or she shall, regardless of any
technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from
office unless a recount is ordered. If the official is deemed removed,
the removal shall result in a vacancy in the office which shall be
filled as otherwise provided in this section and state law.
(3) If the election results show a margin of votes equal to 1% or less
between the removal or retention of the official in question, the
Secretary of State, Election Commissioner, or County Clerk shall
order a recount of the votes cast unless the official named on the
ballot files a written statement with the Election Commissioner or
County Clerk that he or she does not want a recount.
(4) If there are vacancies in the offices of 1/2 or more of the members
of the City Council at one time due to the recall of such members, a
special election to fill such vacancies shall be conducted as
expeditiously as possible by the Secretary of State, Election
Commissioner, or County Clerk.24
(5) No official who is removed at a recall election or who resigns after
the initiation of the recall process shall be appointed to fill the
vacancy resulting from his or her removal or the removal of any
other member of the same governing body during the remainder of
his or her term of office.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 32-1.12 SEWARD CODE § 32-1.12
1:70
§ 32-1.13. Special elections. [Amended 9-18-1984 by Ord. No.
33-84; 10-7-1997 by Ord. No. 47-97; 8-4-2004 by Ord. No. 18-04]
(Neb. RS 32-1308)
I. No recall petition shall be filed against an elected official within 12
months after a recall election has failed to remove him or her from
office or within six months after the beginning of his or her term of
office or within six months prior to the incumbent filing deadline for the
office. (Neb. RS 32-1309, 32-1401 through 32-1408)
A. Procedure.
(1) Except as provided in Neb. RS 77-3444, any issue to be submitted
to the registered voters at a special election by the City shall be
certified by the City Clerk to the Election Commissioner or County
Clerk at least 50 days prior to the election. A special election may
be held by mail as provided in Neb. RS 32-952 through 32-959. Any
other special election shall be subject to Subsection B of this
section.
(2) In lieu of submitting the issue at a special election, the City may
submit the issue at a statewide primary or general election or at
any scheduled county election, except that no such issue shall be
submitted at a statewide election or scheduled county election
unless the issue to be submitted has been certified by the City Clerk
to the Election Commissioner or County Clerk by March 1 for the
primary election and by September 1 for the general election.
(3) After the Election Commissioner or County Clerk has received the
certification of the issue to be submitted, he or she shall be
responsible for all matters relating to the submission of the issue to
the registered voters, except that the City Clerk shall be
responsible for the publication or posting of any required special
notice of the submission of such issue other than the notice
required to be given of the statewide election issues. The Election
Commissioner or County Clerk shall prepare the ballots and issue
ballots for early voting and shall also conduct the submission of the
issue, including the receiving and counting of ballots on the issue.
The election returns shall be made to the Election Commissioner or
County Clerk. The ballots shall be counted and canvassed at the
same time and in the same manner as the other ballots. Upon
completion of the canvas of the vote by the County Canvassing
Board, the Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall certify the
election results to the City Council. The canvass by the County
Canvassing Board shall have the same force and effect as if made
by the City Council. (Neb. RS 32-559)25
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 32-1.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-1.13
1:71
§ 32-1.14. Candidate qualifications. [Amended 9-18-1984 by Ord.
No. 33-84]
Any person seeking elected office in the municipality shall be a registered
voter prior to holding such office and in addition shall have reached the age
of majority.
§ 32-1.15. Exit polls. [Amended 10-1-1985 by Ord. No. 14-85]
No person shall conduct an exit poll, public opinion poll, or any other
interview with voters on election day seeking to determine voter preference
within 20 feet of the entrance of any public place room or, if inside the
public place building, within 100 feet of any voting booth. (Neb. RS
32-1525)
§ 32-1.16. Election of officers; certifications required. [Amended
4-5-2005 by Ord. No. 21-05]
No later than January 5 of each even-numbered year, the City Council
shall certify to the Election Commissioner or the County Clerk, on forms
prescribed by such official, the name of the City, the number of officers to
be elected, the length of the terms of office, the vacancies to be filled by
election and length of remaining term, and the number of votes to be cast
by a registered voter for each office. (Neb. RS 32-404)
B. Any special election under the Election Act shall be held on the first
Tuesday following the second Monday of the selected month unless
otherwise specifically provided. No special election shall be held under
the Election Act in April, May, June, October, November, or December of
an even-numbered year unless it is held in conjunction with the
statewide primary or general election. (Neb. RS 32-405, 32-559)
§ 32-1.13 SEWARD CODE § 32-1.16
1:72
Chapter 40
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 252. Conduct at fires — See Ch. 290, Art. IX.
§ 32-1.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-1.16
1:73

ARTICLE I
Establishment, Operation and Authority
§ 40-1.1. Operation and funding; cooperative agreements.
§ 40-1.2. Fire Chief.26
A. The municipality operates the Municipal Fire Department through the
Municipal Fire Chief and Firemen. The governing body, for the purpose
of defraying the cost of management, maintenance, and improving the
Fire Department, may each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum
limits prescribed by state law on the actual valuation of all real estate
and personal property within the municipality that is subject to
taxation. The revenue from said tax shall be known as the "Fire
Department Fund." The fund shall be at all times in the possession of
the Municipal Treasurer.
B. In addition to the above, the Fire Department is authorized to enter into
agreement with the appropriate Rural Fire District for the mutual aid
and protection of the residents of both the City and the Rural Fire
District. The agreement so entered into shall be on file at the office of
the Municipal Clerk for public inspection at any reasonable time.
(Neb. RS 16-222, 18-1201)
A. The Fire Chief shall manage the Fire Department and it shall be his
duty to inform the governing body when any of the fire engines, hose,
ladders, or other apparatus needs repair. Upon the written consent and
directive of the governing body, the Fire Chief shall cause the repair,
improvement, or maintenance of the equipment and shall personally
supervise and approve of the same. It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief
to come before the governing body at the regular meeting in January of
each year to give an annual report to the governing body of the general
condition and the proposed additions or improvements recommended
by him.
B. In addition to such other duties as may be performed by the Fire Chief,
he or she shall keep and maintain full and complete records regarding
the twelve-month period ending 30 days prior to the annual report of
the Chief to the City Council as provided for in Subsection C of this
section. Such records include, but are not limited to, the number of
volunteers in active volunteer service providing emergency response
services to the City, including their ages, the amount and type of
training received by each volunteer during the course of his or her time
of service as an active volunteer, the number of new volunteers
recruited during such period, the number of volunteers who ceased to
be active volunteers during that period, the basic information regarding
each volunteer specified in Neb. RS 35-1309.01, the number and nature
of calls or requests for emergency services, the response time for each
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 40-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-1.2
1:75
§ 40-1.3. Equipment custody and care.
All apparatus and appliances for the extinguishment of fire belonging to this
City shall be under the direct and immediate control of the Chief of the
Fire Department and of the several fire companies to which such appliances
have been delivered. No person shall, under any pretense whatsoever,
remove any of such appliances from the place or house where it is kept
by its respective company, except the members of such company, without
the order of one of the properly authorized officers of such company, the
Chief of the Department or someone authorized to act in his stead. It shall
be the duty of the aforesaid fire companies to keep all apparatus and hose
furnished by the City in a serviceable and clean condition and in such a state
as to be of immediate use in case of fire.
§ 40-1.4. Expenditure of funds.
No obligation, except in exigencies and with regard to minor expenditures,
shall be incurred on behalf of the Fire Department unless authorized by the
Council.
§ 40-1.5. Interference with equipment prohibited.
No person, other than the Fire Chief and the members of the Fire
Department, shall, at any time, molest, handle or interfere with any of the
fire apparatus belonging to the City.
§ 40-1.6. Membership and organization; powers and duties.
[Amended 10-1-1985 by Ord. No. 15-85; 8-3-2004 by Ord. No. 18-04]
The Fire Department shall consist of so many members as may be decided
by the City Council. The members may organize themselves in any way
they may decide, subject to the review of the City Council. The Fire Chief
shall appoint no more than 25 members for each Fire Department company,
subject to the review and approval of the City Council. All vacancies shall
be filled in this manner.
call, to be calculated from the time of receipt of the dispatch to the time
of arrival of the first fire or rescue emergency response vehicle at the
site of the request, the number of volunteers responding to each call,
and the time each call was received. The City Council may specify any
additional information to be gathered or collected by the Fire Chief or
as the Fire Chief may recommend.
C. The Fire Chief shall collate and analyze the information gathered
pursuant to Subsection A of this section and shall, no less than once in
any twelve-month period, on a date specified by the City Council,
provide a report to the City Council at a regular Council meeting on the
prior year's experience regarding the volunteer department and shall
make such recommendations as he or she deems appropriate.
§ 40-1.2 SEWARD CODE § 40-1.6
1:76
§ 40-1.7. Fires within corporate limits.
It shall be the duty of the Fire Department to use all proper means for
the extinguishment of fires; to protect property within the municipality;
and to secure the observance of all ordinances, laws, and other rules and
regulations with respect to fires and fire prevention.
§ 40-1.8. Fires beyond corporate limits.
A. All members of the Fire Department shall be subject to such rules and
regulations, and shall perform such duties, as may be prescribed or
required of them by the Fire Chief or the City Council. The members of
the Fire Department shall, during the time of a fire or great public
danger, have and exercise the powers and duties of police officers and
shall have full power and authority to arrest all persons guilty of any
violation of the Municipal Code or the laws of the State of Nebraska.
B. Members of the Fire Department may hold meetings and engage in
social activities with the approval of the City Council. The Secretary
shall, upon request, keep a record of all meetings and shall make a
report to the City Council of all meetings and activities of the Fire
Department.
C. Members of the Fire Department shall be considered to be employees of
the City for the purpose of providing them with workers' compensation
and other benefits. The City Council may compensate or reimburse any
member of the Fire Department for expenses incurred in carrying out
his or her duties in an amount set by resolution.
D. The City Council shall purchase and maintain in force a policy of group
term life insurance to age 65 covering the lives of all the City's active
volunteer fire and rescue personnel, except that when any such person
serves more than one municipality or rural or suburban fire protection
district, the policy shall be purchased only by the first municipality or
district which he or she serves. The policy shall provide a minimum
death benefit of $10,000 for death from any cause and shall, at the
option of the insured, be convertible to a permanent form of life
insurance at age 65. The coverage of such policy shall terminate as to
any individual who ceases to be an active volunteer member of the Fire
Department of the City. (Neb. RS 35-108)
E. For purposes of Neb. RS 33-139.01, volunteer firefighters and rescue
squad members testifying as witnesses in that capacity alone shall not
be deemed employees of the City.
(Neb. RS 33-139.01, 18-2538, 35-101 through 35-103, 35-108)
A. Upon the permission of the Mayor or Fire Chief, such fire equipment of
the municipality as may be designated by the governing body as rural
equipment may be used beyond the corporate limits to extinguish
reported fires.
§ 40-1.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-1.8
1:77
§ 40-1.9. Preservation of property.
Any official of the municipal Fire Department shall have the power during
the time of a fire to cause the removal of any private or public property
whenever it shall become necessary to do so for the preservation of such
property from fire, to prevent the spreading of fire, or to protect adjoining
property. The officials may direct the municipal firefighters to remove any
building, structure, or fence for the purpose of checking the progress of any
fire, and the official in charge of the fire-fighting effort shall have the power
to blow up, or cause to be blown up, with powder or otherwise, any building
or erection during the progress of a fire for the purpose of extinguishing or
checking the same.
§ 40-1.10. Drills.
The Municipal Fire Department shall hold departmental fire drills at least
six times per year at such times as the members of the Fire Department
shall decide.
§ 40-1.11. Right-of-way during fires and drills.
The Municipal Fire Department shall have the right-of-way upon any street,
alley, or highway when going to or returning from fires or drills had under
the direction of, or by order of, the Fire Department. When fires occur, the
Fire Chief, Chief of Police or any officer specially deputized shall have the
power to close any street or highway or public place adjacent to such fire.
§ 40-1.12. Inspections.27
It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief, when directed to do so by the
governing body, to inspect or cause to be inspected by Fire Department
officers, members, or some other official, as often as may be necessary, all
buildings, premises and public thoroughfares, except the interiors of private
dwellings, for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any
conditions liable to create a fire hazard. The inspection shall be of the
storage, sale and use of flammable liquids, combustibles, and explosives;
electric wiring and heating; and the means and adequacy of exits, in case
of fire in schools, churches, hotels, halls, theaters, factories, hospitals, and
all other buildings in which numbers of persons congregate from time to
time for any purpose, whether publicly or privately owned; the design,
B. The firefighters of the municipality shall be considered as acting in the
performance and within the scope of their duties in fighting fire or
saving property or life outside the corporate limits of the municipality
when directed to do so by the Mayor or Chief of the Fire Department or
some person authorized to act for such Chief and, in so doing, may take
such fire equipment of the municipality as may be designated by the
governing body.
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 40-1.8 SEWARD CODE § 40-1.12
1:78
construction, location, installation, and operation of equipment for storing,
handling, and utilizing of liquefied petroleum gases, specifying the
odorization of said gases and the degree thereof; and chemicals, pyroxylin
plastics, nitrocellulose films, or any other hazardous material that may now
or hereafter exist. (Neb. RS 81-512)
§ 40-1.13. Notice of violation; appeals.
Upon a finding that the Municipal Code has been violated, the Fire Chief
shall notify, or cause to be notified, the owner, occupant, or manager of the
premises where a violation has occurred. Notice may be made personally or
by delivering a copy to the premises and affixing it to the door of the main
entrance of the premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an
order upon the owner, such order may be served personally, or by mailing
a copy to the owner's last known post office address if the owner is absent
from the jurisdiction. Any such order shall be immediately complied with by
the owner, occupant, or manager of the premises or building. The owner,
occupant, or manager may, within five days after such order by the Chief
of the Fire Department or his agent, appeal the order with the governing
body, requesting a review, and it shall be the duty of the governing body to
hear the same within not less than five days nor more than 10 days from
the time when the request was filed in writing with the Municipal Clerk.
The governing body shall then affirm, modify, or rescind the order as safety
and justice may require and the decision shall then be final, subject only to
any remedy which the aggrieved person may have at law or in equity. The
order shall be modified or rescinded only where it is evident that reasonable
safety exists and that conditions necessitate a variance due to the probable
hardship in complying literally with the order of the Fire Chief. A copy of
any decision so made shall be sent to both the Fire Chief and the owner,
occupant, or manager making the appeal.
§ 40-1.14. Impersonating firefighters.
It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely personate a fireman by wearing
a badge or other apparel usually worn by a fireman for the purpose of
obtaining any benefit whatsoever. Nothing herein shall be construed to
prohibit the theatrical representation of a fireman for bona fide
entertainment purposes when there is no intent to defraud. (Neb. RS
28-609)
§ 40-1.15. Mandatory assistance.
Any official of the municipal Fire Department may command the assistance
and services of any person present at a fire to help in extinguishing the fire,
or in the removal and protection of property. In the event that a spectator
refuses, neglects, or fails to assist the Fire Department after a lawful order
to do so, he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 40-1.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-1.16
1:79
§ 40-1.16. Power of arrest.
The Municipal Fire Chief or the Assistant Fire Chief shall have the power
during the time of a fire and for a period of 36 hours after its extinguishment
to arrest any suspected arsonist, or other person hindering or resisting
the fire-fighting effort, or any person who conducts himself in a noisy or
disorderly manner. The officials shall be severally vested with the usual
powers and authority of Municipal Policemen to command all persons to
assist them in the performance of their duties.
§ 40-1.17. Fire investigations.28
It shall be the duty of the Fire Department to investigate, or cause to be
investigated, the cause, origin, and circumstances of every fire occurring
in the municipality in which property has been destroyed or damaged. All
fires of unknown origin shall be reported, and such officers shall especially
make an investigation and report as to whether such fire was the result
of carelessness, accident, or design. Such investigation shall be begun
immediately after the occurrence of such fire, and the State Fire Marshal
shall have the right to supervise and direct the investigation whenever he
deems it expedient or necessary. The officer making the investigation of
fires occurring within the municipality shall immediately notify the State
Fire Marshal and shall, within one week of the occurrence of the fire,
furnish him with a written statement of all the facts relating to the cause
and origin of the fire, and such further information as he may call for. (Neb.
RS 81-506)
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 40-1.16 SEWARD CODE § 40-1.17
1:80
Chapter 44
FISCAL MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Purchasing and contracts — See Ch. 100.
§ 40-1.17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-1.17
1:81

ARTICLE I
Budgets, Expenditures and Other Financial Matters
§ 44-1.1. Financial statement. [Amended 3-2-1993 by Ord. No. 6-93]
The Mayor and Council shall have cause to be published semiannually
a statement of the receipts of the City and an itemized account of the
expenditures of the City. (Neb. RS 16-722)
§ 44-1.2. Proposed budget statement contents. [Amended 9-18-1984
by Ord. No. 32-84; 6-28-1994 by Ord. No. 33-94; 10-7-1997 by Ord.
No. 49-97; 10-20-1998 by Ord. No. 32-98; 3-20-2001 by Ord. No.
7-01; 5-6-2003 by Ord. No. 23-03]
A. The governing body shall annually or biennially prepare a proposed
budget statement on forms prescribed and furnished by the Auditor of
Public Accounts. The proposed budget statement shall be made
available to the public prior to the publication of the notice of the
hearing on the proposed budget statement. A proposed budget
statement shall contain the following information, except as provided
by state law:29
(1) For the immediately preceding fiscal year, the revenue from all
sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other than revenue
received from personal and real property taxation, allocated to the
funds and separately stated as to each such source: the
unencumbered cash balance at the beginning and end of the year;
the amount received by taxation of personal and real property; and
the amount of actual expenditures;
(2) For the current fiscal year, actual and estimated revenue from all
sources, including motor vehicle taxes, allocated to the funds and
separately stated as to each such source: the actual unencumbered
cash balance available at the beginning of the year; the amount
received from personal and real property taxation; and the amount
of actual and estimated expenditures, whichever is applicable.
Such statement shall contain the cash reserve for each fiscal year
and shall note whether or not such reserve is encumbered. Such
cash reserve projections shall be based upon the actual experience
of prior years. The cash reserve shall not exceed 50% of the total
budget adopted exclusive of capital outlay items;
(3) For the immediately ensuing fiscal year, an estimate of revenue
from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other than revenue
to be received from taxation of personal and real property,
separately stated as to each such source: the actual or estimated
unencumbered cash balances, whichever is applicable, to be
available at the beginning of the year; the amounts proposed to be
expended during the year; and the amount of cash reserve, based
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 44-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1.2
1:83
§ 44-1.3. Hearing on proposed budget statement; adoption;
certification of tax amount. [Amended 10-20-1998 by Ord. No.
33-98; 5-6-2003 by Ord. No. 22-03]
on actual experience of prior years, which cash reserve shall not
exceed 50% of the total budget adopted exclusive of capital outlay
items;
(4) A statement setting out separately the amount sought to be raised
from the levy of a tax on the taxable value of real property:
(a) For the purpose of paying the principal or interest on bonds
issued by the governing body; and
(b) For all other purposes;
(5) A uniform summary of the proposed budget statement, including
each proprietary function fund included in a separate proprietary
budget statement prepared pursuant to the Municipal Proprietary
Function Act (Neb. RS 18-2801 et seq.), and a grand total of all
funds maintained by the governing body; and
(6) A list of the proprietary functions which are not included in the
budget statement. Such proprietary functions shall have a separate
budget statement which is approved by the governing body as
provided in the Municipal Proprietary Function Act.
B. The actual or estimated unencumbered cash balance required to be
included in the budget statement by this section shall include deposits
and investments of the municipality as well as any funds held by the
County Treasurer for the municipality and shall be accurately stated on
the proposed budget statement.
C. The municipality shall correct any material errors in the budget
statement detected by the Auditor of Public Accounts or by other
sources. (Neb. RS 13-504)
D. The estimated expenditures plus the required cash reserve for the
ensuing fiscal year less all estimated and actual unencumbered
balances at the beginning of the year and less the estimated income
from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other than taxation of
personal and real property shall equal the amount to be received from
taxes, and such amount shall be shown on the proposed budget
statement pursuant to this section. The amount to be raised from
taxation of personal and real property, as determined above, plus the
estimated revenue from other sources, including motor vehicle taxes,
and the unencumbered balances shall equal the estimated
expenditures, plus the necessary required cash reserve, for the ensuing
year. (Neb. RS 13-505)
(Neb. RS 13-504, 13-505)
§ 44-1.2 SEWARD CODE § 44-1.3
1:84
§ 44-1.4. Adopted budget statement; filing; certification of amount
of tax. [Amended 1-17-1978 by Ord. No. 1121; 3-2-1993 by Ord. No.
7-93; 6-28-1994 by Ord. No. 32-94; 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 45-95;
10-7-1997 by Ord. No. 48-97; 10-20-1998 by Ord. No. 34-98]
A. The governing body shall each year conduct a public hearing on its
proposed budget statement. Notice of the place and time of the hearing,
together with a summary of the proposed budget statement, shall be
published at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation within the municipality.
B. After the hearing, the proposed budget statement shall be adopted, or
amended and adopted as amended, and a written record shall be kept of
such hearing. The amount to be received from personal and real
property taxation shall be certified to the levying board after the
proposed budget statement is adopted or is amended and adopted as
amended. The certification of the amount to be received from personal
and real property taxation shall specify separately:
(1) The amount to be applied to the payment of principal or interest on
bonds issued by the governing body; and
(2) The amount to be received for all other purposes.
C. If the adopted budget statement reflects a change from that shown in
the published proposed budget statement, a summary of such changes
shall be published within 20 days after its adoption in the manner
provided in this section, but without provision for hearing, setting forth
the items changed and the reasons for such changes. (Neb. RS 13-506)
D. When a levy increase has been authorized by vote of the electors, the
adopted budget statement shall indicate the amount of the levy
increase. (Neb. RS 13-506, 13-507)
A. After publication and hearing on the proposed budget statement and
within the time prescribed by law, the governing body shall file with and
certify to the levying board, on or before September 20 of each year,
and file with the Auditor of Public Accounts, a copy of the adopted
budget statement, together with the amount of tax required to fund the
adopted budget, setting out separately: 1) the amount to be levied for
the payment of principal or interest on bonds issued by the governing
body; and 2) the amount to be levied for all other purposes. Proof of
publication shall be attached to the statements.
B. The governing body, in certifying the amount required, may make
allowance for delinquent taxes not exceeding 5% of the amount
required plus the actual percentage of delinquent taxes for the
preceding tax year and for the amount of estimated tax loss from any
pending or anticipated litigation which involves taxation and in which
tax collections have been or can be withheld or escrowed by court
order. For purposes of this section, anticipated litigation shall be limited
§ 44-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1.4
1:85
§ 44-1.5. Expenditures prior to adoption of budget. [Amended
2-7-1995 by Ord. No. 15-95]
§ 44-1.6. Property taxes; power to levy; certification of amount;
limitations. [Amended 10-20-1998 by Ord. No. 35-98]
to the anticipation of an action being filed by a taxpayer who or which
filed a similar action for the preceding year which is still pending.
Except for such allowances, the governing body shall not certify an
amount of tax more than 1% greater or less than the amount
determined in the proposed budget statement.
C. The governing body may designate one of its members to perform any
duty or responsibility required of such body by this section.
(Neb. RS 13-508)
A. On and after the first day of its fiscal year in 1993 and of each
succeeding year and until the adoption of the budget by the governing
body in September, the governing body may expend any balance of cash
on hand for the current expenses of the municipality. Except as
provided in Subsection B of this section, such expenditures shall not
exceed an amount equivalent to the total amount expended under the
last budget in the equivalent period of the prior budget year. Such
expenditures shall be charged against the appropriations for each
individual fund or purpose as provided in the budget when adopted.
B. The restriction on expenditures in Subsection A of this section may be
exceeded upon the express finding of the governing body that
expenditures beyond the amount authorized are necessary to enable
the municipality to meet its statutory duties and responsibilities. The
finding and approval of the expenditures in excess of the statutory
authorization shall be adopted by the governing body in open public
session. Expenditures authorized by this section shall be charged
against appropriations for each individual fund or purpose as provided
in the budget when adopted, and nothing in this section shall be
construed to authorize expenditures by the municipality in excess of
that authorized by any other statutory provision.
(Neb. RS 13-509.01, 13-509.02)
A. Subject to the limits in Neb. RS 77-3442, the Mayor and City Council
shall have the power to levy and collect taxes for all municipal purposes
on the taxable property within the corporate limits of the municipality.
All municipal taxes, except special assessments otherwise provided for,
shall become due on the first day of December of each year.
B. At the time provided for by law, the Council shall cause to be certified to
the County Clerk the amount of tax to be levied for the purposes of the
adopted budget statement on the taxable property within the
municipality for the year then ensuing, as shown by the assessment roll
§ 44-1.4 SEWARD CODE § 44-1.6
1:86
§ 44-1.7. Annual appropriations. [Amended 6-28-1994 by Ord. No.
30-94; 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 46-95]
The City shall adopt a budget statement pursuant to the Nebraska Budget
Act, to be termed "the annual appropriation bill," in which are appropriated
such sums of money as may be deemed necessary to defray all necessary
expenses and liabilities of the City. (Neb. RS 16-704)
§ 44-1.8. Expenditures.
The governing body shall not have the power to appropriate, issue, or draw
any order or warrant on the Municipal Treasurer for money, unless the
same has been appropriated or ordered by ordinance or the claim has been
allowed and a fund has been provided in the adopted budget statement out
of which such claim is payable. (Neb. RS 16-706, 16-726 through 16-729)
§ 44-1.9. Judgments.
Should any judgment be obtained against the municipality, the Mayor and
the Committee on Finances, with the sanction of the City Council, may
borrow a sufficient amount to pay the same for a period of time not to
extend beyond the close of the next fiscal year. The governing body shall
then add to the amount authorized to be raised in the general tax levy the
sum and interest accrued of the judgment. (Neb. RS 16-706)
§ 44-1.10. Unlawful transfers.
Any transfer or division of the money or credits from any of the funds
to another fund or to a purpose other than for which proposed, except
as specifically hereinafter provided, shall render any Councilman voting
therefor or any municipal official participating therein guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Neb. RS 16-706)
§ 44-1.11. Lawful transfer of funds.
When the City Council, by a three-fourths vote of the members, shall
declare the expenditure of any fund for the purpose for which it was
created to be unwise and impracticable or where the purpose has been fully
for such year, including all special assessments and taxes assessed as
otherwise provided.
C. The maximum amount of tax which may be certified, assessed, and
collected for purposes of the adopted budget statement shall not
require a tax levy in excess of the amounts specified in Neb. RS 16-702.
D. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize an increase in
the amounts of levies for any specific municipal purpose or purposes
elsewhere limited by law, whether limited in specific sums or by tax
levies.
(Neb. RS 16-702)
§ 44-1.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1.11
1:87
accomplished and the whole fund or an unexpired balance thereof remains,
and no indebtedness has been incurred on account of such fund which has
not been fully paid, such fund may be transferred to any other fund of the
municipality by the affirmative vote of 3/4 of all the members of the Council.
(Neb. RS 16-721)
§ 44-1.12. Revision of budget. [Amended 5-6-2003 by Ord. No.
21-03]
A. Unless otherwise provided by law, the governing body may propose to
revise the previously adopted budget statement and shall conduct a
public hearing on such proposal whenever during the current fiscal
year it becomes apparent to the governing body that:
(1) There are circumstances which could not reasonably have been
anticipated at the time the budget for the current year was
adopted;
(2) The budget adopted violated Neb. RS 13-518 to 13-522, such that
the revenue of the current fiscal year for any fund thereof will be
insufficient, additional expenses will be necessarily incurred, or
there is a need to reduce the budget requirements to comply with
Neb RS. 13-518 to 13-522; or
(3) The governing body has been notified by the Auditor of Public
Accounts of a mathematical or accounting error or noncompliance
with the Nebraska Budget Act.
B. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be published at least
five days prior to the date set for hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation within the municipality. Such published notice shall set
forth:
(1) The time and place of the hearing;
(2) The amount in dollars of additional or reduced money required and
for what purpose;
(3) A statement setting forth the nature of the unanticipated
circumstances and, if the budget requirements are to be increased,
the reasons why the previously adopted budget of expenditures
cannot be reduced during the remainder of the current year to
meet the need for additional money in that manner;
(4) A copy of the summary of the originally adopted budget previously
published; and
(5) A copy of the summary of the proposed revised budget.
C. At such hearing any taxpayer may appear or file a written statement
protesting any application for additional money. A written record shall
be kept of all such hearings.
§ 44-1.11 SEWARD CODE § 44-1.12
1:88
§ 44-1.13. Sinking funds.
The governing body, subject to the limitations set forth herein, shall have
the power to levy a tax not to exceed three mills on the dollar in any one
year upon the assessed value of all taxable property within the municipality,
except intangible property, for a term not to exceed 10 years in addition
to the amount of tax which may be annually levied for the purposes of
the adopted budget statement of the municipality, for the purpose of
establishing a sinking fund for the construction, purchase, improvement,
extension, or repair of the approved uses as authorized by state law. To
initiate the sinking fund, the governing body shall declare its purpose
by resolution to submit to the qualified electors of the municipality the
proposition to provide the improvement at the next general municipal
election. The resolution shall set forth the improvement, the estimated cost,
the amount of the annual levy, the number of years required to provide
the required revenue, the name of the sinking fund proposed, and the
proposition as it will appear on the ballot. Notice of the proposition shall
be published in its entirety three times on successive weeks before the
day of the election in a legal newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality. The sinking fund may be established after the election if a
majority or more of the legal votes were in favor of the establishment of
D. Upon conclusion of the public hearing on the proposed revised budget
and approval of the proposed revised budget by the governing body, the
governing body shall file with the County Clerk of the county or
counties in which such governing body is located, and with the Auditor
of Public Accounts, a copy of the revised budget, as adopted. The
governing body may then issue warrants in payment for expenditures
authorized by the adopted revised budget. Such warrants shall be
referred to as "registered warrants" and shall be repaid during the next
fiscal year from funds derived from taxes levied therefor.
E. Within 30 days after the adoption of the budget under Neb. RS 13-506,
a governing body may, or within 30 days after notification of an error by
the Auditor of Public Accounts a governing body shall, correct an
adopted budget which contains a clerical, mathematical or accounting
error which does not affect the total amount budgeted by more than 1%
or increase the amount required from property taxes. No public hearing
shall be required for such a correction. After correction, the governing
body shall file a copy of the corrected budget with the County Clerk of
the county or counties in which such governing body is located and with
the Auditor of Public Accounts. The governing body may then issue
warrants in payment for expenditures authorized by the budget. (Neb.
RS 13-511)
F. The public hearing requirement shall not apply to emergency
expenditures pursuant to Neb. RS 81-829.51.30
(Neb. RS 13-510, 13-511)
30.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 44-1.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1.13
1:89
the fund. The governing body may then proceed to establish the fund in
conformity with the provisions of the proposition, and applicable state law.
The funds received by the Municipal Treasurer shall, as they accumulate,
be immediately invested with the written approval of the governing body in
the manner provided by state law. No sinking fund so established shall be
used for any purpose or purposes contrary to the purpose as it appeared on
the ballot unless the governing body is authorized to do so by 60% of the
qualified electors of the municipality voting at a general election favoring
such a change in the use of the sinking fund. (Neb. RS 19-1301 through
19-1304, 77-2337, 77-2339)
§ 44-1.14. Depositories. [Amended 11-3-1998 by Ord. No. 40-98;
7-16-2002 by Ord. No. 22-02]
§ 44-1.15. Certificates of deposit and time deposits. [Amended
11-3-1998 by Ord. No. 41-98; 7-16-2002 by Ord. No. 23-0231]
The City Treasurer may, upon resolution of the Mayor and Council
authorizing the same, purchase certificates of deposit from and make time
A. The City Treasurer shall deposit, and at all times keep on deposit, for
safekeeping, in banks, capital stock financial institutions, or qualifying
mutual financial institutions of approved and responsible standing, all
money collected, received or held by him or her as City Treasurer. Such
deposits shall be subject to all regulations imposed by law or adopted
by the City Council for the receiving and holding thereof. The fact that a
stockholder, director, or other officer of such bank, capital stock
financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial institution shall also
be serving as Mayor, as a member of the City Council, or as any other
officer of such municipality, shall not disqualify such bank, capital stock
financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial institution from
acting as a depository for such municipal funds. Neb. RS 77-2366 shall
apply to deposits in capital stock financial institutions. Neb. RS
77-2365.01 shall apply to deposits in qualifying mutual financial
institutions. (Neb. RS 16-712)
B. The City Treasurer may deposit the funds received and held by him or
her, by virtue of such office, with a cooperative credit association
situated within the boundaries of the county, or a county adjoining
thereto, where the City is situated, if the City is the depositor, as well as
in a commercial state or national bank if the cooperative credit
association performs all the conditions precedent required by the laws
of this state of commercial state and national banks to qualify them to
receive deposits of such public funds. It shall not be necessary for the
City, in making such a deposit of public funds, to purchase shares in
such cooperative credit association or become a member thereof, and
such a cooperative credit association is hereby authorized and
empowered to receive such money under such conditions.
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 44-1.13 SEWARD CODE § 44-1.15
1:90
deposits in banks, capital stock financial institutions, or qualifying mutual
financial institutions selected as depositories of City funds under provisions
of this Code. The certificates of deposit purchased and time deposits made
shall bear interest and shall be secured as set forth in this Code, except
that the penal sum of such of the required bond or the sum of the required
security shall be reduced in the amount of the time deposit or certificate
of deposit insured or guaranteed by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation. Neb. RS 77-2366 shall apply to deposits in capital stock
financial institutions. Neb. RS 77-2365.01 shall apply to deposits in
qualifying mutual financial institutions. (Neb. RS 16-713)
§ 44-1.16. Depository bonds. [Amended 11-3-1998 by Ord. No.
42-98; 7-16-2002 by Ord. No. 24-02]
A. For the security of the fund so deposited, the City Treasurer shall
require each depository to give bond for the safekeeping and payment
of such deposits and the accretions thereof, which bond shall run to the
City and be approved by the Mayor. Such bond shall be conditioned that
such a depository shall, at the end of every quarter, render to the
Treasurer a statement in duplicate, showing the several daily balances,
the amount of money of the City held by it during the quarter, the
amount of the accretion thereto, and how credited. The bond shall also
be conditioned that the depository shall generally do and perform
whatever may be required by the provisions of this Code and faithfully
discharge the trust reposed in such depository. Such bond shall be as
nearly as practicable in the form provided in Neb. RS 77-2304. No
person in any way connected with any depository as an officer or
stockholder shall be accepted as a surety on any bond given by the
depository of which he or she is an officer or stockholder. Such bond
shall be deposited with the City Clerk. Neb. RS 77-2366 shall apply to
deposits in capital stock financial institutions. Neb. RS 77-2365.01 shall
apply to deposits in qualifying mutual financial institutions. (Neb. RS
16-714)
B. The insurance or guarantee afforded to depositors in banks, capital
stock financial institutions, or qualifying mutual financial institutions
through the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation shall be deemed
and construed to be a surety bond to the extent that the deposits are
insured or guaranteed by such corporation; and for deposits so insured
or guaranteed, no other surety bond or other security shall be
required.32
(Neb. RS 16-714, 77-2362 through 77-2364)
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 44-1.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1.17
1:91
§ 44-1.17. Depository securities. [Amended 11-3-1998 by Ord. No.
43-98; 7-16-2002 by Ord. No. 25-0233]
In lieu of the bond required by this Code, any bank, capital stock financial
institution, or qualifying mutual financial institution making application
to become a depository may give security to the City Clerk as provided
in the Public Funds Deposit Security Act. The penal sum of the bond
shall be equal to or greater than the amount of the deposit in excess of
that portion of the deposit insured or guaranteed by the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation. Neb. RS 77-2366 shall apply to deposits in capital
stock financial institutions. Neb. RS 77-2365.01 shall apply to deposits in
qualifying mutual financial institutions. (Neb. RS 16-715, 77-2364, 77-2386
through 77-2397)
§ 44-1.18. Maximum deposits. [Amended 7-25-1994 by Ord. No.
34-94; 7-16-2002 by Ord. No. 26-0234]
The City Treasurer shall not have on deposit in any bank, capital stock
financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial institution at any time
more than the amount insured or guaranteed by the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation plus the maximum amount of the bond given by
the bank, capital stock financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial
institution if the bank gives a surety bond, nor in any bank, capital stock
financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial institution giving a
personal bond, more than the amount insured or guaranteed by the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation plus one-half of the amount of the bond of
such bank, capital stock financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial
institution, and the amount so on deposit at any time with any bank, capital
stock financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial institution shall not
in either case exceed the amount insured or guaranteed by the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation plus the paid-up capital stock and surplus of
such bank, capital stock financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial
institution. The City Treasurer shall not be liable for any loss sustained by
reason of the failure of any such bonded depository whose bond has been
duly approved by the Mayor as provided in this Code or which has, in lieu
of a surety bond, given security as provided in this Code. (Neb. RS 16-716)
§ 44-1.19. Investment of funds.35
Whenever the municipality shall have accumulated a surplus in its General
Fund in excess of its current needs, or shall have accumulated a sinking
fund for the payment of its bonds and the money in such sinking fund shall
exceed the amount necessary to pay the principal and interest of any such
bonds which become due during the current year, the Mayor and Council
are authorized to invest such surplus in its General Fund, in excess of
current needs, or such excess in its sinking funds, in certificates of deposit,
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 44-1.17 SEWARD CODE § 44-1.19
1:92
in time deposits, and in any securities in which the State Investment Officer
is authorized to invest pursuant to the Nebraska Capital Expansion Act
(Neb. RS 72-1261 et seq.) and the Nebraska State Funds Investment Act
(Neb. RS 72-1237 et seq.) and as provided in the authorized investment
guidelines of the Nebraska Investment Council in effect on the date the
investment is made. When any warrant of the municipality shall have been
presented for payment and the same is not paid for want of funds, the
Treasurer shall, upon and under direction of the Mayor and Council,
purchase and take up such registered warrant with the sinking funds in the
hands of the Treasurer and hold such warrant for the benefit of the fund
so invested until the same is paid in its order, as provided by law. (Neb. RS
77-2341, 77-2335)
§ 44-1.20. Claims.36
§ 44-1.21. Warrants.
Upon allowance of a claim by the Council, the order for the payment thereof
shall specify the particular fund or appropriation out of which it is payable
as specified in the annual appropriation bill and no order or warrant shall
A. All liquidated and unliquidated claims and accounts payable against the
City shall:
(1) Be presented in writing;
(2) State the name and address of the claimant and the amount of the
claim; and
(3) Fully and accurately identify the items or services for which
payment is claimed or the time, place, nature, and circumstances
giving rise to the claim.
B. As a condition precedent to maintaining an action for a claim, other
than a tort claim as defined in Neb. RS 13-903, the claimant shall file
such claim within 90 days of the accrual of the claim in the office of the
City Clerk.
C. The City Clerk shall notify the claimant or his or her agent or attorney
by letter mailed to the claimant's address within five days if the claim is
disallowed by the City Council.
D. No costs shall be recovered against the City in any action brought
against it for any claim or for any claim allowed in part which has not
been presented to the City Council to be audited, unless the recovery is
for a greater sum than the amount allowed with the interest due.37
(Neb. RS 16-726)
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
37.Editor's Note: Original § 1-920 of the 1976 Code, Claims; audits, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 44-1.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1.21
1:93
be drawn in excess of 85% of the current levy for the purpose of which
it is drawn unless there shall be sufficient money in the Treasury to the
credit of the proper fund for its payment, and no claim shall be audited or
allowed except an order or warrant for the payment thereof may legally
be drawn. All warrants drawn upon the Treasury must be signed by the
Mayor and countersigned by the Clerk and shall state the particular fund or
appropriation to which the same is chargeable, the person to whom payable,
and for what particular object. No money shall be otherwise paid that
has not been drawn upon such warrant. Such warrants may be delivered
immediately when so drawn. (Neb. RS 16-718)
§ 44-1.22. Appropriation required for contracts.
No contract shall be made by the City Council or any committee or member
thereof and no expense shall be incurred by any of the officers or
departments of the municipality, whether the object of the expenditure is
ordered by the City Council or not, unless an appropriation shall have been
previously made concerning such expense, except as otherwise provided by
law. (Neb. RS 16-501)
§ 44-1.23. Contract vote.
On the passage or adoption of every resolution or order to enter into
a contract, or accepting of work done under contract, by the Mayor or
Council, the "yeas" and "nays" shall be called and entered upon the record.
To pass or adopt any bylaw, ordinance, or any such resolution, or order, a
concurrence of a majority of the whole number of the members elected to
the Council shall be required. The Mayor may vote on any such matter when
his vote shall be decisive and the Mayor shall, for the purpose of such vote,
be deemed to be a member of the Council. (Neb. RS 16-503)
§ 44-1.24. Contract advertising. [Amended 9-4-1979 by Ord. No.
1184; 9-20-1983 by Ord. No. 24-83; 4-6-1993; 11-18-1997 by Ord.
No. 52-97; 3-20-2012 by Ord. No. 6-12]
A. Except as provided in Neb. RS 18-412.01, no contract for enlargement
or general improvements, such as water extensions, sewers, public
heating system, bridges, work on streets, or any other work or
improvement when the cost of such improvement is assessed to the
property, costing over $30,000,00 shall be made unless it is first
approved by the City council.
B. Except as provided in Neb. RS 18-412.01, before the City Council
makes any contract in excess of $30,000,00 for enlargement or general
improvements, such as water extensions, sewers, public heating
system, bridges, work on streets, or any other work or improvement
when the cost of such enlargement or improvement is assessed to the
property, an estimate of the cost shall be made by the City Engineer and
submitted to the Council. In advertising for bids as provided in
§ 44-1.21 SEWARD CODE § 44-1.24
1:94
Subsections C and E of this section, the Council may publish the amount
of the estimate.
C. Advertisements for bids shall be required for any contract costing over
$30,000 entered into:
(1) For enlargement or general improvements, such as water
extensions, sewers, public heating system, bridges, work on
streets, or any other work or improvement when the cost of such
enlargement or improvement is assessed to the property; or
(2) For the purchase of equipment used in the construction of such
enlargement or general improvements.
D. A municipal electric utility may enter into a contract for the
enlargement or improvement of the electric system or for the purchase
of equipment used for such enlargement or improvement without
advertising for bids if the price is:
(1) Thirty thousand dollars or less;
(2) Sixty thousand dollars or less and the municipal electric utility has
gross annual revenue from retail sales in excess of $1,000,000;
(3) Ninety thousand dollars or less and the municipal electric utility
has gross annual revenue from retail sales in excess of $5,000,000;
or
(4) One hundred twenty thousand dollars or less and the municipal
electric utility has gross annual revenue from retail sales in excess
of $10,000,000.
E. The advertisement provided for in Subsections B and C of this section
shall be published at least seven days prior to the bid closing in a legal
newspaper published in or of general circulation in the City. In case of a
public emergency resulting from infectious or contagious diseases,
destructive windstorms, floods, snow, war, or an exigency or pressing
necessity or unforeseen need calling for immediate action or remedy to
prevent a serious loss of, or serious injury or damage to, life, health, or
property, estimates of costs and advertising for bids may be waived in
the emergency ordinance authorized by Neb. RS 16-405 when adopted
by a three-fourths vote of the Council and entered of record.
F. If, after advertising for bids as provided in Subsections B, C and E of
this section, the City Council receives fewer than two bids on a contract
or if the bids received by the City Council contain a price which exceeds
the estimated cost, the Mayor and the City Council may negotiate a
contract in an attempt to complete the proposed enlargement or
general improvements at a cost commensurate with the estimate given.
G. If the materials are of such a nature that, in the opinion of the
manufacturer and with the concurrence of the City Council or Board of
Public Works, no cost can be estimated until the materials have been
§ 44-1.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1.24
1:95
§ 44-1.25. Annual audit; financial statements. [Amended 8-21-1984
by Ord. No. 20-84]
The governing body shall cause an audit of the municipal accounts to be
made by a qualified accountant as expeditiously as possible following the
close of the fiscal year. Such audit shall be made on a cash or accrual
method at the discretion of the governing body. The audit shall be
completed, and the annual audit report made not later than six months
after the close of the fiscal year. The accountant making the audit shall
submit not fewer than three copies of the audit report to the governing
body. All public utilities or other enterprises which substantially generate
their own revenue shall be audited separately, and the results of such audits
shall appear separately in the annual audit report, and such audits shall
be on an accrual basis and shall contain statements and materials which
conform to generally accepted accounting principles. The audit report shall
set forth the financial position and results of financial operations for each
fund or group of accounts of the municipality as well as an opinion by
the accountant with respect to the financial statements. Two copies of
the annual audit report shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk, and shall
become a part of the public records of the Municipal Clerk's office, and will
at all times thereafter be open for public inspection. One copy shall be filed
with the Auditor of Public Accounts. Every governing body that is required
herein to submit to an audit of its accounts shall provide and file with the
Municipal Clerk, not later than August 1 of each year, financial statements
showing its actual and budgeted figures for the most recently completed
fiscal year. (Neb. RS 19-2901 through 19-2909, 23-934)
§ 44-1.26. Surplus City property. [Added 6-17-1986 by Ord. No.
7-86; amended 7-20-1993 by Ord. No. 22-93]
manufactured or assembled to the specific qualifications of the
purchasing municipality, the City Council or Board of Public Works may
authorize the manufacture and assemblage of such materials and may
thereafter approve the estimated cost expenditure when it is provided
by the manufacturer.
H. Any municipal bidding procedure may be waived by the City Council or
Board of Public Works:
(1) When materials or equipment are purchased at the same price and
from the same seller as materials or equipment which have
formerly been obtained pursuant to the state bidding procedure in
Neb. RS 81-145 to 81-162;
(2) When the contract is negotiated directly with a sheltered workshop
pursuant to Neb. RS 48-1503; or
(3) When required to comply with any federal grant, loan, or program.
(Neb. RS 16-321, 16-321, 17-568.01, 17-568.02)
§ 44-1.24 SEWARD CODE § 44-1.26
1:96
A. All departments, boards and commissions shall submit to the
Purchasing Agent of the City, quarterly, a listing of all property no
longer used and which is obsolete, scrapped or overstocked.
Notification and listing shall be submitted on forms provided by the
Purchasing Agent. For all property listed, a detailed description of its
use, condition, quality, age and location shall be included.
B. Disposal of surplus property shall be accomplished by any one of the
following methods:
(1) Trade-in for new merchandise.
(2) Transfer to another department.
(3) Sale by public auction or by competitive bidding.
C. In the event it is determined that trade-in is not to the advantage and
best interests of the City, the surplus property shall be offered to other
City departments on an equal basis. Should a department advise the
Purchasing Agent of an interest in said property, the Purchasing Agent
shall place a monetary value on the equipment and if the department
agrees to such value, and subject to approval of the City Administrator,
the equipment will be transferred.
D. If property is not traded or transferred to another department of the
City, the property shall be offered for sale either at public auction or by
competitive bid. If property has a value of more than $5,000 as
determined by the Purchasing Agent, approval of the City Council
should be obtained prior to its classification of excess property and its
disposal. Property of the value of $5,000 or more shall be disposed of
strictly in accordance with Nebraska State Statutes governing
competitive bidding procedure as may be applicable.
E. For property valued at less than $5,000, a listing of said property shall
be posted monthly at the following three places: City Hall, Seward
County Courthouse and Seward Public Library. No property shall be
sold until it has been advertised for at least 15 days prior to the sale.
F. In addition to posting as above set forth, the Purchasing Agent shall
utilize one of the following means to advertise all property with an
estimated value of $100 or more:
(1) Publication in a local newspaper.
(2) Publication in a trade publication, and if by a trade publication the
property may not be sold until 30 days have elapsed from the time
publication was made therein.
G. If it is determined to be for the best interests of the City, advertising in
newspapers and/or trade magazines may also be used for property with
an estimated value of $100 or less.
§ 44-1.26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1.26
1:97
§ 44-1.27. Proprietary functions; budget process. [Added 6-28-1994
by Ord. No. 31-94]
H. Property may be disposed of either through public auction or through
the sealed bid process. If the latter is used, opening of sealed bids shall
be open to the public.
I. Proceeds received from the sale of surplus property shall be paid to the
City Clerk-Treasurer of the City of Seward, Nebraska and shall be
credited to the appropriate fund.
J. If, after 45 days after notice and publication is made, no interest has
been shown in an item for sale by the City, it shall be disposed of in a
manner deemed appropriate by the City Administrator.
K. Employees of the City of Seward wishing to purchase an item of surplus
property in accordance with the procedures and provisions heretofore
set forth shall be accorded the same privileges and consideration as the
general public, and in no case shall any employee of the City of Seward
have any priority for an item because he or she is an employee of the
City of Seward, Nebraska.
L. A record shall be maintained by the Purchasing Agent of the sales,
transfers and disposal of such City property. A report, not less than
annually, shall be made to the Mayor and City Council by the City
Administrator or the Purchasing Agent, if directed by him, of all such
sales, transfers and disposal of such property.
M. This section shall not affect nor apply to the sale of Library outdated
books and periodicals to the general public. The Library is hereby
authorized to sell its outdated books and periodicals at such times and
on such terms as determined by the Library to be in the best interest of
the City. The Library is authorized to use the Friends of the Library
organization to assist with the sale of said outdated books and
periodicals, with the proceeds of said sales going to the Friends of the
Library. All proceeds from the sale of Library outdated books and
periodicals shall be used for the direct benefit of the Seward Public
Library.
A. Pursuant to the Municipal Proprietary Function Act, the governing body
may prepare a proprietary budget statement for its proprietary
functions separate and apart from its municipal budget statement
prepared pursuant to the Nebraska Budget Act. For purposes of this
section, "proprietary function" shall mean a water supply or distribution
utility, a wastewater collection or treatment utility, an electric
generation, transmission, or distribution utility, a gas supply,
transmission, or distribution utility, an integrated solid waste
management collection, disposal, or handling utility, or a hospital or a
nursing home owned by the municipality.
§ 44-1.26 SEWARD CODE § 44-1.27
1:98
B. The governing body may establish a separate fiscal year for each
proprietary function, except that any proprietary function which is
subsidized by appropriations from the municipality's General Fund
shall have the same fiscal year as the municipality. For purposes of this
section, "subsidization" shall mean that the costs of operation of a
proprietary function are regularly financed by appropriations from the
municipality's general fund in excess of the amount paid by the
municipality to the proprietary function for actual service or services
received.
C. Proposed proprietary statement.
(1) If the municipality does not include its proprietary functions in its
municipal budget statement, a proposed proprietary statement
shall be prepared in writing on forms provided by the State Auditor
and filed with the Municipal Clerk, at least 30 days prior to the
start of the fiscal year of each proprietary function, containing the
following information:
(a) For the immediately preceding fiscal year, the revenue from all
sources, the unencumbered cash balance at the beginning and
end of the year, the amount received by taxation, and the
amount of actual expenditure;38
(b) For the current fiscal year, actual and estimated revenue from
all sources separately stated as to each such source, the actual
unencumbered cash balance available at the beginning of the
year, the amount received from taxation, and the amount of
actual and estimated expenditure, whichever is applicable;
(c) For the immediately ensuing fiscal year, an estimate of revenue
from all sources separately stated as to each such source, the
actual or estimated unencumbered cash balance, whichever is
applicable, to be available at the beginning of the year, the
amounts proposed to be expended during the fiscal year, and
the amount of cash reserve based on actual experience of prior
years; and
(d) A uniform summary of the proposed budget statement which
shall include a total of all funds maintained for the proprietary
function.
(2) Such statement shall contain the estimated cash reserve for each
fiscal year and shall note whether or not such reserve is
encumbered. The cash reserve projections shall be based upon the
actual experience of prior years.
D. Public hearing.
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 44-1.27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1.27
1:99
§ 44-1.28. Fiscal year. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 44-95]
The fiscal year of the City and of any public utility of the City commences
on October 1 and extends through the following September 30, except as
provided in the Municipal Proprietary Function Act. (Neb. RS 16-701)
(1) After the proposed proprietary budget statement is filed with the
Municipal Clerk, the governing body shall conduct a public hearing
on such statement. Notice of the time and place of the hearing, a
summary of the proposed proprietary budget statement, and notice
that the full proposed proprietary budget statement is available for
public review with the Municipal Clerk during normal business
hours shall be published at least five days prior to the hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation within the governing body's
jurisdiction or by mailing each resident within the governing body's
jurisdiction.
(2) After such hearing, the proposed proprietary budget statement
shall be adopted or amended and adopted as amended, and a
written report shall be kept of such hearing. If the adopted
proprietary budget statement reflects a change from the proposed
proprietary statement presented at the hearing, a copy of the
adopted proprietary budget statement shall be filed with the
Municipal Clerk within 20 days after its adoption and published in a
newspaper of general circulation within the governing body's
jurisdiction or by mailing to each resident within the governing
body's jurisdiction.
E. If the actual expenditures for a proprietary function exceed the
estimated expenditures in the proprietary budget statement during its
fiscal year, the governing body shall adopt a proprietary function
reconciliation statement within 90 days after the end of such fiscal year
which reflects any difference between the adopted proprietary budget
statement for the previous fiscal year and the actual expenditures and
revenue for such fiscal year. After the adoption of a proprietary function
reconciliation statement, it shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk and
published in a newspaper of general circulation within the governing
body's jurisdiction or by mailing to each resident within the governing
body's jurisdiction. If the difference between the adopted proprietary
budget for the previous fiscal year and the actual expenditures and
revenues for such fiscal year is greater than 10%, the proprietary
function reconciliation statement shall only be adopted following a
public hearing.
F. Any income from a proprietary function which is transferred to the
general fund of the municipality shall be shown as a source of revenue
in the municipal budget statement created pursuant to the Nebraska
Budget Act.
(Neb. RS 18-2803 through 18-2808)
§ 44-1.27 SEWARD CODE § 44-1.28
1:100
Chapter 51
HEALTH REGULATIONS
§ 44-1.28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1.28
1:101

ARTICLE I
Authority; Implementation and Enforcement
§ 51-1.1. Authority of Board of Health.
For the purpose of promoting the health and safety of the residents of the
municipality, the Board of Health shall, from time to time, adopt such rules
and regulations relative thereto and shall make such inspections, prescribe
such penalties, and make such reports as may be necessary toward that
purpose. (Neb. RS 16-238)
§ 51-1.2. Enforcement official.
The Municipal Police Chief, as the Quarantine Officer, shall be the chief
health officer of the municipality. It shall be his duty to notify the governing
body and the Board of Health of health nuisances within the municipality
and its zoning jurisdiction. (Neb. RS 16-238)
§ 51-1.3. Cooperation with County Health Board.
It shall be the duty of the Board of Health to work closely with the County
Health Board in protecting the health and welfare of the residents of the
municipality.
§ 51-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-1.3
1:103
Chapter 59
INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION
§ 51-1.3 SEWARD CODE § 51-1.3
1:104
ARTICLE I
Risk Management
[Adopted 9-15-1987 by Ord. No. 20-87 (Ch. 1, Art. 14, of the 1976
Code)]
§ 59-1.1. Authority and scope.
The governing body and any one or more public agencies, as defined
in Neb. RS 44-4303, may make and execute an agreement providing for
joint and cooperative action in accordance with Neb. RS 44-4301 through
44-4339, to form, become, members of, and operate a risk management
pool for the purpose of providing to members risk management services
and insurance coverages in the form of group self-insurance or standard
insurance, including any combination of group self-insurance and standard
insurance, to protect members against losses arising from any of the
following:
A. General liability;
B. Damage, destruction, or loss or real or personal property, including, but
not limited to, loss of use or occupancy, and loss of income or extra
expense resulting from loss of use or occupancy;
C. Errors and omissions liability; and
D. Workers' compensation liability.
(Neb. RS 44-4301 through 44-4339)
§ 59-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-1.1
1:105
Chapter 72
LEGISLATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 7. Fiscal management — See Ch. 44.
§ 59-1.1 SEWARD CODE § 59-1.1
1:106
ARTICLE I
Ordinances, Resolutions and Orders
[Adopted as Ch. 1, Art. 7, of the 1976 Code]
§ 72-1.1. Adoption; evidence of passage.
All ordinances shall be passed pursuant to such rules and regulations as
the Council may provide. All ordinances may be proven by the certificate
of the Municipal Clerk under the Seal of the municipality. When printed
or published in book or pamphlet form and purporting to be published by
authority of the City, such ordinances shall be read and received in evidence
in all courts and places without further proof. The passage, approval, and
publication or posting of any ordinance shall be sufficiently proven by a
certificate under the Seal of the City from the Clerk showing that such
ordinance was passed and approved, and when and in what paper the same
was published. When ordinances are published in book or pamphlet form,
purporting to be published by authority of the City Council, the same need
not be otherwise published; and such book or pamphlet shall be received as
evidence of passage and legal publication of such ordinances as of the dates
mentioned in such book or pamphlet. (Neb. RS 16-403)
§ 72-1.2. Appropriation of money. [Amended 10-21-1980 by Ord. No.
29-80]
All ordinances, resolutions, or orders for the appropriation or payment of
money shall require for their passage or adoption the concurrence of a
majority of all members elected to the Council. The Mayor may vote on such
matter when his vote shall be decisive and the Council is equally divided,
and the Mayor shall, for the purpose of such vote, be deemed to be a
member of the Council. (Neb. RS 16-404)
§ 72-1.3. Reading. [Amended 2-7-1995 by Ord. No. 14-95]
All ordinances and resolutions or orders for the appropriation or payment
of money shall require for their passage or adoption the concurrence of a
majority of all members elected to the Council. Ordinances of a general or
permanent nature shall be read by title on three different days unless 3/4
of the Council members vote to suspend this requirement, except that such
requirement shall not be suspended for any ordinance for the annexation of
territory. In the case such requirement is suspended, the ordinance shall be
read by title or number and then moved for final passage. Three-fourths of
the Council members may require a reading of any such ordinance in full
before enactment under either procedure set out in this section. (Neb. RS
16-404)
§ 72-1.4. Publication.
All ordinances of a general nature shall be published one time within 15
days after they are passed in some newspaper published within the City or
in pamphlet form to be distributed or sold as may be provided by ordinance,
§ 72-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-1.4
1:107
and every ordinance fixing a penalty or forfeiture for its violation shall,
before the same takes effect, be published for at least one week in some
manner above prescribed. (Neb. RS 16-405)
§ 72-1.5. Style.
The style of all municipal ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the Mayor
and Council of the City of Seward." (Neb. RS 16-405)
§ 72-1.6. Title.
No ordinance shall contain a subject not clearly expressed in its title. (Neb.
RS 16-404)
§ 72-1.7. Effective date; emergency ordinances.
§ 72-1.8. Amendments and revisions.
No ordinance or section thereof shall be revised or amended unless the new
ordinance contains the entire ordinance or section as revised or amended,
and the ordinance or section so amended is repealed, except that an
ordinance revising all the ordinances of the municipality and modifications
to zoning or building districts may be adopted as otherwise provided by law.
(Neb. RS 16-404)
§ 72-1.9. Introduction.
Ordinances shall be introduced by members of the governing body in one of
the following ways:
A. Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, an ordinance for the
government of the municipality which has been adopted by the
governing body without submission to the voters of the municipality
shall not go into effect until 15 days after the passage of the ordinance.
B. In the case of riots, infectious diseases, or other impending danger or
other emergency requiring its immediate operation, an ordinance shall
take effect upon the proclamation of the Mayor immediately upon the
first publication of the ordinance. Such emergency ordinance shall
recite the emergency, be passed by a three-fourths vote of the
governing body, and be entered of record on the Municipal Clerk's
minutes.
(Neb. RS 16-405, 19-3701)
A. With the recognition of the Mayor, a member may, in the presence and
hearing of a majority of the members elected to the governing body,
read aloud the substance of the proposed ordinance and file a copy with
the Municipal Clerk for future consideration; or
B. With the recognition of the Mayor, a member may present the proposed
ordinance to the Clerk who, in the presence and hearing of a majority of
§ 72-1.4 SEWARD CODE § 72-1.9
1:108
§ 72-1.10. Resolutions and motions. [Amended 10-21-1980 by Ord.
No. 30-80]
Resolutions and motions shall be introduced in one of the methods
prescribed for the introduction of ordinances. After their introduction they
shall be fully and distinctly read one time in the presence and hearing of
a majority of the members elected to the Council. The issue raised by said
resolutions or motions shall be disposed of in accordance with the usage of
parliamentary law adopted for the guidance of the Council. A majority vote
shall be required to pass any resolution or motion. The Mayor may vote on
any such matter when his vote shall be decisive and the Council is equally
divided, and the Mayor shall, for the purpose of such vote, be deemed to be
a member of the Council. The vote on any resolution or motion shall be viva
voce and "yeas" and "nays" thereon shall be recorded by the Clerk. (Neb.
RS 16-503)
§ 72-1.11. Procedure for publication in pamphlet form. [Amended
12-6-1977 by Ord. No. 1105]
The ordinance to be published in pamphlet form shall provide in the title of
the ordinance and in a section of the ordinance that such ordinance shall
be published in pamphlet form. The number and title of the ordinance shall
be entered in the minutes of the meeting at which said ordinance is duly
passed and approved by the Mayor and Council. Upon the Mayor declaring
the ordinance adopted and signing the same, the City Clerk shall attest
to the passage and adoption by fixing her signature and Seal of the City
thereto and the Clerk shall thereupon enter into the minutes of the meeting
that the ordinance by its number is published in pamphlet form. The Clerk
shall enter under oath a certificate in written form of such publication in
pamphlet form in the ordinance records of the City.
§ 72-1.12. Scope of legislative authority.
The governing body may make all ordinances, bylaws, rules, regulations,
and resolutions, not inconsistent with the laws of the State of Nebraska,
as may be necessary or expedient for maintaining the peace, good
government, and welfare of the municipality and its trade, commerce,
and manufactures, for preserving order and securing persons or property
from violence, danger, and destruction, for protecting public and private
property, and for promoting the public health, safety, convenience, comfort,
and morals and the general interests and welfare of the inhabitants of the
municipality. (Neb. RS 16-246)
the members elected to the governing body, shall read aloud the
substance of the ordinance and file it for future consideration.
§ 72-1.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-1.12
1:109

ARTICLE II
Initiatives and Referenda
[Adopted 9-4-1984 by Ord. No. 23-84 (Ch. 1, Art. 12, of the 1976
Code)]
§ 72-2.1. Scope; definitions.
§ 72-2.2. Petition and ballot procedures.
A. The powers of initiative and referendum are reserved to the qualified
electors of the municipality by state law. This article shall govern the
use of initiatives to enact, and the use of referenda to amend or repeal,
measures affecting the governance of the municipality.
B. For purposes of this article, the definitions set out in this section, unless
the context otherwise requires, shall apply:
CIRCULATOR — Any person who solicits signatures for an initiative or
referendum petition.
CLERK — The Municipal Clerk or the municipal official in charge of
elections.
GOVERNING BODY — The legislative authority of the municipality.
MEASURE — An ordinance, charter provision, or resolution which is
within the legislative authority of the governing body to pass, and which
is not excluded from the operation of referendum by the exceptions in
§ 72-2.12.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Seward, Nebraska.
PETITION — A document authorized for circulation pursuant to
§ 72-2.2, or any copy of such document.
PLACE OF RESIDENCE — The street and number of the residence. If
there is no street and number for the residence, "place of residence"
shall mean the mailing address.
PROSPECTIVE PETITION — A sample document containing the
information necessary for a completed petition, including a sample
signature sheet, which has not yet been authorized for circulation.
QUALIFIED ELECTORS — All persons registered to vote at the time
the prospective petition is filed, in the jurisdiction governed or to be
governed by any measure sought to be enacted by initiative, or altered
or repealed by referendum.
RESIDENCE — That place at which a person has established his or her
home, where he or she is habitually present, and to which, when he or
she departs, he or she intends to return.
SIGNATURE SHEET — A sheet of paper which is part of a petition and
which is signed by persons wishing to support the petition effort.
(Neb. RS 18-2501 through 18-2511)
§ 72-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-2.2
1:111
§ 72-2.3. Petition form. [Amended 8-4-2004 by Ord. No. 18-04]
A. Before circulating an initiative or referendum petition, the petitioner
shall file with the Clerk a prospective petition. The Clerk shall date the
prospective petition immediately upon its receipt. The Clerk shall verify
that the prospective petition is in proper form and shall provide a ballot
title for the initiative or referendum proposal, as described below. If the
prospective petition is in proper form, the Clerk shall authorize the
circulation of the petition and such authorization shall be given within
three working days from the date the prospective petition was filed. If
the form of the prospective petition is incorrect, the Clerk shall, within
three working days from the date the prospective petition was filed,
inform the petitioner of necessary changes and request that those
changes be made. When the requested changes have been made and
the revised prospective petition has been submitted to the Clerk in
proper form, the Clerk shall authorize the circulation of the petition and
such authorization shall be given within two working days from the
receipt of the properly revised petition. Verification by the Clerk that
the prospective petition is in proper form does not constitute an
admission by the Clerk, governing body, or municipality that the
measure is subject to referendum or limited referendum or that the
measure may be enacted by initiative.
B. The ballot title of any measure to be initiated or referred shall consist
of:
(1) A briefly worded caption by which the measure is commonly known
or which accurately summarizes the measure;
(2) A briefly worded question which plainly states the purpose of the
measure, and is phrased so that an affirmative response to the
question corresponds to an affirmative vote on the measure; and
(3) A concise and impartial statement, of not more than 75 words, of
the chief purpose of the measure.
C. The ballots used when voting on an initiative or referendum proposal
shall contain the entire ballot title. Proposals for initiative and
referendum shall be submitted on separate ballots and the ballots shall
be printed in lowercase ten-point type, except that the caption shall be
in boldface type. All initiative and referendum measures shall be
submitted in a nonpartisan manner without indicating or suggesting on
the ballot that they have or have not been approved or endorsed by any
political party or organization.
(Neb. RS 18-2512, 18-2513)
A. The forms designed by the Secretary of State to be used for initiative
and referendum petitions shall be made available to the public by the
City Clerk, and they shall serve as a guide for individuals preparing
prospective petitions. Substantial compliance with initiative and
§ 72-2.2 SEWARD CODE § 72-2.3
1:112
§ 72-2.4. Signature sheets.39
Every signature sheet shall:
(Neb. RS 18-2516)
§ 72-2.5. Signers and circulators.40
Signers and circulators shall comply with Neb. RS 32-629 and 32-630. (Neb.
RS 18-2517)
§ 72-2.6. Signature verification.
referendum forms is required before authorization to circulate such
petition shall be granted by the City Clerk. Chief petitioners or
circulators preparing prospective petitions shall be responsible for
making copies of the petition for circulation after authorization for
circulation has been granted. (Neb. RS 18-2514)
B. Each petition presented for signature must be identical to the petition
authorized for circulation by the City Clerk. Every petition shall contain
the name and place of residence of not more than three persons as chief
petitioners or sponsors of the measure. The chief petitioners or
sponsors shall be qualified electors of the municipality potentially
affected by the initiative or referendum proposal. Every petition shall
contain the caption and the statement specified to be part of the ballot
title. When a special election is being requested, such fact shall be
stated on every petition.
(Neb. RS 18-2515, 25-510.02, 25-2514)
A. Contain the caption required in Subsection B of § 72-2.2 of this article;
B. Be part of a complete and authorized petition when presented to
potential signatories; and
C. Provide space for signatories to write their names, residential
addresses, and the date of signing.
A. Signed petitions shall be filed with the Clerk for signature verification.
Upon the filing of a petition, and passage of a resolution by the
governing body, the municipality and the County Clerk or Election
Commissioner of the county in which such municipality is located may
by mutual agreement provide that the County Clerk or Election
Commissioner shall ascertain whether the petition is signed by the
requisite number of voters. The municipality shall reimburse the
County for any costs incurred by the County Clerk or Election
Commissioner. When the verifying official has determined that 100% of
the necessary signatures required by this article have been obtained, he
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 72-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-2.6
1:113
§ 72-2.7. Frequency.
The same measure, either in form or in essential substance, may not be
submitted to the people by initiative petition, either affirmatively or
negatively, more often than once every two years. No attempt to repeal
or alter an existing measure or portion of such measure by referendum
petition may be made within two years from the last attempt to do the same.
Such prohibition shall apply only when the subsequent attempt to repeal or
alter is designed to accomplish the same or essentially the same purpose as
the previous attempt. (Neb. RS 18-2519)
§ 72-2.8. Direct vote.
§ 72-2.9. Elections.
or she shall notify the governing body of that fact, and shall
immediately forward to the governing body a copy of the petition.
B. In order for an initiative or referendum proposal to be submitted to the
governing body and the voters, the necessary signatures shall be on file
with the Clerk within six months from the date the prospective petition
was authorized for circulation. If the necessary signatures are not
obtained by such date, the petition shall be void.
(Neb. RS 18-2518)
A. The executive officer and governing body of the municipality may at any
time, by resolution, provide for the submission to a direct vote of the
electors of any measure pending before it, passed by it, including an
override of any veto, if necessary, or enacted by the electors under this
article and may provide in such resolution that such measure shall be
submitted at a special election or the next regularly scheduled primary
or general election. Immediately upon the passage of any such
resolution for submission, the Clerk shall cause such measure to be
submitted to a direct vote of the electors, at the time specified in such
resolution and in the manner provided in this article for submission of
measures upon proposals and petitions filed by voters. Such matter
shall become law if approved by a majority of the votes cast.
B. The executive officer and governing body of a municipal subdivision
shall not submit to a direct vote of the electors the question of whether
the municipal subdivision should initiate proceedings for the
condemnation of a natural gas system.41
(Neb. RS 18-2520)
A. The Clerk shall call elections under this article, either at a special
election or regularly scheduled primary or general election. He or she
shall cause notice of every such election to be printed in one or more
41.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 72-2.6 SEWARD CODE § 72-2.9
1:114
§ 72-2.10. Ballots.
All ballots for use in special elections under this article shall be prepared by
the Clerk and furnished by the governing body, unless the governing body
contracts with the county for such service, and shall be in form the same
as provided by law for election of the executive officer and governing body
of such municipality. When ordinances under such sections are submitted
to the electors at a regularly scheduled primary or general election, they
shall be placed upon the official ballots as provided in this article. (Neb. RS
18-2522)
§ 72-2.11. Initiatives.
newspapers of general circulation in such municipality at least once not
less than 30 days prior to such election and also posted in the office of
the Clerk and in at least three conspicuous places in such municipality
at least 30 days prior to such election. The notice shall be substantially
as follows:
Notice is hereby given that on Tuesday, the _____ day of __________,
20_____, at (identify polling place or precinct) of the City of Seward,
Nebraska, an election will be held at which there will be submitted
to the electors of the municipality for their approval or rejection,
the following measures, propositions, or issues: __________ __________
(naming measures, propositions, or issues), which election will be open
at 8:00 a.m. and will continue open until 8:00 p.m., of the same day.
Dated this _____ day of ______________ 20_____
Clerk of the City of Seward, Nebraska.
__________________________
B. The Clerk shall make available for photocopying a copy in pamphlet
form of measures initiated or referred. Such notice provided in this
section shall designate where such a copy in pamphlet form may be
obtained.
(Neb. RS 18-2521)
A. The power of initiative allows citizens the right to enact measures
affecting the governance of the municipality. An initiative proposal shall
not have as its primary or sole purpose the repeal or modification of
existing law except if such repeal or modification is ancillary to and
necessary for the adoption and effective operation of the initiative
measure.
B. An initiative shall not be effective if the direct or indirect effect of the
passage of such initiative measure shall be to repeal or alter an existing
law, or portion thereof, which is not subject to referendum or subject
only to limited referendum pursuant to § 72-2.12.
§ 72-2.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-2.11
1:115
§ 72-2.12. Referendum limitations. [Amended 3-16-1993 by Ord.
No. 8-93; 4-3-2001 by Ord. No. 11-01]
C. Whenever an initiative petition bearing signatures equal in number to
at least 15% of the qualified electors of the municipality has been filed
with the Clerk and verified, it shall be the duty of the governing body to
consider passage of the measure contained in the petition, including an
override of any veto, if necessary. If the governing body fails to pass the
measure without amendment, including an override of any veto, if
necessary, within 30 days from the date it received notification, the
Clerk shall cause the measure to be submitted to a vote of the people at
the next regularly scheduled primary or general election held within
the municipality. If the governing body desires to submit the measure to
a vote of the people at a special election prior to the next regularly
scheduled primary or general election held within the municipality, the
governing body shall, by resolution, direct the Clerk to cause the
measure to be submitted at a special election. Such resolution shall not
be subject to referendum or limited referendum.
D. Whenever an initiative petition, bearing signatures equal in number to
at least 20% of the qualified electors, which requests that a special
election be called to submit the initiative measure to a vote of the
people has been filed with the Clerk and verified pursuant to § 72-2.6, it
shall be the duty of the governing body to consider passage of the
measure contained in the petition, including an override of any veto, if
necessary. If the governing body falls to pass the measure, without
amendment, including an override of any veto, if necessary, within 30
days from the date it received notification, the Clerk shall cause the
measure to be submitted to a vote of the people at a special election
called for such purpose. The date of such election shall not be less than
30 days nor more than 60 days from the date the governing body
received notification pursuant to § 72-2.6.
E. If a majority of voters voting on the initiative measure shall vote in favor
of such measure, it shall become a valid and binding measure of the
municipality 30 days after certification of the election results, unless
the governing body by resolution orders an earlier effective date or the
measure itself provides for a later effective date, which resolution shall
not be subject to referendum or limited referendum. A measure passed
by such method shall not be amended or repealed except by a twothirds
majority of the members of the governing body. No such attempt
to amend or repeal shall be made within one year from the passage of
the measure by the electors.
(Neb. RS 18-2523 through 18-2526)
A. The power of referendum allows citizens the right to repeal or amend
existing measures, or portions thereof, affecting the governance of the
municipality. (Neb. RS 18-2527)
§ 72-2.11 SEWARD CODE § 72-2.12
1:116
B. The following measures shall not be subject to referendum or limited
referendum:
(1) Measures necessary to carry out contractual obligations, including,
but not limited to, those relating to the issuance of or provided for
in bonds, notes, warrants, or other evidence of indebtedness, for
projects previously approved by a measure which was, or is,
subject to referendum or limited referendum or previously
approved by a measure adopted prior to July 17, 1982;
(2) Measures relating to any industrial development projects,
subsequent to measures giving initial approval to such projects;
(3) Measures adopting proposed budget statements following
compliance with procedures set forth in the Nebraska Budget Act;
(4) Measures relating to the immediate preservation of the public
peace, health, or safety which have been designated as urgent
measures by unanimous vote of those present and voting of the
governing body and approved by the Mayor;
(5) Measures relating to projects for which notice has been given as
provided for in Subsection E of this section for which a sufficient
referendum petition was not filed within the time limit stated in
such notice or which received voter approval after the filing of such
petition;
(6) Resolutions directing the Municipal Clerk to cause measures to be
submitted to a vote of the people at a special election as provided in
Subsection C of § 72-2.11, Initiatives, and Subsection A of
§ 72-2.13, Referendum passage;
(7) Resolutions ordering an earlier effective date for measures enacted
by initiative as provided in Subsection E of § 72-2.11; and
(8) Measures relating to any facility or system adopted or enacted
pursuant to the Integrated Solid Waste Management Act (Neb. RS
13-2001 et seq.) by the municipality and which are necessary to
carry out contractual obligations provided for in previously issued
bonds, notes, warrants, or other evidence of indebtedness;
(9) Measures that amend, supplement, change, modify, or repeal a
zoning regulation, restriction, or boundary and are subject to
protest as provided in Neb. RS 19-905; and
(10) Measures relating to personnel issues, including, but not limited to,
establishment, modification, or elimination of any personnel
position, policy, salary, or benefit and any hiring, promotion,
demotion, or termination of personnel.
[Neb. RS 18-2528(1)]
C. The following measures shall be subject to limited referendum:
§ 72-2.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-2.12
1:117
(1) Measures in furtherance of a policy of the municipality or relating
to projects previously approved by a measure which was subject to
referendum or which was enacted by initiative or has been
approved by the voters at an election, except that such measures
shall not be subject to referendum or limited referendum for a
period of one year after any such policy or project was approved at
a referendum election, enacted by initiative, or approved by the
voters at an election;
(2) Measures relating to the acquisition, construction, installation,
improvement, or enlargement, including the financing or
refinancing of the costs of public ways, public property, utility
systems, and other capital projects, and measures giving initial
approval for industrial development projects;
(3) Measures setting utility system rates and charges, except for
measures necessary to carry out contractual obligations provided
for in previously issued bonds, notes, warrants, or other evidences
of indebtedness, and pay rates and salaries for municipal
employees other than the members of the governing body and the
Mayor; and
(4) Measures relating to any facility or system adopted or enacted
pursuant to the Integrated Solid Waste Management Act by the
municipality, except for measures necessary to carry out
contractual obligations provided for in previously issued bonds,
notes, warrants, or other evidence of indebtedness.
[Neb. RS 18-2528(2)]
D. Measures subject to limited referendum shall ordinarily take effect 30
days after their passage by the governing body, including an override of
any veto, if necessary. Referendum petitions directed at measures
subject to limited referendum shall be filed for signature verification
pursuant to § 72-2.6, Signature verification, within 30 days after such
measure's passage by the governing body, including a override of any
veto, if necessary, or after notice is first published pursuant to
Subsection E(3) of this section. If the necessary number of signatures
as provided in § 72-2.11, Initiatives, has been obtained within the time
limitations, the effectiveness of the measure shall be suspended unless
approved by the voters. [Neb. RS 18-2528(3)]
E. Exemption for certain projects.
(1) For any measure relating to the acquisition, construction,
installation, improvement, or enlargement of public ways, public
property, utility systems, or other capital projects or any measure
relating to any facility or system adopted or enacted pursuant to
the Integrated Solid Waste Management Act, the municipality may
exempt all subsequent measures relating to the same project from
the referendum and limited referendum procedures provided for in
this article by the following procedure:
§ 72-2.12 SEWARD CODE § 72-2.12
1:118
(a) By holding a public hearing on the project, the time and place
of such hearing being published at least once not less than five
days prior to the date set for hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation within the governing body's jurisdiction;
(b) By passage of a measure approving the project, including an
override of a veto, if necessary, at a meeting held on any date
subsequent to the date of hearing; and
(c) After passage of such measure, including an override of a veto,
if necessary, by giving notice as follows:
[1] For those projects for which applicable statutes require an
ordinance or resolution of necessity, creating a district or
otherwise establishing the project, notice shall be given
for such project by including either as part of such
ordinance or resolution or as part of any publicized notice
concerning such ordinance or resolution a statement that
the project as described in the ordinance or resolution is
subject to limited referendum for a period of 30 days after
the first publication of such notice and that, after such
thirty-day period, the project and measures related to it
will not be subject to any further right of referendum; and
[2] For projects for which applicable statutes do not require
an ordinance or resolution of necessity, notice shall be
given by publication of a notice concerning such projects
stating in general terms the nature of the project and the
engineer's estimate of costs of such project and stating
that the project described in the notice is subject to limited
referendum for a period of 30 days after the first
publication of such notice and that, after such thirty-day
period, the project and measures related to it will not be
subject to any further right of referendum. The notice
required by this subsection shall be published in at least
one newspaper of general circulation within the
municipality and shall be published not later than 15 days
after passage by the governing body, including an override
of a veto, if necessary, of a measure approving the project.
(2) The right of the municipality to hold such a hearing prior to the
passage of the measure by the governing body and give such notice
after passage of such measure by the governing body to obtain
exemption for any particular project in a manner described in this
subsection is optional and the municipality shall not be required to
hold such a hearing or give such notice for any particular project.
[Neb. RS 18-2528(4)]
F. All measures, except as provided in Subsections B, C, and E of this
section, shall be subject to the referendum procedure at any time after
such measure has been passed by the governing body, including an
§ 72-2.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-2.12
1:119
§ 72-2.13. Action upon filing of referendum petition.
override of a veto, if necessary, or enacted by the voters by initiative.
[Neb. RS 18-2528(5)]
A. Whenever a referendum petition bearing signatures equal in number to
at least 15% of the qualified electors of the municipality has been filed
with the Clerk and verified pursuant to § 72-2.6, it shall be the duty of
the governing body to reconsider the measure or portion of such
measure which is the object of the referendum. If the governing body
fails to repeal or amend the measure or portion thereof in the manner
proposed by the referendum, including an override of any veto, if
necessary, within 30 days from the date the governing body receives
notification pursuant to § 72-2.6, the Clerk shall cause the measure to
be submitted to a vote of the people at the next regularly scheduled
primary or general election held within the municipality. If the
governing body desires to submit the measure to a vote of the people at
a special election prior to the next regularly scheduled primary or
general election held within the municipality, the governing body shall,
by resolution, direct the Clerk to cause the measure to be submitted at
a special election. Such resolution shall not be subject to referendum or
limited referendum.
B. Whenever a referendum petition bearing signatures equal in number to
at least 20% of the qualified voters of the municipality, which petition
requests that a special election be called to submit the referendum
measure to a vote of the people, has been filed with the Clerk and
verified, it shall be the duty of the governing body to reconsider the
measure or portion of such measure which is the object of the
referendum. If the governing body fails to repeal or amend the measure
or portion thereof, in the manner proposed by the referendum,
including an override of any veto, if necessary, the Clerk shall cause the
measure to be submitted to a vote of the people at a special election
called for such purpose within 30 days from the date the governing
body received notification. Subject to the provisions of § 72-2.9, the
date of such special election shall not be less than 30 days nor more
than 60 days from the date the governing body received notification.42
C. If a majority of the electors voting on the referendum measure shall
vote in favor of such measure, the law subject to the referendum shall
be repealed or amended. A measure repealed or amended by
referendum shall not be reenacted or returned to its original form
except by a two-thirds majority of the members of the governing body.
No such attempt to reenact or return the measure to its original form
shall be made within one year of the repeal or amendment of the
measure by the electors. If the referendum measure does not receive a
majority vote, the ordinance shall immediately become effective or
remain in effect.
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 72-2.12 SEWARD CODE § 72-2.13
1:120
§ 72-2.14. Violations and penalties.
§ 72-2.15. Applicability.
§ 72-2.16. Declaratory judgments. [Amended 8-4-2004 by Ord. No.
18-4]
(Neb. RS 18-2529 through 18-2531)
A. Whoever knowingly or willfully makes a false affidavit or takes a false
oath regarding the qualifications of any person to sign petitions under
Neb. RS 18-2501 through 18-2531 shall be guilty of a Class I
misdemeanor, with a limit of $300 on the fine.
B. Whoever falsely makes or willfully destroys a petition or any part
thereof, or signs a false name thereto, of signs or files any petition
knowing the same or any part thereof to be falsely made, or suppresses
any petition, or any part thereof, which has been duly filed, pursuant to
Neb. RS 18-2501 through 18-2531 shall be guilty of a Class I
misdemeanor, with a limit of $500 on the fine.
C. Whoever signs any petition under Neb. RS 18-2501 through 18-2531
knowing that he or she is not a registered voter in the place where such
petition is made, aids or abets any other person in doing any of the acts
mentioned in this section, bribes or gives or pays any money or thing of
value to any person directly or indirectly to induce him or her to sign
such petition, or engages in any deceptive practice intended to induce
any person to sign a petition shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor,
with a limit of $300 on the fine.
D. Any Clerk who willfully refuses to comply with the provisions of Neb. RS
18-2501 through 18-2531 or who willfully causes unreasonable delay in
the execution of his or her duties under such sections shall be guilty of a
Class I misdemeanor, but imprisonment shall not be included as part of
the punishment.
(Neb. RS 18-2532 through 18-2535)
A. The Election Act, so far as applicable, and when not in conflict with this
article, shall apply to voting on ordinances by the electors pursuant to
this article.43
B. Nothing in this article shall apply to procedures for initiatives or
referendums provided in Neb. RS 18-412 and 18-412.02 relating to
municipal light and power plants, Neb. RS 70-504, 70-650.01 and
70-650.02, relating to public power districts, and Neb. RS 80-203 to
80-205 relating to soldiers and sailors monuments.
(Neb. RS 18-2536, 18-2537)
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 72-2.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-2.16
1:121
A. The City or any chief petitioner may seek a declaratory judgment
regarding any questions arising under this article, as it may be from
time to time amended, including, but not limited to, determining
whether a measure is subject to referendum or limited referendum or
whether a measure may be enacted by initiative. If a chief petitioner
seeks a declaratory judgment, the City shall be served by personal,
residence, or certified mail service upon the chief executive officer or
City Clerk. If the City seeks a declaratory judgment, only the chief
petitioner or chief petitioners shall be required to be served.
B. Any action brought for declaratory judgment for purposes of
determining whether a measure is subject to limited referendum or
referendum, or whether a measure may be enacted by initiative, may be
filed in the District Court at any time after the filing of a referendum or
initiative petition with the City Clerk for signature verification until 40
days from the date the City Council received notification from the
verifying official that the necessary signatures have been obtained. If
the City does not bring an action for declaratory judgment to determine
whether the measure is subject to limited referendum or referendum,
or whether the measure may be enacted by initiative, until after it has
received such notification, it shall be required to proceed with the
initiative or referendum election in accordance with the provisions of
this article. If the City does file such an action prior to receiving such
notification, it shall not be required to proceed to hold such election
until a final decision has been rendered in the action.
C. Any action for a declaratory judgment shall be governed generally by
Neb. RS 25-21, 149 through 25-21, 164, except that only the City and
each chief petitioner shall be required to be made parties. The City, City
Clerk, City Council, or any of the City's officers shall be entitled to rely
on any order rendered by the court in any such proceeding. Any action
brought for declaratory judgment pursuant to this section shall be given
priority in scheduling hearings and in disposition as determined by the
court. When an action is brought to determine whether the measure is
subject to limited referendum or referendum, or whether a measure
may be enacted by initiative, a decision shall be rendered by the court
no later than five days prior to the election.
D. The provisions of this section relating to declaratory judgments shall
not be construed as limiting, but shall be construed as supplemental
and additional to other rights and remedies conferred by law.
(Neb. RS 18-2538)
§ 72-2.16 SEWARD CODE § 72-2.16
1:122
Chapter 78
MEETINGS
§ 72-2.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-2.16
1:123

ARTICLE I
Documents and Procedures
§ 78-1.1. City Council agendas; notice of meetings. [Amended
3-4-2008 by Ord. No. 3-08; 12-2-2008 by Ord. No. 22-08; 8-16-2011
by Ord. No. 16-11; 5-5-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-08]
A. All requests for City Council agenda items shall be presented in writing
to the Mayor, City Administrator or City Clerk. In addition to requesting
agenda items at the designated time during Council meetings, Council
members may request items to be placed on the agenda at the next
regularly scheduled meeting, if feasible, by written request. Any
member of the public may request an item for the Council agenda or
administrative action by filling out a request form entitled "Request for
Council Agenda Item or Administrative Action." This form is available at
City Hall, or can be downloaded from the City's website at
cityofsewardne.gov. The deadline for the Council and the public for
adding items to the Council agenda shall be 12:00 noon on the
Wednesday preceding each regular meeting, unless the item is
determined to be of an emergency nature. The item requested will
either be placed on the next regularly scheduled Council meeting
agenda, if feasible, or handled administratively if a policy is already in
place. The Mayor and Council will be provided copies of all requests
submitted. The Council shall have the right to modify an agenda only for
items of an emergency nature. The deadline for the Mayor to add items
to the Council agenda shall be 24 hours before the commencement of
the meeting, unless the item is determined to be of an emergency
nature.
B. Notice of meetings.
(1) The method of communicating advance notice of the regular and
special meetings of the City Council shall be made by posting
notice of such meeting, with the agenda thereon, in the following
public places of the City of Seward, Nebraska:
(a) The front entrance of City Hall;
(b) The front entrance of the City Library;
(c) The bulletin board in the Seward County Courthouse; and
(d) The front entrance of the City Municipal Building.
(2) Such notice shall contain the time and specific place for each
meeting and either an enumeration of the agenda subjects known
at the time of the notice, or a statement that such an agenda kept
continually current shall be readily available for public inspection
at the office of the Municipal Clerk. Except for items of an
emergency nature, the agenda shall not be altered later than 24
hours before the scheduled commencement of the meeting. The
Mayor will present any request for an emergency item at the
§ 78-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-1.1
1:125
§ 78-1.2. Definitions. [Amended 10-4-1983 by Ord. No. 25-83;
2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MEETINGS — All regular, special, or called meetings, formal or informal,
of a public body for the purposes of briefing, discussion of public business,
formation of tentative policy, or the taking of any action. [Neb. RS
84-1409(2)]
PUBLIC BODY —
§ 78-1.3. Public meetings. [Amended 10-4-1983 by Ord. No. 25-83;
9-15-1987 by Ord. No. 19-87]
beginning of the next regularly scheduled meeting, and the item
will be subject to the final determination and approval of the City
Council.
Shall mean:
(1) The governing body of the municipality;
All independent boards, commissions, bureaus, committees,
councils, subunits, or any other bodies now or hereafter created by
Constitution, statute, ordinance or otherwise pursuant to law; and
(2)
(3) Advisory committees of the bodies listed above.
A.
This article shall not apply to subcommittees of such bodies unless a
quorum of the public body attends a subcommittee meeting or unless
such subcommittees are holding hearings, making policy or taking
formal action on behalf of their parent body.
[Neb. RS 84-1409(1)]
B.
A. All public meetings as defined by law shall be held in a municipal public
building which shall be open to attendance by the public. All meetings
shall be held in the public building in which the governing body usually
holds such meetings unless the publicized notice hereinafter required
shall designate some other public building or other specified place. The
advance publicized notice of all public convened meetings shall be
simultaneously transmitted to all members of the governing body and to
the public by a method designated by the governing body or by the
Mayor if the governing body has not designated a method. Such notice
shall contain the time and specific place for each meeting and either an
enumeration of the agenda subjects known at the time of the notice, or
a statement that such an agenda kept continually current shall be
readily available for public inspection at the office of the Municipal
Clerk. Except for items of an emergency nature, the agenda shall not be
altered later than: 1) 24 hours before the scheduled commencement of
the meeting or 2) 48 hours before the scheduled commencement of a
§ 78-1.1 SEWARD CODE § 78-1.3
1:126
§ 78-1.4. Closed sessions. [Amended 10-4-1983 by Ord. No. 25-83;
2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 4-93; 2-7-1995 by Ord. No. 13-95; 10-16-2007
by Ord. No. 37-07]
meeting of the governing body scheduled outside the corporate limits
of the municipality. The governing body shall have the right to modify
the agenda to include items of an emergency nature only at such
public meetings. Agenda items shall be sufficiently descriptive to give
the public reasonable notice of the matters to be considered at the
meeting.44
B. The minutes of the Municipal Clerk shall include the record of the
manner and advance time by which the advance publicized notice was
given, a statement of how the availability of an agenda of the thenknown
subjects was communicated, the time and specific place of the
meetings, and the names of each member of the governing body
present or absent at each convened meeting. The minutes of the
governing body shall be a public record open to inspection by the public
upon request at any reasonable time at the office of the Municipal
Clerk. Any official action on any question or motion duly moved and
seconded shall be taken only by roll call vote of the governing body in
open session. The record of the Municipal Clerk shall show how each
member voted, or that the member was absent and did not vote.
(Neb. RS 84-1408, 84-1409, 84-1411, 84-1413)
A. Any public body may hold a closed session by the affirmative vote of a
majority of its voting members if a closed session is clearly necessary
for the protection of the public interest or for the prevention of needless
injury to the reputation of an individual and if such individual has not
requested a public meeting. The subject matter and the reason
necessitating the closed session shall be identified in the motion to
close.
(1) Closed sessions may be held for, but shall not be limited to, such
reasons as:
(a) Strategy sessions with respect to collective bargaining, real
estate purchases, pending litigation or litigation which is
imminent as evidenced by communication of a claim or threat
of litigation to or by the public body;
(b) Discussion regarding deployment of security personnel or
devices;
(c) Investigative proceedings regarding allegations of criminal
misconduct; or
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 78-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-1.4
1:127
(d) Evaluation of the job performance of a person when necessary
to prevent needless injury to the reputation of a person and if
such person has not requested a public meeting.
(2) Nothing in this section shall permit a closed meeting for discussion
of the appointment or election of a new member to any public body.
B. The vote to hold a closed session shall be taken in open session. The
entire motion, the vote of each member on the question of holding a
closed session, and the time when the closed session commenced and
concluded shall be recorded in the minutes. If the motion to close
passes, then immediately prior to the closed session the presiding
officer shall restate on the record the limitation of the subject matter of
the closed session. The public body holding such a closed session shall
restrict its consideration to matters during the closed portions to only
those purposes set forth in the motion to close as the reason for the
closed session. The meeting shall be reconvened in open session before
any formal action may be taken. For purposes of this section, "formal
action" shall mean a collective decision or a collective commitment or
promise to make a decision on any question, motion, proposal,
resolution, order, or ordinance or formation of a position or policy but
shall not include not include negotiating guidance given by members of
the public body to legal counsel or other negotiators in closed sessions
authorized under Subsection A(1)(a) of this section.
C. Any member of the public body shall have the right to challenge the
continuation of a closed session if the member determines that the
session has exceeded the reason stated in the original motion to hold a
closed session or if the member contends that the closed session is
neither clearly necessary for 1) the protection of the public interest or
2) the prevention of needless injury to the reputation of an individual.
Such challenge shall be overruled only by a majority vote of the
members of the public body. Such challenge and its disposition shall be
recorded in the minutes.
D. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that any meeting
be closed to the public. No person or public body shall fail to invite a
portion of its members to a meeting and no public body shall designate
itself a subcommittee of the whole body for the purpose of
circumventing the Open Meetings Act (Neb. RS 84-1407 through
84-1414). No closed session, informal meeting, chance meeting, social
gathering, e-mail, fax, or other electronic communication shall be used
for the purpose of circumventing the provisions of the Act.
E. The Act does not apply to chance meetings, or to attendance at or travel
to conventions or workshops of members of a public body at which
there is no meeting of the body then intentionally convened, if there is
no vote or other action taken regarding any matter over which the
public body has supervision, control, jurisdiction, or advisory power.
(Neb. RS 84-1410)
§ 78-1.4 SEWARD CODE § 78-1.5
1:128
§ 78-1.5. Prohibited acts; exempt events. [Added 2-15-2005 by Ord.
No. 11-0545]
No person or public body shall fail to invite a portion of its members to
a meeting, and no public body shall designate itself a subcommittee of
the whole body for the purpose of circumventing this articles or the Open
Meetings Act. No closed session, informal meeting, chance meeting, social
gathering, e-mail, fax, or electronic communication shall be used for the
purpose of circumventing the requirements of this article or the Act.
§ 78-1.6. Emergency meetings. [Amended 10-4-1983 by Ord. No.
25-83]
When it is necessary to hold an emergency meeting without reasonable
advance public notice, the nature of the emergency shall be stated in
the minutes, and any formal action taken in such meeting shall pertain
only to the emergency. Such emergency meetings may be held by means
of electronic or telecommunications equipment. The provisions of § 78-1.9
of this article shall be complied with in conducting emergency meetings.
Complete minutes of such emergency meetings specifying the nature of
the emergency and any formal action taken at the meeting shall be made
available to the public by no later than the end of the next regular business
day. (Neb. RS 84-1411)
§ 78-1.7. Minutes. [Amended 8-7-2007 by Ord. No. 20-07;
10-16-2007 by Ord. No. 35-07]
§ 78-1.8. Votes. [Amended 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. 1138]
A. Each public body shall keep minutes of all meetings, showing the time,
place, members present and absent, and the substance of all matters
discussed.
B. The minutes of all meetings and evidence and documentation received
or disclosed in open session shall be public records and open to public
inspection during normal business hours.
C. The minutes of all meetings shall be written and available for public
inspection within 10 working days or prior to the next convened
meeting, whichever occurs earlier. An additional 10 days shall be
allowed the City Clerk in writing and making available for inspection
such minutes in the event of the Clerk's serious illness or an emergency
which prevents him/her from writing such minutes and making them
available to the general public within 10 working days as set forth
herein.
(Neb. RS 84-1413)
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 78-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-1.8
1:129
§ 78-1.9. Notice to news media.
The Municipal Clerk, Secretary, or other designee of each public body shall
maintain a list of the news media requesting notification of meetings and
shall make reasonable efforts to provide advance notification to them of the
time and place of each meeting, and the subjects to be discussed at that
meeting. (Neb. RS 84-1411)
§ 78-1.10. Public participation. [Amended 10-4-1983 by Ord. No.
25-83; 10-1-1985 by Ord. No. 12-85; 10-16-2007 by Ord. No. 36-07]
A. Any action taken on any question or motion duly moved and seconded
shall be by roll call vote of the public body in open session, and the
record shall state how each member voted, or if the member was absent
or not voting. The requirements of a roll call or viva voce vote shall be
satisfied by the municipality utilizing an electronic voting device which
allows the "yeas" and "nays" of each member of the governing body to
be readily seen by the public.
B. The vote to elect leadership within a public body may be taken by secret
ballot, but the total number of votes for each candidate shall be
recorded in the minutes.
(Neb. RS 16-503, 17-616, 84-1413)
A. Subject to the Open Meetings Act, the public has the right to attend and
the right to speak at meetings of public bodies, and all or any part of a
meeting of a public body, except for closed sessions called pursuant to
§ 78-1.4, may be videotaped, televised, photographed, broadcast, or
recorded by any person in attendance by means of a tape recorder,
camera, video equipment, or any other means of pictorial or sonic
reproduction or in writing.
B. It shall not be a violation of this section for any public body to make and
enforce reasonable rules and regulations regarding the conduct of
persons attending, speaking at, videotaping, televising, photographing,
broadcasting, or recording its meetings. A body may not be required to
allow citizens to speak at each meeting, but it may not forbid public
participation at all meetings.
C. No public body shall require members of the public to identify
themselves as a condition for admission to the meeting, nor shall such
body require that the name of any member of the public be placed on
the agenda prior to such meeting in order to speak about items on the
agenda. The body may require any member of the public desiring to
address the body to identify himself or herself.46
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 78-1.8 SEWARD CODE § 78-1.10
1:130
D. No public body shall, for the purpose of circumventing the provisions of
the Open Meetings Act, hold a meeting in a place known by the body to
be too small to accommodate the anticipated audience.
E. No public body shall be deemed in violation of this section if it holds its
meeting in its traditional meeting place which is located in this state.
F. No public body shall be deemed in violation of this section if it holds a
meeting outside of this state if, but only if:
(1) A member entity of the public body is located outside of this state
and the meeting is in that member's jurisdiction;
(2) All out-of-state locations identified in the notice are located within
public buildings used by members of the entity or at a place which
will accommodate the anticipated audience;
(3) Reasonable arrangements are made to accommodate the public's
right to attend, hear, and speak at the meeting, including making a
telephone conference call available at an in-state location to
members, the public, or the press, if requested 24 hours in
advance;
(4) No more than 25% of the public body's meetings in a calendar year
are held out-of-state;
(5) Out-of-state meetings are not used to circumvent any of the public
government purposes established in the Open Meetings Act;
(6) Reasonable arrangements are made to provide viewing at other instate
locations for a videoconference meeting if requested 14 days
in advance and if economically and reasonably available in the
area; and
(7) The public body publishes notice of the out-of-state meeting at least
21 days before the date of the meeting in a legal newspaper of
statewide circulation.
G. The public body shall, upon request, make a reasonable effort to
accommodate the public's right to hear the discussion and testimony
presented at the meeting.
H. Public bodies shall make available at the meeting or the in-state
location for a telephone conference call or videoconference, for
examination and copying by members of the public, at least one copy of
all reproducible written material to be discussed at an open meeting.
Public bodies shall make available at least one current copy of the Open
Meetings Act posted in the meeting room at a location accessible to
members of the public. At the beginning of the meeting, the public shall
be informed about the location of the posted information.47
47.Editor's Note: Original § 1-610 of the 1976 Code, Meetings; governing body, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 10-1-1985 by Ord. No. 13-85.
§ 78-1.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-1.10
1:131
§ 78-1.11. Meeting date falling on holiday. [Amended 8-20-2002 by
Ord. No. 29-03; 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 40-12]
When the regular meeting date of the City Council shall fall on a legal
holiday, the Mayor and Council shall meet on the evening of the day
following such legal holiday.
§ 78-1.12. Change in office.
The change in office shall be made as follows: The Mayor and Council
shall meet on the first regular meeting date in December of each year
in which a municipal election is held and the outgoing officers and the
outgoing members of the Council shall present their reports, and upon the
old Council having completed its business up to said time, the outgoing
members of the Council shall surrender their offices to the incoming
members, and the outgoing officers shall thereupon each surrender to his
successor in office all property, records, papers and moneys belonging to
the same. (Neb. RS 16-302.01)
§ 78-1.13. Organizational meeting.
The newly elected Council shall convene at the regular place of meeting
in the City on the first regular meeting in December of each year in which
a municipal election is held immediately after the prior Council adjourns
and proceed to organize itself for the ensuing year. The Mayor elected for
the new municipal year shall call the meeting to order. The Council shall
then proceed to examine the credentials of its members and other elective
officers of the City to see that each has been duly and properly elected, and
to see that such oaths and bonds have been given as are required. After
ascertaining that all members are duly qualified, the Council shall then elect
one of its own body who shall be styled as "President of the Council." The
Mayor shall then nominate his candidates for appointive offices. He shall
then proceed with the regular order of business. It is hereby made the duty
of each and every member of the Council, or his successor in office, and
to each officer elected to any office, to qualify prior to the first regular
meeting in December following his election. All appointive officers shall
qualify within two weeks following their appointments. Qualification for
each officer who is not required to give bond shall consist in his subscribing
and taking an oath to support the Constitution of the United States, the
Constitution of the State of Nebraska, the laws of the municipality and to
perform faithfully and impartially the duties of his office, said oath to be
filed in the office of the Municipal Clerk. Each officer who is required to give
a bond shall file the required bond in the office of the Municipal Clerk with
sufficient sureties, conditioned on the faithful discharge of the duties of his
office, with the oath endorsed thereon. (Neb. RS 16-302.01)
§ 78-1.14. Regular meetings. [Amended 10-1-1985 by Ord. No.
13-85; 8-20-2002 by Ord. No. 30-02; 12-21-2010 by Ord. No. 30-10]
(Neb. RS 84-1412)
§ 78-1.10 SEWARD CODE § 78-1.14
1:132
§ 78-1.15. Special meetings. [Amended 10-1-1985 by Ord. No.
13-85]
§ 78-1.16. Videoconferencing. [Amended 6-1997 by Ord. No. 17-97;
11-21-2000 by Ord. No. 53-00; 3-15-2005 by Ord. No. 11-05]
A. The meeting of the governing body shall be held in the meeting place of
the municipality. Regular meetings shall be held on the first and third
Tuesdays of each month at the hour of 7:00 p.m.
B. At all meetings of the Council, a majority of the Councilmembers
elected or appointed to the Council shall constitute a quorum to do
business.48
(Neb. RS 16-401)
A. Special meetings may be called by the Mayor, or by four members of the
City Council, the object of which shall be submitted to the Council in
writing. The call and object, as well as the disposition thereof, shall be
entered upon the journal by the Municipal Clerk. On filing the call for a
special meeting, the Municipal Clerk shall notify the Councilmembers
of the special meeting, stating the time and its purpose. Notice of a
special meeting need not be given to a Councilmember known to be out
of the state or physically unable to be present. A majority of the
members of the City Council shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business, but a smaller number may adjourn from day to
day and compel the attendance of the absent members. Whether a
quorum is present or not, all absent members shall be sent for and
compelled to attend.
B. At the hour appointed for the meeting, the Municipal Clerk shall
proceed to call the roll of members and announce whether a quorum is
present. If a quorum is present, the Council shall be called to order by
the Mayor, if present, or, if absent, by the President of the Council. In
the absence of both the Mayor and the President of the Council, the City
Councilmembers shall elect a President Pro Tempore. All ordinances
passed at any special meeting shall comply with procedures set forth in
Chapter 72, Article I, of the Seward Municipal Code.
(Neb. RS 16-401)
A. A meeting of an organization created under the Interlocal Cooperation
Act (Neb. RS 13-801), the Joint Public Agency Act (Neb. RS 13-2501), or
the Municipal Cooperative Financing Act (Neb. RS 18-2401 et seq.) or
of the governing body of a risk management pool or its advisory
committees organized in accordance with the Intergovernmental Risk
Management Act (Neb. RS 44-4301 et seq.) may be held by means of
videoconferencing if:
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 78-1.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-1.16
1:133
(Neb. RS 84-1411)
§ 78-1.17. Teleconferencing.
(1) Reasonable advance publicized notice is given;
(2) Reasonable arrangements are made to accommodate the public's
right to attend, hear, and speak at the meeting, including seating,
recordation by audio or visual recording devices, and a reasonable
opportunity for input such as public comment or questions to at
least the same extent as would be provided if videoconferencing
was not used;
(3) At least one copy of all documents being considered is available to
the public at each site of the videoconference;
(4) At least one member of the governing body or advisory committee
is present at each site of the videoconference; and
(5) No more than 1/2 of the governing body's or advisory committee's
meetings in a calendar year are held by videoconference.
B. Videoconferencing or conferencing by other electronic communication
shall not be used to circumvent any of the public government purposes
established in the Open Meetings Act.
C. For the purpose of this section, the following definition applies:
VIDEOCONFERENCING — Conducting a meeting involving
participants at two or more locations through the use of audio-video
equipment which allows participants at each location to hear and see
each meeting participant at each other location, including public input.
Interaction between meeting participants shall be possible at all
meeting locations. (Neb. RS 84-1409)
A. A meeting of the governing body of an entity formed under the
Interlocal Cooperation Act or the Joint Public Agency Act or of the
governing body of a risk management pool or its advisory committees
organized in accordance with the Intergovernmental Risk Management
Act may be held by telephone conference call if:
(1) The territory represented by the member public agencies of the
entity or pool covers more than one county;
(2) Reasonable advance publicized notice is given which identifies
each telephone conference location at which a member of the
entity's or pool's governing body will be present;
(3) All telephone conference meeting sites identified in the notice are
located within public buildings used by members of the entity or
pool at a place which will accommodate the anticipated audience;
(4) Reasonable arrangements are made to accommodate the public's
right to attend, hear, and speak at the meeting, including seating,
§ 78-1.16 SEWARD CODE § 78-1.17
1:134
recordation by audio recording devices, and a reasonable
opportunity for input such as public comment or questions to at
least the same extent as would be provided if a telephone
conference call was not used;
(5) At least one copy of all documents being considered is available to
the public at each site of the telephone conference call;
(6) At least one member of the governing body of the entity or pool is
present at each site of the telephone conference call identified in
the public notice;
(7) The telephone conference call lasts no more than one hour; and
(8) No more than 1/2 of the entity's or pool's meetings in a calendar
year are held by telephone conference call.
B. Nothing in this section shall prevent the participation of consultants,
members of the press, and other nonmembers of the governing body at
sites not identified in the public notice. Telephone conference calls, emails,
faxes, or other electronic communication shall not be used to
circumvent any of the public government purposes established in the
Open Meetings Act.49
(Neb. RS 84-1411)
49.Editor's Note: The original section of the 1976 Code entitled "Closed sessions," which
immediately followed this section, as amended, was repealed at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). For current provisions see § 78-1.4 above.
§ 78-1.17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-1.17
1:135
Chapter 85
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 7.
Boards, commissions and committees — See
Ch. 12.
Elections — See Ch. 32.
Meetings — See Ch. 78.
Pension plans — See Ch. 91.
Personnel — See Ch. 95.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 113.
§ 78-1.17 SEWARD CODE § 78-1.17
1:136
Part 1
[Adopted As ChE.l e1c,t Aedrt .O 2ffi, cOifa lTshe 1976 Code]
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 85-1.1. Qualifications and prohibitions. [Amended 8-21-1984 by
Ord. No. 17-8450]
Elected officials shall be residents and registered voters of the City. Except
as an officer of a public power district, public power and irrigation district,
or public utility company, elected officials shall hold no other elective office,
any county office, nor any other office or employment of the municipality.
The acceptance of any county office by any elected municipal official shall
be a vacation of the municipal office so held prior to such acceptance.
Further, except as provided in Chapter 100, Purchasing and Contracts,
Article I, Conflicts of Interest, of the Seward Municipal Code, such elected
officials shall not be interested in the profits or emoluments of any contract,
job, work or service for the City. (Neb. RS 16-305, 16-311, 70-624.04)51
§ 85-1.2. Officers to be elected; qualifications; terms.
The electors of the municipality shall elect a Mayor at large and two
City Councilmembers from each ward in each municipal election year.
Councilmembers shall be electors of the municipality and residents of the
ward from which they were elected. Terms of all elected officials shall
commence on the first regular meeting in December of each election year.
(Neb. RS 16-302.01)
§ 85-1.3. Vacancies. [Amended 1-20-1976 by Ord. No. 1043;
10-21-1980 by Ord. No. 27-80; 8-21-1984 by Ord. No. 18-84;
10-6-1998 by Ord. No. 28-98; 8-21-2007 by Ord. No. 25-07]
A. Every elective office shall be vacant upon the happening of any of the
events specified in Neb. RS 32-560.
B. In case of any vacancy in the Office of Mayor, the President of the City
Council shall serve as Mayor for the unexpired term. In case of any
temporary absence or disability on the part of the Mayor, the President
of the Council shall exercise the powers and duties of the Office of
Mayor until such disability is removed, or in case of temporary absence
until the Mayor returns, and shall perform such other duties as may be
required by law. Any vacancy on the City Council resulting from causes
other than expiration of the term shall be filled by appointment by the
Mayor with the consent of the City Council to hold office for the
remainder of the term.
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
51.Editor's Note: Original § 1-202 of the 1976 Code, Elected Officials; Other Offices
Prohibited, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 8-21-1984 by Ord. No.
17-84.
§ 85-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-1.3
1:137
C. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection B, E or F of this section,
vacancies in City elected offices shall be filled by the Mayor and City
Council for the balance of the unexpired term. Notice of a vacancy,
except a vacancy resulting from the death of the incumbent, shall be in
writing and presented to the Council at a regular or special meeting
and shall appear as a part of the minutes of such meeting. The Council
shall at once give public notice of the vacancy by causing to be
published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City or by
posting in three public places in the City the office vacated and the
length of the unexpired term.
D. The Mayor shall, within four weeks after the meeting at which such
notice of vacancy has been presented or upon the death of the
incumbent, call a special meeting of the Council or place the issue of
filling such vacancy on the agenda at the next regular meeting, at which
time the Mayor shall submit the name of a qualified registered voter to
fill the vacancy for the balance of the unexpired term. The Council shall
vote upon such nominee, and if a majority votes in favor of such
nominee, the vacancy shall be declared filled. If the nominee fails to
receive a majority of the votes, the nomination shall be rejected and the
Mayor shall, at the next regular or special meeting, submit the name of
another qualified registered voter to fill the vacancy. If the subsequent
nominee fails to receive a majority of the votes, the Mayor shall
continue at such meeting to submit the names of qualified registered
voters in nomination and the Council shall continue to vote upon such
nominations until the vacancy is filled. The Mayor shall cast his or her
vote for or against the nominee in case of a tie vote of the Council. All
Council members present shall cast a ballot for or against the nominee.
Any member of the Council who has been appointed to fill a vacancy on
the Council shall have the same rights, including voting, as if such
person were elected.
E. The Mayor and Council may, in lieu of filling a vacancy in a City elected
office as provided in Subsections B through D of this section, call a
special City election to fill such vacancy.
F. If vacancies exist in the offices of 1/2 or more of the members of the City
Council, the Secretary of State shall conduct a special City election to
fill such vacancies for the unexpired portion of each term.52
G. No officer who is removed at a recall election or resigns after the
initiation of the recall process shall be appointed to fill the vacancy
resulting from his or her removal or the removal of any other member of
the same governing body during the remainder of his or her term of
office.53
(Neb. RS 16-217, 32-560 et seq., 32-1406)
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
53.Editor's Note: Original § 1-209 of the 1976 Code, Mayor; Vacancy, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 10-21-1980 by Ord. No. 27-80. See now § 85-1.3.
§ 85-1.3 SEWARD CODE § 85-1.4
1:138
§ 85-1.4. Code of Decorum.
It is the policy of the City of Seward that the proper operation of democratic
government requires that public officials and employees be independent,
impartial and responsible to the people; that governmental decisions and
policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that
public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have
confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals,
a code of conduct for all City officials and employees is adopted. The City
Council may adopt, amend, and/or rescind this code. If any portion of this
Code of Conduct is found to conflict with City ordinance or state law, the
provisions of the City ordinance or state law shall be followed.54
54.Editor's Note: The Code of Decorum is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 85-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-1.4
1:139

ARTICLE II
Mayor
[Amended 10-21-1980 by Ord. No. 28-80; 3-5-1985 by Ord. No. 5-85]
§ 85-2.1. Term of office; duties.
The Mayor shall be elected to serve a four-year term of office. The Mayor
shall preside at all the meetings of the City Council and shall have the
right to vote when his vote shall be decisive and the City Council is equally
divided on any pending matter, legislation, or transaction and the Mayor
shall, for the purpose of such vote, be deemed to be a member of the
Council. He shall have the superintending control of all the officers and
affairs of the municipality and shall take care that the state and municipal
law are complied with. He may administer oaths, and shall sign the
commissions and appointments of all the officers appointed in the
municipality.
§ 85-2.2. Approval or veto of ordinances.
A. The Mayor shall have the power to approve or veto any ordinance
passed by the City Council, and to approve or veto any order, bylaw,
resolution, award of or vote to enter into any contract, or the allowance
of any claim. If the Mayor approves the ordinance, order, bylaw,
resolution, contract, or claim, he or she shall sign it, and it shall become
effective. If the Mayor vetoes the ordinance, order, bylaw, resolution,
contract, or any item or items of appropriations or claims, he or she
shall return it to the City Council stating that the measure is vetoed.
The Mayor may issue the veto at the meeting at which the measure
passed or within seven calendar days after the meeting. If the Mayor
issues the veto after the meeting, the Mayor shall notify the City Clerk
of the veto in writing. The Clerk shall notify the City Council in writing
of the Mayor's veto. Any ordinance, order, bylaw, resolution, award, or
vote to enter into any contract, or the allowance of any claim vetoed by
the Mayor may be passed over his veto by a vote of 2/3 of all the
members elected to the City Council. If the Mayor neglects or refuses to
sign any ordinance, order, bylaw, resolution, award, or vote to enter into
any contract, or the allowance of any claim, but fails to veto the
measure within the time required by this section, the measure shall
become effective without his signature. The Mayor may veto any item or
items of any appropriation bill or any claims bill, and approve the
remainder thereof. The item or items so vetoed may be passed by the
Council over his veto as in other cases. Provided, further, as to any
measure or item which is subject to an imposed or required time
limitation for approval or disapproval by the Council, the Mayor shall
exercise his veto at the meeting at which such measure or item is
passed and approved. As to any other measure or item passed and
approved by the Council, if the Mayor does not exercise his veto at the
meeting at which the measure or item is passed and approved, then
such veto shall be exercised within 10 days immediately following its
passage and approval by the City Council.55
§ 85-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-2.2
1:141
§ 85-2.3. Scope of authority.56
The Mayor shall communicate to the Council such information and
recommend such measures as in his opinion may tend to improve the
municipality, and may have such jurisdiction as may be vested in him by
ordinance over all places within two miles of the corporate limits of the
municipality for the enforcement of health or quarantine laws and the
regulation thereof. The Mayor shall have the power after the conviction
of any person to remit fines and forfeitures, and to grant reprieves and
pardons for all offenses arising under the laws of the municipality. (Neb. RS
16-312 through 16-316)
B. After the Mayor has exercised his veto, the Council may pass such
measure or item so vetoed over the Mayor's veto, if the veto is exercised
during the Council meeting at which it was passed and approved by the
Council, at the same meeting or at a regular or special meeting of the
Council within 30 days after such veto was exercised.
C. The veto of the Mayor and the reasons stated therefor when exercised
after the meeting during which the measure or item was passed and
approved by the Council shall be filed with the City Clerk by the Mayor
and the same shall be made a part of the minutes and records of the
City Council at its next regular or special meeting. If the Council passes
the measure or item over the Mayor's veto by vote of a two-thirds
majority of all members elected to the Council, then such measure shall
become law without his signature as aforesaid. If the measure or item is
not passed over the Mayor's veto by vote of a two-thirds majority of all
the members elected to the City Council, then such veto shall stand and
such measure or item as vetoed shall be of no force and effect.
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 85-2.2 SEWARD CODE § 85-2.3
1:142
ARTICLE III
City Council
§ 85-3.1. President and Acting President.
The City Council shall elect one of its own body at the first meeting in
December of each year who shall be styled the "President" of the Council,
and who shall preside at all meetings of the City Council in the absence of
the Mayor. In the absence of the Mayor and the President of the Council, the
City Council shall elect one of its own body to occupy his place temporarily,
who shall be styled "Acting President" of the Council. Both the President of
the Council and the Acting President of the Council, when occupying the
position of the Mayor, shall have the same privileges as the other members
of the City Council, and all acts of the President of the Council, or Acting
President of the Council, while so acting, shall be as binding upon the City
Council and upon the municipality as if done by the elected Mayor. (Neb. RS
16-402)
§ 85-3.2. Election; term; powers and duties.
The members of the City Council shall be elected and serve for a four-year
term. One Councilman from each ward shall be elected at each election, so
that terms are staggered. The City Council shall be the legislative division
of the municipal government, and shall perform such duties and have such
powers as may be authorized by law. (Neb. RS 16-302.01)
§ 85-3.3. Organization; residency requirements.
City Councilmen of this municipality shall take office and commence their
duties on the first regular meeting date in December following their
election. The newly elected Councilmen who have qualified as prescribed
by law, together with the members of the City Council holding over, shall
assemble in a regular meeting at the hour and place hereinafter prescribed
and perfect the reorganization of the City Council as herein provided, and
all appointive offices in which the terms of incumbents are expired shall
be filled by appointment. After said meeting has been called to order, the
Municipal Clerk shall report to the City Council the names of all City
Councilmen-elect who have qualified for their respective offices, and this
report shall be spread upon the minutes of the meeting preceding the roll
call. Each ward of the municipality shall be represented by two Councilmen.
No person shall be eligible who is not at the time of his election an actual
resident of the ward for which he is qualified; and should any City
Councilman move from the ward from which he was elected, his office shall
thereby become vacant. (Neb. RS 16-302.01, 16-402)
§ 85-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-3.3
1:143

Part 2
[Adopted As CAhp.p 1o,i nAtretd. 3O,ffi Ocf iTalhse 1976 Code]
ARTICLE IV
In General
§ 85-4.1. Enumerated. [Amended 6-17-1997 by Ord. No. 20-9757]
The Mayor may, by and with the advice and consent of the City Council,
have such departments and appoint such officials as may be established
by ordinance, which shall include a City Administrator, Assistant
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer/Budget and Human Resources Director,
Deputy Clerk/Finance Director/Assistant Treasurer, Electric and Power
Resource Director, Water/Wastewater Director, Street/Transportation and
Recycling Superintendent, Parks/Recreation/Cemetery Director, Public
Facilities/Capital Improvements and GIS Director, Chief of Police, Fire
Chief, Library Director, Engineer, City Attorney, and such other officials as
may otherwise be required by law. All appointed officials may be removed at
any time by the Mayor with the approval of the majority of the Council. All
confirmations of appointments to such offices by the Council shall be made
viva voce, and the concurrence of a majority shall be required. The vote by
"yeas" and "nays" shall be recorded. (Neb. RS 16-308)58
§ 85-4.2. Vacancies.
Whenever any vacancy shall occur in an appointive office for any reason,
the Mayor, with the concurrence of the majority of the Council, shall fill
the office in the manner prescribed for the appointment of new appointed
officials for the unexpired term. (Neb RS 16-271)
§ 85-4.3. Term of office. [Amended 10-6-1998 by Ord. No. 29-98]
All officers appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council shall hold
the office to which they may be appointed until the end of the Mayor's
term of office and until their successors are appointed and qualified, unless
sooner removed, or the ordinance creating the office is repealed, except as
otherwise specifically provided. (Neb. RS 16-309)
§ 85-4.4. Creation of offices.
The governing body may create any office that it may deem necessary for
the good government and interest of the municipality. (Neb. RS 16-308)
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
58.Editor's Note: Original § 1-302 of the 1976 Code, Appointed Officials; Emergency
Appointment, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 1-17-1978 by Ord.
No. 1118.
§ 85-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-4.5
1:145
§ 85-4.5. Duties prescribed.
The governing body may regulate and prescribe by ordinance the powers,
duties, and compensation of the officers of the municipality not specifically
delineated by state law. (Neb. RS 16-218)
§ 85-4.6. Reports.
The governing body may require from any office of the municipality at any
time a report in detail of the transactions of the office or of any matters
connected therewith. (Neb. RS 16-220)
§ 85-4.5 SEWARD CODE § 85-4.6
1:146
ARTICLE V
City Administrator
§ 85-5.1. Position created; appointment and removal; duties;
compensation. [Amended 11-17-1981 by Ord. No. 42-81; 11-20-1984
by Ord. No. 38-84; 5-4-1993 by Ord. No. 13-93; 6-1997 by Ord. No.
21-97; 2-2-1999 by Ord. No. 3-9959]
There is hereby created the Office of City Administrator in and for the City.
The Mayor shall, with the consent of a majority of the Council, appoint the
City Administrator. All matters of general supervision and administration
with respect to public utilities now owned, operated or hereafter acquired
by the City, together with the maintenance of the streets and alleys and
the preservation and care of all property owned by the City, except fire
equipment, subject to the instruction, direction, approval or ratification of
the Mayor and Council, and in conformity with the provisions of this Code
and the statutes of the State of Nebraska, shall be combined under the
jurisdiction and control of said officer. The Electric Superintendent, Water/
Wastewater Superintendent, Public Works Superintendent, City Clerk-
Treasurer/Administrative Assistant, Library Director, Recreation Director,
Senior Center Manager and Building Inspector/Purchasing Agent shall be
under the direct control and supervision of the City Administrator. The
City Administrator shall be responsible for supervision of the Municipal
Swimming Pool(s), with the assistance of the Recreation Director and
Water/Wastewater Superintendent, and said City Administrator shall also
assist the Mayor with the supervision of the Police Department. This will
include all forms of discipline except demotion and dismissal, which shall
require the approval of the Mayor and City Council. He shall be responsible
for the prudent management of his department and shall be accountable to
the Mayor and Council at all times. He shall recommend the appointment
together with the compensation of such employees and assistants as are
necessary to perform the duties of his office and of the various departments
of the City, but such appointments and the compensation of appointees shall
be approved and confirmed by the Mayor and Council before the City is
bound to the acts of the City Administrator in this respect. All employees of
his department and subordinate departments shall obey his orders and may
be discharged on recommendation of the City Administrator for inefficiency
or for the general good of the several departments. The Mayor and City
Council may assign duties from time to time, additional to those prescribed
herein. For performing the duties mentioned herein, or for other such
duties as the Mayor and Council may from time to time designate, he shall
receive such compensation payable out of the several funds to credit of
the municipal activities under his jurisdiction in regular installments as the
Mayor and Council shall fix by ordinance. He may be removed at any time
by the Mayor with approval of a majority vote of the members elected to the
Council. The City Administrator, or his designee, shall serve as an ex-officio
member of the Library, Cemetery, Seward Aging Services Commission and
Park and Recreation Boards. The City Administrator shall give bond in a
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 85-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-5.1
1:147
sum set from time to time by the City Council to be executed for the faithful
performance of the duties of the several offices under his jurisdiction and of
the duties prescribed herein.
§ 85-5.2. Administrative Assistant. [Added 6-17-1997 by Ord. No.
22-97]
There is hereby created the Office of Administrative Assistant to the City
Administrator in and for the City. The Administrative Assistant shall assist
the City Administrator in performing responsible administrative work in
analyzing, controlling, recommending and implementing City policy. In the
absence of the City Administrator, the Administrative Assistant shall provide
general management assistance and direction to all department
superintendents, directors and supervisors under the jurisdiction/control of
the City Administrator.
§ 85-5.1 SEWARD CODE § 85-5.2
1:148
ARTICLE VI
City Attorney
[Amended 3-21-2006 by Ord. No. 2-06]
(Neb. RS 16-319)
§ 85-6.1. Authority.
The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the Council and City officers.
§ 85-6.2. Supervision; duties.
The City Attorney shall be under the direction of the Mayor with the
assistance of the City Administrator. The City Attorney shall commence,
prosecute, and defend all suits and actions necessary to be commenced,
prosecuted, or defended on behalf of the City, or that may be ordered by
the Council. He shall attend meetings of the Council and give them his
opinion upon any matter submitted to him, either orally or in writing as may
be required. He shall draw all ordinances, contracts and other documents
requested by the Mayor and Council.
§ 85-6.3. Compensation; additional legal services.
The Mayor and City Council shall have the right to pay the City Attorney
additional compensation for legal services performed by him for the City or
to employ additional legal assistance and to pay for such legal assistance
out of the funds of the City.
§ 85-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-6.3
1:149

ARTICLE VII
City Treasurer
§ 85-7.1. Duties. [Amended 7-8-2007 by Ord. No. 21-07]
The Treasurer of the City shall be the custodian of and receive all money
belonging to the City. He shall keep a separate account of each fund or
appropriation, and the debits and credits belonging thereto. He shall, at
the end of every month, and as often as may be requested, render an
account to the City Council, under oath, showing the state of the treasury
at the date of such account, the amount of money remaining in each fund
and the amount paid therefrom, and the balance of money in the treasury.
He shall accompany such account with a statement of all receipts and
disbursements, together with all warrants retained and paid by him, which
warrants, with all vouchers held by him, shall be filed with his account
in the Clerk's office. He shall produce and show all funds shown by such
report to be on hand, or satisfy the Council or its committee that he has
such funds in his custody or under his control. If said Treasurer neglects
or fails, for the space of 20 days from the end of every month, or by a
later date as established by the Council, to render his account, his office
may, by resolution of the Mayor and Council, be declared vacant; and the
Mayor shall appoint and the Council confirm some person to fill the vacancy.
The Treasurer shall keep his books and accounts in such a manner as
the Mayor and Council shall prescribe and shall keep a daily cashbook.
All of the books and accounts of the Treasurer shall always be subject to
inspection by the Mayor, members of the Council and such other persons as
they may designate. The Treasurer shall perform such other duties as are
required of him by the laws of the City and the statutes of Nebraska. The
Treasurer shall keep all money in his hands belonging to the City separate
and distinct from his own money; and he is hereby expressly prohibited
from using, either directly or indirectly, the corporation money or warrants
in his custody and keeping same for his own use and benefit or that of
any other person whomsoever. Any violation of this section shall subject the
Treasurer to immediate removal from office by the City Council, and it may
declare such office vacant. The Mayor shall appoint a successor, who shall
be confirmed by the City Council, to hold office for the remainder of the
term. (Neb. RS 16-318, 16-717, 16-719)
§ 85-7.2. Books and accounts.
The Treasurer shall give every person paying money into the treasury and
his office a receipt therefor, which shall show the source from which such
funds are derived, and shall, by distinct lines and columns, show the amount
received to the credit of each separate fund, and whether same was paid
in cash, in warrants, or otherwise, one of which copies the Treasurer shall
deliver to the person making such payment and the other he shall retain
in his office and file such copy with his monthly reports. (Neb. RS 16-318,
77-2209)
§ 85-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-7.3
1:151
§ 85-7.3. Daily accounting; availability of records.
The Treasurer shall daily, as moneys are received, foot the several columns
of his cashbook and of his register, and carry the amounts forward, and
at the close of each year, in case the amount of money received by the
Treasurer is insufficient to pay the warrants registered, he shall close
the account for that year in such register and shall carry forward the
excess. Any Treasurer who shall fail regularly to enter upon his cashbook
the amounts so received and receipted for, or who shall fail to keep his
cashbook footed from day to day, for the space of three days, shall forfeit for
each offense the sum of $100, to be recovered in a civil action on his official
bond by any person holding a warrant drawn on such Treasurer, 1/2 to the
person bringing such action, and 1/2 to the school fund of the County. The
cashbook, register and retained receipts of the Treasurer shall at all times
be open to the inspection of any person in whose name any warrants are
registered and unpaid. (Neb. RS 77-2210 through 77-2212)
§ 85-7.4. Annual report.60
It shall be the duty of the Treasurer to prepare and publish annually, within
60 days following the close of the municipal fiscal year, a statement of the
receipts and expenditures by funds of the City for the preceding fiscal year.
The statement shall also include the information required by Subsection (3)
of Neb. RS 16-318 or Subsection (2) of Neb. RS 17-606. Not more than the
legal rate provided for in Neb. RS 33-141 shall be charged and paid for
such publication. Such publication shall be made in one legal newspaper
of general circulation in the City. Any Treasurer failing or neglecting to
prepare and publish such statement of receipts and expenditures shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be removed from office for such
failure or neglect. (Neb. RS 19-1101, 19-1103, 19-1104)
§ 85-7.5. Warrants.61
The Treasurer shall keep a warrant register which shall show in columns
arranged for that purpose the number, date, and amount of each warrant
presented and registered, the particular fund upon which the same is
drawn, the date of presentation, the name and address of the person in
whose name the same is registered, the date of payment, the amount of
interest, and the total amount paid thereon, with the date when notice to
the person in whose name such warrant is registered as herein provided.
On presentation of a warrant for payment to the Treasurer when there
are not insufficient moneys on hand to the credit of the proper fund to
pay the same, it shall be the duty of the Treasurer to enter such warrant
in his warrant register for payment in the order of its presentation and
he shall endorse on the warrant the words "registered for payment" with
the date of registration and shall sign such endorsement, whereupon the
warrant shall draw interest at such rate as is fixed by the issuing authority
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 85-7.3 SEWARD CODE § 85-7.5
1:152
and endorsed on the warrant from the date of registration until notice of
payment shall be given the registered owner. The Treasurer shall neither
directly nor indirectly contract for or purchase any City warrant at any
discount whatever upon the sum due on such warrant or order, and if
he shall so contract for or purchase any such order or warrant, he shall
not be allowed in settlement the amount of such order or warrant, or any
part thereof, and shall also forfeit the whole amount due on such order or
warrant. (Neb. RS 45-106, 77-2202, 77-2203)
§ 85-7.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-7.5
1:153

ARTICLE VIII
City Clerk
§ 85-8.1. Appointment; duties. [Amended 5-21-1996 by Ord. No.
21-96]
A. The Mayor shall, with the consent of a majority of the Council, appoint
the Municipal Clerk. It shall be the duty of the Municipal Clerk to attend
every meeting of the Council and keep a record of the proceedings
thereof. Whenever required by the Mayor or requested by four
members of the Council, he shall issue to the Chief of Police a notice to
be delivered to the members of the Council of any special meeting
thereof, and shall notify any and all committees of the Council of the
business entrusted to them.
B. The Clerk shall keep and carefully preserve all papers and books which
may come into his possession as Clerk, filing and arranging them in a
manner convenient for reference; provided that after the period of time
specified by the State Records Board, the Clerk may transfer such
journal of proceedings of the Council to the state archives of the
Nebraska State Historical Society for permanent preservation.
C. The Clerk shall keep the Seal of the City and duly attest thereby the
Mayor's signature to all ordinances and all deeds and papers required
to be attested, when ordered by the governing body.
D. The Clerk shall keep all orders for money or warrants for the payment
of money, and shall enter the same in numerical order in a book to be
kept for that purpose.
E. The Clerk shall keep a register of all licenses granted and the purpose
for which they were issued, and report to the Council at every meeting.
At the beginning of each month, he shall, if required by the governing
body, furnish the Police Department with a true copy of the register of
all licenses then in force. He shall issue licenses and collect license fees
connected therewith as provided by the laws of Nebraska or the
municipality.
F. The office of the Clerk shall be responsible for keeping a full and correct
account with each consumer of City utility services and shall issue
proper receipts for all money collected from each consumer, one copy of
which shall be retained by this office. The books and papers
representing all transactions of this office shall at all times be open to
the inspection of the Mayor and Council. This office shall make to the
Mayor and Council a detailed monthly report as prescribed by the
Mayor and Council. This office shall collect all money receivable by the
City on account of public utilities, duly accounting therefor, and pay
said sums forthwith to the Treasurer.
G. All office personnel of the Clerk's office and the Electric and Water
Office shall be under the supervision and control of the City Clerk. All of
§ 85-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-8.1
1:155
§ 85-8.2. Deputy Clerk.
The Mayor, with the consent of the Council, may appoint within the office
of the City Clerk a Deputy Clerk, who shall have all the powers and duties
of the Clerk except as otherwise shall be provided by ordinance. He shall
receive such compensation as the Mayor and Council shall from time to time
establish by ordinance. He shall be removable at any time by the Mayor with
the consent of the members of the Council. He shall give such bond as may
be required by the Mayor and Council. He shall be under the immediate
supervision of the Clerk.
said employees shall obey the Clerk's orders and may be discharged on
recommendation of the Clerk for inefficiency or for the general good of
said office.
H. Within 30 days after any meeting of the Council, the Clerk shall prepare
and publish the proceedings of the Council in a legal newspaper, or
more than one legal newspaper if directed by the Council. Said
publication shall set forth a statement of the proceedings thereof and
shall also include the amount of each claim allowed, the purpose of the
claim, and the name of the claimant, except that the aggregate amount
of all payroll claims may be included as one item. Between July 15 and
August 15 of each year, the names of all employees and their current
annual monthly or hourly salaries corresponding to such job titles shall
be published. Each job title published shall be descriptive and
indicative of the duties and functions of the position. The charge for the
publication shall not exceed the rates provided for in Neb. RS 23-122.
The publication charge shall be paid and allowed as other claims
against the General Fund.
I. Wherever the Clerk is required to issue licenses, occupation tax
receipts, or permits, the City Treasurer shall collect the amount
required to be paid by the applicant therefor.
J. The Clerk shall have such additional duties and receive such salary as
the governing body may prescribe. (Neb. RS 16-317, 19-1102 through
19-1104)
§ 85-8.1 SEWARD CODE § 85-8.2
1:156
ARTICLE IX
Merged Offices
§ 85-9.1. Authority to merge offices; effect. [Amended 8-21-1984 by
Ord. No. 19-84]
The governing body may, at its discretion, by ordinance combine and merge
any elective or appointive office or employment, except Mayor and
Councilmember, with any other elective or appointive office or employment
so that one or more of such offices or employments may be held by the
officer or employee at the same time. The offices or employments so merged
and combined shall always be construed to be separate and the effect of
the combination or merger shall be limited to a consolidation of official
duties only. The salary or compensation of the officer or employee holding
the merged and combined office or employment or offices and employments
shall not be in excess of the maximum amount provided by law for the
salary or compensation of the office, offices, employment or employments
so merged and combined. (Neb. RS 16-305, 16-318.01)
§ 85-9.2. Clerk-Treasurer position created.
The appointed offices of Municipal Clerk and Municipal Treasurer are
hereby combined and merged, in accordance with the authority granted to
the governing body by § 85-9.1.
§ 85-9.3. Clerk-Treasurer/Administrative Assistant position created.
[Added 6-17-1997 by Ord. No. 23-97]
The appointive offices of Municipal Clerk, Municipal Treasurer and
Administrative Assistant are hereby combined and merged, in accordance
with the authority granted to the governing body by § 85-9.1.
§ 85-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-9.3
1:157

ARTICLE X
City Engineer
§ 85-10.1. Duties.
The City Engineer shall, when requested by the governing body, make
estimates of the cost of labor and material which may be done or furnished
by contract with the municipality, and make all surveys, estimates, and
calculations necessary to be made for the establishment of grades, building
of culverts, sewers, electric light system, waterworks, power plant, public
heating system, bridges, curbing, gutters, the improvement of streets, and
the erection and repair of buildings. He shall perform such additional duties
as the governing body may require. It shall be his duty to make a record
of the minutes of his surveys and of all work done for the municipality
and accurately make such plats, sections, profiles, and maps as may be
necessary in the prosecution of any public work, which shall be public
records and belong to the municipality. (Neb. RS 16-320, 16-321)
§ 85-10.2. Special engineer.
The governing body may, whenever it deems it expedient, employ a special
engineer to make or assist in making any particular estimate or survey.
Any such estimate or survey shall have the same validity and serve in all
respects as though the same had been made by the City Engineer. (Neb. RS
16-322)
§ 85-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-10.2
1:159

ARTICLE XI
Public Works Superintendent
[Amended 6-17-1997 by Ord. No. 24-97]
§ 85-11.1. Duties and supervision.
The Public Works Superintendent shall be subject to the orders of the
governing body by resolution and under the immediate supervision of the
City Administrator. The Public Works Superintendent shall have general
charge, direction, and control over all work of the Street Division, Public
Properties Division, and Recycling Center of the municipality. He shall
perform such other duties and make reports as the City Administrator
or governing body may require. He shall serve all notices pertaining to
sidewalks, streets, alleys, and other property unless some other official is
specifically required to serve such notices. It is hereby made the duty of the
Public Works Superintendent or his/her agent to view and inspect all lots
and parcels of land for weeds and worthless vegetation upon complaint or
otherwise as often as may be required. It shall be the duty of the Public
Works Superintendent or his/her agent to view and inspect all sidewalks
contiguous to public property within the municipality to ascertain if any
snow, ice, mud, or other obstructions encroach into or upon said sidewalks.
(Neb. RS 16-324)
§ 85-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-11.1
1:161

ARTICLE XII
Police Department
[Amended 5-4-1993 by Ord. No. 14-93]
(Neb. RS 16-225, 16-238, 16-323, 29-401)
§ 85-12.1. Chief of Police; juvenile offenders.62
The Chief of Police shall have the immediate superintendence of the police.
Every sheriff, deputy sheriff, marshal, deputy marshal, security guard,
police officer, or peace officer as defined in Subdivision (15) of Neb. RS
49-801 shall arrest and detain any person found violating any law of this
state or any legal ordinance of the City until a legal warrant can be
obtained, except that:
§ 85-12.2. Composition of Department; general authority.
The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police and such further
number of regular policemen as may be duly ordered by resolution of the
Council.
A. Any such law enforcement officer taking a juvenile under the age of 18
years into his or her custody for any violation herein defined shall
proceed as set forth in Neb. RS 43-248, 43-248.01, 43-250, 43-251,
43-251.01, and 43-253; and
B. The court in which the juvenile is to appear shall not accept a plea from
the juvenile until finding that the parents of the juvenile have been
notified or that reasonable efforts to notify such parents have been
made as provided in Neb. RS 43-250.
A. The Chief of Police shall, subject to the direction of the Mayor with the
assistance of the City Administrator, have control and management of
all matters relating to the Police Department, its officers and members,
and shall have the custody and control of all property and books
belonging to the Department. He shall devote his whole time to the
municipal affairs, interests of the municipality, and to the preservation
of peace, order, safety, and cleanliness thereof.
B. The Department shall execute and enforce all laws, shall execute the
orders of the Mayor, and shall execute the orders of the City
Administrator in the absence of the Mayor. It shall be the duty of the
Department to protect the rights of persons and property. There shall
be a proper police force at all fires. The Department shall take notice of
all nuisances, impediments, obstructions, and defects in the streets,
avenues, alleys, business places, and residences of the municipality.
The Department shall execute or cause to be executed the processes
issued and shall cause all persons arrested to be brought before the
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 85-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-12.2
1:163
§ 85-12.3. Powers and duties.
§ 85-12.4. Reserve officer bond. [Amended 9-16-1986 by Ord. No.
14-8663]
No appointment of a law enforcement reserve officer shall be valid until a
bond in an amount set from time to time by the City Council, payable to the
City, has been filed with the Municipal Clerk by the individual appointed,
or a blanket surety bond arranged and paid for by the governing body and
bonding all such officers of the governing body has been filed. Such bonds
shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 11, Article 1 of the Nebraska
Revised Statutes. (Neb. RS 81-1444)
proper court for trial as speedily as possible. The Chief of Police and
all regular and special policemen shall become thoroughly conversant
with the laws of the municipality, and shall see that the same are
strictly enforced and shall make sworn complaints against any person
or persons for violation of the same.
A. Each member of the City Police Department shall have the duties of
becoming well-informed as to the laws of the state and laws of the City,
of enforcing such laws, of wearing, while on duty, the badge, uniform
and insignia furnished by the City for the police and of properly caring
for same, and such further duties as shall be assigned to them by the
Mayor and Council and as are otherwise provided by law.
B. The Chief of Police shall have custody of all municipal property used by
the City Police; shall execute the orders of the Mayor; shall be a
member of the Board of Health and the Secretary and quarantine
officer thereof, shall have charge of traffic control on the City streets;
shall make and file or cause to be made and filed complaints for
violations of the ordinances of the City; and shall perform such other
duties as are assigned to or required of him by the Mayor and Council
or otherwise provided by law. The Chief may be removed from office by
the Mayor, subject to the provisions of the Civil Service Commission of
the City or by the Civil Service Commission.
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 85-12.2 SEWARD CODE § 85-12.4
1:164
ARTICLE XIII
Building Inspector
§ 85-13.1. Powers and duties.
§ 85-13.2. Dangerous buildings.
When any structure is in a dangerous condition or the building is being
used contrary to the provisions of the laws of the municipality, the Building
Inspector may order such use discontinued or the structure or portion
thereof in violation vacated. The Building Inspector, acting in good faith
and without malice in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render
himself personally liable and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for
any damage that may accrue to persons or property as the result of any act
or omission in the discharge of his duties.
§ 85-13.3. Suits against Inspector.
Any suit brought against the Building Inspector, because of an alleged
act or omission performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of
the Municipal Code relating to buildings or building construction, shall be
defended by the legal department of the municipality until final termination
of the proceedings.
§ 85-13.4. Assistance of other officials.
The Building Inspector may request, and shall receive so far as may be
necessary in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of
other officials of the municipality.
§ 85-13.5. Additional duties.
The Building Inspector shall have such additional duties and make such
reports as the governing body may prescribe from time to time.
A. The Building Inspector is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all
the provisions of the Municipal Code pertaining to building
construction and repair. For such purpose, he shall have the powers of
the Municipal Police.
B. Whenever any building or construction work is being done contrary to
the provisions of the Building Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing Code, or
Gas Code, it shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to order the
work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in
doing or causing the work to be done. Any such person shall
immediately stop, or cause to be stopped, said work until authorization
is received from the Building Inspector to continue the work.
§ 85-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-13.5
1:165

ARTICLE XIV
Water/Wastewater Superintendent
[Amended 8-7-1979 by Ord. No. 1170; 10-2-1984 by Ord. No. 36-84;
4-6-1993 by Ord. No. 12-93]
§ 85-14.1. General duties.
The Water/Wastewater Superintendent, hereinafter referred to as the
"Superintendent," shall be the official who shall have the immediate charge
of the Water and Wastewater Departments of the municipality, and who
shall assist the City Administrator with the supervision of the Municipal
Swimming Pool(s).
§ 85-14.2. Appointment and removal; supervision; term.
§ 85-14.3. Specific powers and duties.
The Superintendent shall have the immediate control of: the facilities,
machinery and equipment used in connection with the production,
distribution and storage of water for the inhabitants of the municipality;
and the facilities, machinery and appliances used in connection with the
collection and treatment of sewage of the municipality. The Superintendent
shall read or cause to be read the water meters of the customers of the
Water Department. He shall supervise and inspect repairs and maintenance
work on the municipal water and wastewater systems. He shall also assist
the City Administrator with the supervision of the Municipal Swimming
Pool(s). He shall enforce the laws of the municipality relating to the Water
and Wastewater Departments as well as carry out any order or directive
of the City Administrator. All employees under his direction shall obey his
orders.
A. The Superintendent shall be under the direction and control of the City
Administrator at all times. He shall be appointed by the Mayor in the
manner of other appointed officials and may be removed by a majority
vote of the City Council for any good and sufficient cause.
B. The term of office of the Superintendent shall extend until the end of
the Mayor's term of office or until his successor shall be appointed and
qualified.
§ 85-14.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-14.3
1:167

ARTICLE XV
Light Commissioner
§ 85-15.1. General duties; supervision.
The Light Commissioner shall be the official who shall have the immediate
charge of the municipal lighting system, light plant, and distribution system.
The Commissioner shall be under the direction and control of the City
Administrator at all times.
§ 85-15.2. Appointment and removal; term.
The Commissioner shall be appointed by the Mayor in the manner of other
appointed officials and may be removed by a majority vote of the City
Council for any good and sufficient cause. The term of office of the
Commissioner shall extend until the end of the Mayor's term of office or
until his successor shall be appointed and qualified.
§ 85-15.3. Specific powers and duties.64
The Commissioner shall read or cause to be read all meters of the customers
of the Municipal Electric Department. All employees under his direction
shall obey his orders. He shall supervise and inspect repairs and
maintenance work on the municipal electrical system. He shall have the
duty of enforcing the laws of the municipality relating to the Electric
Department as well as carry out any order or directive of the City
Administrator.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 85-15.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-15.3
1:169

ARTICLE XVI
Fire Chief
[Amended 12-15-1987 by Ord. No. 31-87]
(Neb. RS 16-308, 16-309, 35-102, 81-506, 81-512, 81-522, 81-531)
§ 85-16.1. Appointment; term.
The Fire Chief and Assistant Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Mayor,
with the approval of a majority of the Council. Said officials shall hold office
for a period of two years or until removed by the Mayor. The Fire Chief
shall be appointed the first Tuesday in December of every even year. The
Assistant Fire Chief shall be appointed on the first Tuesday in December of
every odd year.
§ 85-16.2. Roster of members.
The Fire Chief shall, on the first day of April and October of each year,
furnish or cause the secretary to furnish to the Municipal Clerk a copy of
the roster of the members of the Fire Department in good standing; and
from month to month thereafter he shall report any proposed additions or
changes in the roster for proper action so that all members of the Fire
Department shall be at all times covered by insurance or by such other
lawful protection and benefits as may be provided under state or municipal
law.
§ 85-16.3. Powers and duties.
§ 85-16.4. Incurrence of obligations.
No obligation, except in an emergency or when the expenditure is of a minor
nature, shall be incurred on behalf of the Fire Department by the Fire Chief
unless the obligation was previously authorized in writing by the governing
body.
A. The Chief of the Fire Department shall have under his control the
property, implements, and apparatus used by the Fire Department,
subject to the general and specific directives of the governing body. He
shall use all proper means for the extinguishment of fires, the
protection of property, the preservation of order, and the enforcement
of all laws relating to fires and fire protection which govern the
municipality.
B. During a time of fire or great public danger, he shall have and exercise
the powers and duties of the Chief of Police.
C. Upon the written consent and directive of the governing body, the Fire
Chief shall cause the repair, improvement, or maintenance of the
property of the Fire Department and shall personally supervise and
approve of the same.
§ 85-16.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-16.5
1:171
§ 85-16.5. Assistant Fire Chief.
The Assistant Fire Chief shall be under the direct supervision and control of
the Fire Chief.
§ 85-16.5 SEWARD CODE § 85-16.5
1:172
Part 3
[Adopted As CBho. n1d, sA rAtn. d4 ,O Oaft hTshe 1976 Code]
ARTICLE XVII
Bonds
§ 85-17.1. Councilmen.65
Each Councilman, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall be
required to give a bond or evidence of equivalent insurance to the
municipality. The bond shall be with two or more good and sufficient
sureties or some responsible surety company. If the bond is given by two
sureties, they shall each justify that he is worth at least $2,000 over and
above all debts and exemptions. Such bond or insurance amounts shall
be on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk and shall be conditioned
on the faithful discharge of the duties of the Councilman. The bond or
insurance will be further conditioned that if the Councilman shall vote for
any expenditure or appropriation of money or create any liability in excess
of the amount allowed by law, the Councilman and the sureties signing the
bond shall be liable thereon. The bond shall be filed with the Clerk and
approved by the Mayor. Upon approval, the City may pay the premium for
such bond. Any liability sought to be incurred, or debt created in excess
of the amount limited or authorized by law, shall be taken and held by any
court of the state as the joint and several liability of the Councilman voting
for and the Mayor approving such liability, obligation, or debt. Any such
liability or debt shall not be an obligation upon the municipality. Voting
for or approving of such liability or debt shall be conclusive evidence of
malfeasance in office. Any Councilman voting for such an appropriation or
any Mayor approving of the same may be removed from office. In the event
that any Councilman has not filed proper bond or insurance, as required
herein, prior to entering upon the duties of his office, said office shall be
declared vacant and shall be filled by appointment as provided in § 85-1.3
of this chapter. (Neb. RS 16-304)
§ 85-17.2. Form.
Official bonds of the municipality shall be in form, joint and several, and
shall be made payable to the municipality in such penalty as the governing
body may set by resolution, which sums shall be on file at the office of
the Municipal Clerk; provided the penalty amount on any bond shall not
fall below the legal minimum, when one has been set by the State of
Nebraska, for each particular official. All official bonds of the municipal
officials shall be executed by the principal named in such bonds and by at
least two sufficient sureties who shall be freeholders of the county, or by the
official as principal and by a guaranty, surety, fidelity, or bonding company;
provided no municipal official, while still in his official term of office, shall
be accepted as surety on any other official's bond, contractor's bond, license
bond, or appeal bond under any circumstances. Only companies that are
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 85-17.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-17.2
1:173
legally authorized to transact business in the State of Nebraska shall be
eligible for suretyship on the bond of an official of the municipality. All said
bonds shall obligate the principal and sureties for the faithful discharge of
all duties required by law of such principal, and shall inure to the benefit
of the municipality and any persons who may be injured by a breach of the
conditions of such bonds. No bond shall be deemed to be given or complete
until the approval of the governing board, and all sureties are endorsed in
writing on the instrument by the Mayor and Municipal Clerk pursuant to the
approval of the governing body. The premium on any official bond required
to be given may be paid out of the General Fund, or other proper municipal
fund, upon a resolution to that effect by the governing body at the beginning
of any municipal year. All official bonds, meeting the conditions herein, shall
be filed with the Municipal Clerk for his official records and it shall be the
duty of the Municipal Clerk to furnish a certified copy of any bond so filed
upon the payment of a fee which shall be set by resolution of the governing
body. In the event that the sureties on the official bond of any officer of
the municipality, in the opinion of the governing body, become insufficient,
the governing body may, by resolution, fix a reasonable time within which
the officer may give a new bond or additional sureties as directed. In the
event that the officer should fail, refuse, or neglect to give a new bond, or
additional sureties to the satisfaction and approval of the governing body,
then the office shall by such failure, refusal, or neglect become vacant,
and it shall be the duty of the governing body to appoint a competent and
qualified person to fill the office. Any official who is reelected to office shall
be required to file a new bond after each election. (Neb. RS 11-103 through
11-118, 16-219)
§ 85-17.3. By whom given; amount. [Amended 11-21-1978 by Ord.
No. 1151; 9-19-1995 by Ord. No. 36-95]
A. The following elected and appointed officials and the employees of the
City shall, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices
and employment, each give bond or be provided with bond by the City
for their respective offices and employment with good and sufficient
surety or a corporate surety bond to be approved by the Mayor and
Council in sums as set from time to time by the City Council:66
(1) Council member.
(2) Treasurer.
(3) Examining Board of Plumbers.
(4) Employees of the City.
B. In the event any elected or appointed official has not filed proper bond
as required herein, prior to entering upon the duties of his/her
respective offices, said office shall be declared vacant and filled by
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 85-17.2 SEWARD CODE § 85-17.3
1:174
§ 85-17.4. Blanket bonds. [Added 12-4-2007 by Ord. No. 42-07]
From and after the effective date herein and pursuant to Neb. RS 11-104(2),
all surety and other bonds required by City ordinances or by Nebraska
law for City officials may be provided by the purchase of a blanket bond,
undertaking or equivalent insurance. The City may pay the premium for
the bond or insurance coverage. The bond or insurance coverage shall be,
at a minimum, an aggregate of the amounts fixed by the law or by the
City Council requiring such bond or undertaking and on such terms and
conditions as may be required.
appointment as provided in § 85-1.3 or 85-4.2 of this Code. Premiums
of such bonds shall be paid by the City.
§ 85-17.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-17.4
1:175

ARTICLE XVIII
Oaths
§ 85-18.1. Oath of office.
All officials of the municipality, whether elected or appointed, except when
a different oath is specifically provided herein, shall, before entering upon
their respective duties, take and subscribe the following oath, which shall
be endorsed upon their respective bonds:
"I _________________________ do solemnly swear that I will support the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of
Nebraska against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I bear true faith
and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely, and without
mental reservation, or for the purpose of evasion; and that I will faithfully
and impartially perform the duties of the office of ________________________
according to law, and to the best of my ability. And I do further swear that
I do not advocate, nor am I a member of any political party or organization
that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of
this state by force or violence; and that during such time as I am in this
position I will not advocate, nor become a member of any political party or
organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States or of this state by force or violence. So help me God."
§ 85-18.2. Failure to take oath.
In the event that any elected or appointed official has not taken and
subscribed the oath of office, as provided herein, prior to entering upon the
duties of his/her respective office, said office shall be declared vacant and
shall be filled by appointment as provided in § 85-1.3 or 85-4.2 of this Code.
(Neb. RS 11-101)
§ 85-18.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-18.2
1:177
Chapter 91
PENSION PLANS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel — See Ch. 95. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 113.
§ 85-18.2 SEWARD CODE § 85-18.2
1:178
ARTICLE I
Police and General Employee Plans
§ 91-1.1. Police Pension Plan incorporated by reference.
The restated Police Officers Pension Plan for the City of Seward is made a
part of and incorporated into this article as fully as if set forth at length
herein, said pension plan to be effective January 1, 1984. (A copy of this plan
is on file at the office of the City Clerk).
§ 91-1.2. Council-designated Pension Committee members;
authority.
The City-Council-designated members for the Pension Committee for the
pension plans shall consist of the City Administrator and the Assistant
Administrator/City Clerk-Treasurer/Budget and Human Resources Director.
The persons holding those offices are hereby appointed and empowered to
perform all administrative duties not specifically delegated, by ordinance,
to the Retirement Committee.
§ 91-1.3. General Employee's Retirement Plan Committee.
A. There shall be one representative from each of the following City
departments on the General Employee's Retirement Plan Committee:
City Hall Administration, Park/Cemetery/Recreation, Building
Inspection/Public Facilities/Civic Center/Senior Center, Street, Electric,
Water/Wastewater, and Library on said Committee. Each representative
must be a full-time employee currently participating in the City's
General Employee's Retirement Plan. Representatives shall serve a
two-year term, with establishment of the first Committee members in
January 2016. Initially, representatives of the City Hall Administration,
Park/Cemetery/Recreation, Building Inspection/Public Facilities/Civic
Center/Senior Center departments shall serve a three-year term and
representatives of the Street, Electric Water/Wastewater, and Library
shall serve a two-year term. The representative shall be the voice for
the respective department, gain additional knowledge about retirement
plans and investments, and be the spokesperson back to the
department and peers.
B. The Committee shall meet at least annually, or more often as deemed
necessary, for the purpose of, but not limited to: selecting an array of
appropriate investment options; monitoring investment options;
monitoring the activities of prudent experts; documenting the
investment review process and decisions, to develop and review an
Investment Policy Statement.
C. The Committee shall annually elect a Chairperson and a Secretary from
among the representatives. The Chairperson shall preside over all
Pension Committee meetings and the Secretary shall give notice of all
meetings and prepare written minutes, of which a final copy shall be
kept on file in the office of Assistant Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer/
§ 91-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-1.3
1:179
Budget and Human Resources Director. All members of the Committee
have voting rights.
§ 91-1.3 SEWARD CODE § 91-1.3
1:180
Chapter 95
PERSONNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 85. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 113.
§ 91-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-1.3
1:181

ARTICLE I
Civil Service Rules
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Art. 11, §§ 1103 through 1107, of the 1976 Code]
(Neb. RS 19-1825 et seq.)
§ 95-1.1. Appointments and promotions.
A. All appointments to and promotions in the Police Department shall be
made solely on merit, efficiency, and fitness, which shall be ascertained
by open competitive examinations and impartial investigation by the
Civil Service Commission ("Commission").
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
APPOINTMENT — All means of selecting, appointing, or employing any
person to hold any position or employment subject to civil service.
POSITION — An individual job which is designated by an official title
indicative of the nature of the work.
PROMOTION OR DEMOTION — Changing from one position to
another, accompanied by a corresponding change in current rate of pay.
C. Requirements for civil service position applicants. An applicant for a
position of any kind under civil service shall be able to read and write
the English language, meet the minimum job qualifications of the
position as established by the Mayor, and be of good moral character.
An applicant shall be required to disclose his or her past employment
history and his or her criminal record, if any, and submit a full set of his
or her fingerprints and a written statement of permission authorizing
the appointing authority to forward the fingerprints for identification.
Prior to certifying to the Mayor the names of the persons eligible for the
position or positions, the Commission shall validate the qualifications of
such persons.67
(1) The Mayor shall require an applicant, as part of the application
process, to submit a full set of his or her fingerprints along with
written permission authorizing the appointing authority to forward
the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation through the
Nebraska State Patrol, for identification. The fingerprint
identification shall be solely for the purpose of confirming
information provided by the applicant.
(2) Any fingerprints received by the Commission or Mayor pursuant to
a request made under Subsection C(1) of this section and any
information in the custody of the Commission or Mayor resulting
from inquiries or investigations made with regard to those
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 95-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-1.1
1:183
fingerprints initiated by the Commission or Mayor shall not be a
public record within the meaning of Neb. RS 84-712 to 84-712.09
and shall be withheld from the public by the lawful custodians
of such fingerprints and information and shall only be released
to those lawfully entitled to the possession of such fingerprints
and information. Any member, officer, agent, or employee of the
municipality who comes into possession of fingerprints and
information gathered pursuant to Subsection C(1) of this section
shall be an official within the meaning of Neb. RS 84-712.09.
D. Filling of a vacant position.
(1) Considerations. If the Mayor, with the approval of the Council, fills
a vacancy in a position subject to the Civil Service Act (Neb. RS
19-1825 et seq.), he or she shall consider factors including, but not
limited to:
(a) The multiple job skills recently or currently being performed
by the applicant which are necessary for the position;
(b) The knowledge, skills, and abilities of the applicant which are
necessary for the position;
(c) The performance appraisals of any applicant who is already
employed in the department, including any recent or pending
disciplinary actions involving the employee;
(d) The employment policies and staffing needs of the department,
together with contracts, ordinances, and statutes related
thereto;
(e) Required federal, state, or local certifications or licenses
necessary for the position; and
(f) The qualifications of the applicants who are already employed
in the department and have successfully completed all parts of
the examination for the position. No person shall be reinstated
in or transferred, suspended, or discharged from any such
position or employment contrary to the Civil Service Act.
(2) Procedure for filling vacant positions. Whenever a position subject
to the Civil Service Act becomes vacant, the Mayor shall make
requisition upon the Commission for the names and addresses of
the persons eligible for appointment and may decline to fill such
vacancy for an indefinite period. If the Commission certifies fewer
than three names for each vacancy to the Mayor, the Mayor may,
with approval of the Council, appoint one of such persons to fill the
vacancy, may decline to fill the vacancy, or may order that another
examination be held by the Civil Service Commission.
(3) Temporary appointments. If a vacancy occurs and there is no
eligible list for the position or if the Commission has not certified
§ 95-1.1 SEWARD CODE § 95-1.1
1:184
§ 95-1.2. Probationary period.
To enable the Mayor to exercise the choice in the filling of positions, no
appointment, employment, or promotion in any position in the service shall
be deemed complete until after the expiration of a period of six months from
the date of employment and successful completion of certification by the
Nebraska Law Enforcement Training Center for Police Officers, as may be
provided in the rules of the Civil Service Commission, during which time
the Mayor, with the approval of the Council, may terminate the employment
of the person appointed by him or her if, during the performance test this
afforded and upon an observation or consideration of the performance of
duty, the Mayor deems such person unfit or unsatisfactory for service in
the department. The Mayor, with the approval of the Council, may appoint
one of the other persons certified by the Commission and such person
shall likewise enter upon such duties until some person is found who is
fit for appointment, employment or promotion for the probationary period
provided and then the appointment, employment, or promotion shall be
complete.
§ 95-1.3. Tenure; disciplinary actions.
the eligible list, a temporary appointment may be made by the
Mayor. Such temporary appointment shall not continue for a period
longer than four months. No person shall receive more than one
temporary appointment or serve more than four months as a
temporary appointee in any one fiscal year.
A. Tenure of employment. The tenure of a person holding a position of
employment under the Civil Service Act shall be only during good
behavior.
B. Causes for disciplinary action. Any such person may be removed or
discharged, suspended with or without pay, demoted, reduced in rank,
or deprived of vacation, benefits, compensation, or other privileges,
except pension benefits, for any of the following reasons:
(1) Incompetency, inefficiency, or inattention to or dereliction of duty;
(2) Dishonesty, prejudicial conduct, immoral conduct, insubordination,
discourteous treatment of the public or a fellow employee, any act
of omission or commission tending to injure the public service, any
willful failure on the part of the employee to properly conduct
himself or herself, or any willful violation of the Civil Service Act or
the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to such Act;
(3) Mental or physical unfitness for the position which the employee
holds;
(4) Drunkenness or the use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics, or any
other habit-forming drug, liquid or preparation to such an extent
that the use interferes with the efficiency or mental or physical
§ 95-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-1.3
1:185
fitness of the employee or precludes the employee from properly
performing the functions and duties of his or her position;
(5) Conviction of a felony or misdemeanor tending to injure the
employee's ability to effectively perform the duties of his or her
position; or
(6) Any other act or failure to act which, in the judgment of the Civil
Service Commissioners, is sufficient to justify the offender to be an
unsuitable and unfit person to be employed in the public service.
C. Disciplinary action procedure.
(1) No employee in the civil service who shall have been permanently
appointed or inducted into civil service shall be removed,
suspended, demoted, or discharged, except for cause and then only
upon the written accusation of the Police Chief, Mayor, or any
citizen or taxpayer.
(2) The written accusation shall set forth the alleged misconduct,
charges, or grounds for investigation against the employee. The
written accusation shall be filed by the complainant with the
Secretary of the Commission, who shall cause a copy of such
written accusation to be delivered within 72 hours after the filing to
a) the Police Chief, b) the Mayor, and c) the employee personally or
by certified mail, addressed to the employee at the residence
address of the employee shown in the personnel records. The
Secretary of the Commission shall cause a return showing such
delivery or mailing to be executed and filed in the Secretary's
office.
(3) The Police Chief shall have the authority to immediately suspend,
with pay, an employee against whom such written accusation has
been filed, pending the confirmation of the suspension, or a
decision of the Mayor to reinstate the employee, remove, demote,
discharge, or suspend the employee, with or without pay.
(4) Prior to the decision of the Mayor to reinstate the employee or
remove, demote, discharge, or suspend the employee, with or
without pay, the Police Chief shall, within a reasonable period of
time, investigate the alleged misconduct, charges, or grounds
against the employee and explain the basis of the employer's
evidence to the employee and provide the employee an opportunity
to present his or her version of the circumstances which resulted in
the filing of the written accusation. If the Chief's investigation
reveals other misconduct, charges, or grounds, the Chief shall
amend the written accusation to include the other misconduct,
charges, or grounds by filing an amendment to the written
accusation with the Secretary of the Commission, who shall cause a
copy of such amended accusation to be delivered within 72 hours
after the filing to a) the Police Chief, b) the Mayor, and c) the
employee personally or by certified mail, addressed to the
§ 95-1.3 SEWARD CODE § 95-1.3
1:186
employee at the residence address of the employee shown in the
personnel records. The Secretary of the Commission shall cause a
return showing such delivery or mailing to be executed and filed
in the Secretary's office. In the event that a Police Chief is being
disciplined, the Mayor shall follow the same procedures as are
followed by the Police Chief in disciplining employees under the
Act. Upon completion of this procedure within a reasonable period
of time, the Police Chief shall recommend in writing to the Mayor
that the alleged misconduct, charges, or grounds set forth in the
written accusation be deemed 1) to be without merit; 2) to not
warrant disciplinary action, 3) to warrant disciplinary action less
severe than removal, demotion, discharge, or suspension, with or
without pay, such as an oral or written reprimand, or 4) to warrant
removal, demotion, discharge, or suspension with or without pay.
(5) Within 20 calendar days after receiving the written
recommendation of the Police Chief, the Mayor shall decide to
accept the recommendation of the Police Chief, or shall decide that
the alleged misconduct, charges, or grounds for investigation
against the employee set forth in the written accusation be
deemed: a) to be without merit, b) to not warrant disciplinary
action, c) to warrant disciplinary action less severe than removal,
demotion, discharge, or suspension, with or without pay, such as an
oral or written reprimand, or d) to warrant removal, demotion,
discharge, or suspension, with or without pay. If a discharge is
being recommended, Council approval shall be required. The
Mayor shall file a copy of his or her decision, within 25 calendar
days after receiving the written recommendation of the Police
Chief, with the Secretary of the Commission, who shall cause a
copy of such decision to be filed within 72 hours after the filing to 1)
the Police Chief, and 2) the employee, personally or by certified
mail, addressed to the employee at the residence address of the
employee shown in the personnel records. The Secretary of the
Commission shall cause a return showing such delivery or mailing
to be executed and filed in the Secretary's office.
(6) Any employee so removed, suspended, demoted or discharged may,
within 10 calendar days after receiving written notice of the
Mayor's decision, file a written demand for an investigation and
public hearing by the Civil Service Commission. The employee shall
file the request for the hearing with the Secretary of the
Commission and simultaneously send a copy of the request to the
Mayor. The failure to file such request with the Secretary of the
Commission within 10 calendar days of receipt of notice of the
action by the Mayor shall constitute a waiver of the employee's
right to review by the Civil Service Commission and the Mayor's
decision shall become final.
(7) Within 10 calendar days of receipt of the employee's notice of
appeal, the Mayor shall cause to be mailed or delivered the
§ 95-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-1.3
1:187
following notice to the employee and Secretary of the Civil Service
Commission:
(a) A statement of the charge(s);
(b) The names of the witnesses who will be called on behalf of the
Mayor and a general statement of the nature of their
testimony; and
(c) Copies of the documents to be introduced.
(8) Within 10 calendar days of the filing of the written demand for an
investigation and public hearing by the Commission, the employee
shall mail or deliver the following upon the Mayor and Commission:
(a) A response to the statement of the charge(s);
(b) The names of the witnesses who will be called on behalf of the
employee and a general statement of the nature of their
testimony; and
(c) Copies of the documents to be introduced.
(9) Upon receipt of a written demand, the Commission shall conduct
an investigation. The Commission may be represented in such
investigation and public hearing by the City Attorney if authorized
by the Mayor. If the City Attorney does not represent the
Commission, the Commission may be represented by special
counsel appointed by the Commission for any such investigation
and hearing. The investigation shall consist solely of a review of the
written submissions of the Mayor and employee to determine
whether any individuals or documents should be subpoenaed by the
Commission for the subsequent public hearing before the
Commission ultimately to determine whether the Mayor acted in
good faith for cause. "Good faith for cause" shall mean that the
action was not arbitrary or capricious and was not made for
political or religious reasons.
(10) The Commission shall schedule a public hearing no less than 10
calendar days nor more than 20 calendar days from the date of
filing of the employee's written demand for an investigation. The
Commission shall notify the Mayor and employee of the date, time
and place of the hearing, in writing, at least five calendar days prior
to the date of the hearing.
(11) The Mayor shall be permitted to appear in person and by counsel
and to present his or her case. The Mayor may present evidence by
testimony and documents and shall be permitted to cross-examine
the employee's witnesses. At the hearing, the employee shall be
permitted to appear in person and by counsel and to present his or
her defense. The employee may present evidence by testimony and
§ 95-1.3 SEWARD CODE § 95-1.3
1:188
§ 95-1.4. Reduction in force policy.
documents and shall be permitted to cross-examine the witnesses
called by the Mayor.
(12) The Commission may affirm the action taken by the Mayor if such
action is supported by a preponderance of the evidence. If the
Commission finds that the removal, suspension, demotion or
discharge was made for political or religious reasons or was not
made in good faith for cause, it shall order the immediate
reinstatement or reemployment of such employee in the position or
employment from which such employee was removed, suspended,
demoted, or discharged, which reinstatement shall, if the
Commission in its discretion so provides, be retroactive and entitle
such person to compensation and restoration of benefits and
privileges from the time of such removal, suspension, demotion, or
discharge.
(13) After the hearing, in lieu of affirming the removal, suspension,
demotion, or discharge, the Commission may modify the order of
removal, suspension, demotion, or discharge by directing a
suspension, with or without pay, for a given period and the
subsequent restoration to duty or demotion in position or pay. No
later than 10 calendar days after the hearing, the Commission shall
certify its findings in writing to the employee and the Mayor, who
shall enforce them.
A. Establishment. In establishing a reduction in force policy, the Mayor
and Council shall consider recommendations from the Civil Service
Commission, but shall not be bound by them. Prior to the adoption of a
reduction in force policy, the Mayor and Council shall, after giving
reasonable notice to each police officer by first class mail, conduct a
public hearing.
B. Factors. The Mayor and Council shall adopt a reduction in force policy
which shall consider factors including, but not limited to:
(1) The multiple job skills recently or currently being performed by the
employee;
(2) The knowledge, skills, and abilities of the employees;
(3) The performance appraisal of the employee, including any recent
or pending disciplinary actions involving the employee;
(4) The employment policies and staffing needs of the department,
together with contracts, ordinances, and statutes related thereto;
(5) Required federal, state, or local certifications or licenses; and
(6) Seniority.
§ 95-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-1.5
1:189
§ 95-1.5. Leaves of absence.
A leave of absence with or without pay may be granted by the Mayor to
any person under civil service. The Mayor shall give notice of such leave to
the Commission. all appointments for temporary employment resulting from
such leaves of absence shall be made from the eligible list, if any, of the civil
service.
§ 95-1.5 SEWARD CODE § 95-1.5
1:190
ARTICLE II
Board Compliance with Uniform Personnel Policies
[Adopted 12-15-1981 by Ord. No. 49-81 (Ch. 2, Art. 13, of the 1976
Code)]
§ 95-2.1. Applicability.
In matters of employee salary benefits and administrative personnel actions
and policies, the Library Board, the Board of Parks and Recreation
Commissioners, the Municipal Cemetery, and the Civic Center Commission
shall comply with the uniform policies as outlined in the current wage and
benefit survey and personnel manual of the City of Seward, Nebraska, and
ensure that personnel forms required on all City personnel in their employ
and under their supervision are filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer.
§ 95-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-2.1
1:191
Chapter 100
PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 85.
Personnel — See Ch. 95.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 113.
§ 95-2.1 SEWARD CODE § 95-2.1
1:192
ARTICLE I
Conflicts of Interest
[Adopted as Ch. 1, Art. 10, § 1004, of the 1976 Code; amended
10-5-1982 by Ord. No. 29-82; 9-20-1983 by Ord. No. 23-83;
9-18-1984 by Ord. No. 34-84; 9-16-1986 by Ord. No. 13-86;
11-2-1993 by Ord. No. 44-93]
(Neb. RS 18-305 through 18-312, 49-14, 103.01 through 49-14, 103.03,
70-624.04)
§ 100-1.1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OFFICER —
§ 100-1.2. Interests in contracts prohibited.68
No officer of the municipality shall be permitted to have an interest in
any contract to which the municipality is a party. The existence of such an
interest in any contract renders the contract voidable by decree of a court
of competent jurisdiction as to any person who entered into the contract or
took assignment thereof with actual knowledge of the prohibited conflict.
Means:
(1) Any member of any board or commission of the municipality;
Any appointed official if such municipal official:
Serves on a board or commission which spends and
administers its own funds; and
(a)
Is dealing with a contract made by such board or commission;
or
(b)
(2)
(3) Any elected municipal official.
A.
Unless specified otherwise, volunteer firefighters and ambulance
drivers shall not be considered officers for purposes of this article, with
respect to their duties as firefighters and ambulance drivers.
B.
A. An action to have a contract declared void under this section may be
brought by the municipality or by any resident thereof and must be
brought within one year after the contract is signed or assigned. Any
such decree may provide for the reimbursement of any person for the
reasonable value of all money, goods, material, labor, or services
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 100-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-1.2
1:193
§ 100-1.3. Exceptions.69
The provisions of this article shall not apply if the contract is an agenda item
approved at a board meeting and the interested officer:
§ 100-1.4. Scope.
The receiving of deposits, cashing of checks, and buying and selling of
warrants and bonds of indebtedness of any municipality by a financial
institution shall not be considered a contract under the provisions of this
article. The ownership of less than 5% of the outstanding shares of a
corporation shall not constitute an interest within the meaning of this
article.
furnished under the contract, to the extent that the municipality has
benefitted thereby.
B. The prohibition in this section shall apply only when the officer or his or
her parent, spouse, or child 1) has a business with which the individual
is associated or business association, which shall mean a business: a) in
which the individual is a partner, director, or officer or b) in which the
individual or a member of the individual's immediate family is a
stockholder of a closed corporation stock worth $1,000 or more at fair
market value or which represents more than five-percent equity
interest, or is a stockholder of publicly traded stock worth $10,000 or
more at fair market value or which represents more than ten-percent
equity interest or 2) will receive a direct pecuniary fee or commission as
a result of the contract; provided, however, if such officer is an
employee of the business involved in the contract and has no ownership
interest or shall not receive a pecuniary fee, such officer shall not be
deemed to have an interest within the meaning of this section.
A. Makes a declaration on the record to the governmental body
responsible for approving the contract regarding the nature and extent
of his or her interest, prior to official consideration of the contract;
B. Does not vote on the matters of granting the contract, making payments
pursuant to the contract, or accepting performance of work under the
contract, or similar matters relating to the contract, except that if the
number of members of the board declaring an interest in the contract
would prevent the board, with all members present, from securing a
quorum on the issue, then all members may vote on the matter; and
C. Does not act for the municipality as to inspection or performance under
the contract in which he or she has an interest.
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 100-1.2 SEWARD CODE § 100-1.5
1:194
§ 100-1.5. Family members as City employees.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 100-1.2 above, if an officer's parent,
spouse or child is an employee of the municipality, the officer may vote on
all issues of the contract which are generally applicable to all employees or
all employees within a classification and do not single out his or her parent,
spouse, or child for special action. If an officer has the power to employ
personnel and he or she hires his or her parent, spouse, or child, such
officer shall disclose the hiring pursuant to § 100-1.6 below, except that if
the parent, spouse, or child is already employed in the position at the time
the officer takes office and such position does not change, no disclosure
need be made.70
§ 100-1.6. Records.
§ 100-1.7. Open accounts.
An open account established for the benefit of any municipality or entity
thereof, with a business in which an officer has an interest, shall be deemed
a contract subject to the provisions of this article. The statement required
to be filed pursuant to this article shall be filed within 10 days after such
account is opened. Thereafter, the Clerk shall maintain a running account
of all amounts purchased on the open account. Purchases made from petty
cash or a petty cash fund shall not be subject to the provisions of this article.
A. The Municipal Clerk shall maintain, separately from other records, a
ledger containing the information listed in Subsections A(1) through (5)
of this section about every contract entered into by the municipality in
which disclosure is made as provided in § 100-1.2 above. Such
information shall be kept in the ledger for five years from the date of the
officer's last day in office and shall include the:
(1) Names of the contracting parties;
(2) Nature of the interest of the officer in question;
(3) Date that the contract was approved by the municipality involved;
(4) Amount of the contract; and
(5) Basic terms of the contract.
B. The information supplied relative to the contract shall be provided to
the Clerk not later than 10 days after the contract has been signed by
both parties. The ledger kept by the Clerk shall be available for public
inspection during the normal working hours of the office in which it is
kept.
70.Editor's Note: The provisions of former § 1004 of the 1976 Code regarding competitive
bidding, which immediately followed this section, were repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 100-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-1.8
1:195
§ 100-1.8. Violations and penalties.71
Any officer who knowingly violates this article shall be guilty of a Class III
misdemeanor. Any officer who negligently violates this article shall be guilty
of a Class V misdemeanor.
§ 100-1.9. Small contract exemption.
Contracts involving $100 or less in which an officer of the municipality may
have an interest are hereby exempted from the provisions of this article.
§ 100-1.10. Additional pay prohibited.
No officer, including volunteer firefighters and ambulance drivers, shall
receive any pay or perquisites from the municipality other than his or her
salary. The governing body shall not pay or appropriate any money or other
valuable thing to pay a person who is not an officer for the performance of
any act, service, or duty which shall come within the proper scope of the
duties of any officer of the municipality. (Neb. RS 17-611)
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 100-1.8 SEWARD CODE § 100-1.10
1:196
Chapter 113
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fiscal management — See Ch. 44.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 85.
Pension plans — See Ch. 91.
Additional pay prohibitions — See Ch. 100,
§ 100-1.10.
§ 100-1.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-1.10
1:197

ARTICLE I
Establishment and Changes
§ 113-1.1. Municipal officers and employees.
Salaries of officers and employees of the municipality shall be in such
amount as the governing body shall fix by ordinance; provided that after
the governing body has adopted a wage and salary schedule with employee
classifications and wage ranges for each classification, by ordinance, such
ordinance shall be sufficient for all changes in salary for municipal
employees included thereunder without further ordinances being passed,
approved, and published. All salaries shall be on file at the office of the
Municipal Clerk and available for public inspection at any reasonable time.
§ 113-1.2. Mayor and Council. [Amended 7-1-1980 by Ord. No.
12-80; 7-5-2000 by Ord. No. 30-00; 12-20-2005 by Ord. No. 58-05;
11-1-2011 by Ord. No. 31-11]
The annual salaries of the Mayor and Council are hereby fixed in the
sums and payable at the beginning of the full term of any member of the
governing body as follows:
§ 113-1.3. Changes in salary.
The emoluments of any elected official shall not be increased or diminished
during the term of office for which he was elected, except that elected
officials who are elected to the Council or other body having more than
one member and where terms of one or more members commence and end
at different times, the compensation of all members of that body may be
increased or diminished at the beginning of the full term of any member
thereof. No person who shall have resigned or vacated any elective office
shall be again eligible to hold the office during the term he was elected to if
after resignation the emoluments have been increased. (Neb. RS 16-326)
A. Mayor, per year, payable monthly: $5,000.
B. Councilmembers (each), per year, payable quarterly: $2,400.
§ 113-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-1.3
1:199
Chapter 205
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tobacco products — See Ch. 355.
§ 113-1.3 SEWARD CODE § 113-1.3
1:200
ARTICLE I
Possession and Consumption
[Adopted as Ch. 6, Art. 3, §§ 6-312 through 6-314, of the 1976 Code]
§ 205-1.1. Drinking in public. [Amended 8-3-1993 by Ord. No.
25-9372]
Except as provided in Neb. RS 60-6, 211.08, it shall be unlawful for any
person to consume alcoholic liquor upon property owned or controlled by
the City unless authorized by the City Council; provided the provisions of
this section shall not apply to liquor establishments licensed by the State of
Nebraska. (Neb. RS 53-186)
§ 205-1.2. Misrepresentation of age by minor. [Amended 1-20-1981
by Ord. No. 2-81; 9-15-1997 by Ord. No. 46-97]
It shall be unlawful for any minor to represent that he or she is of the age of
21 years or older for the purpose of asking for, purchasing, or receiving any
alcoholic beverages. (Neb. RS 53-103, 53-180.01)
§ 205-1.3. Minor in possession. [Amended 1-20-1981 by Ord. No.
1-81; 9-15-1997 by Ord. No. 45-97]
It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to transport,
knowingly possess, or have under his control in any motor vehicle, beer
or other alcoholic liquor on any public street, alley, roadway, or property
owned by the State of Nebraska or any subdivision thereof, or any other
place within the municipal limits. (Neb. RS 53-180.02)
§ 205-1.4. Violations and penalties.73
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
73.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 205-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-1.4
1:201

ARTICLE II
Licensing
[Adopted as Ch. 10, Art. I, of the 1976 Code]
§ 205-2.1. Definitions.
All words and phrases herein used are to have the definitions applied
thereto as defined in the Liquor Control Act of the State of Nebraska (Neb.
RS 53-101 et seq.). (Neb. RS 53-103)
§ 205-2.2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture for sale, sell, keep for
sale, or to barter any alcoholic liquors within the municipality unless said
person shall have in full force and effect a license as provided by the
Nebraska Liquor Control Act. (Neb. RS 53-168.06)
§ 205-2.3. Location restrictions. [Amended 5-6-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-1174]
§ 205-2.4. Limit on number of retail licenses.
The number of licenses to sell alcoholic liquors at retail within the corporate
limits may be limited from time to time by resolution as the public health,
morals and welfare shall require.
A. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection B of this section, it shall be
unlawful for any person or persons to own, maintain, manage, or hold
open to the public any establishment for the purpose of selling at retail
any alcoholic liquor within 150 feet of any church, school, hospital, or
home for aged or indigent persons or veterans, their wives or children;
provided this prohibition shall not apply to any location within such
distance when said establishment has been licensed by the Nebraska
Liquor Control Commission for at least two years, and to hotels offering
restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants where
the selling of alcoholic liquor is not the principal business carried on, if
the hotel, club, or restaurant was licensed and in operation prior to May
24, 1935, or to a college or university in the state which is subject to
Neb. RS 53-177.01.
B. If the proposed location for sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor is within
150 feet of any church, the governing body may approve of said
proposed location after it holds a hearing as prescribed by § 205-2.8 if
the affected church submits a written request for a hearing.75
(Neb. RS 53-177)
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
75.Editor's Note: Original § 10-104 of the 1976 Code, Alcoholic Beverages; Location; Fire
Limits; Exception, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 6-7-1977 by Ord.
No. 1089.
§ 205-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-2.5
1:203
§ 205-2.5. Dwellings.76
Except in the case of hotels and clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be
manufactured or sold at retail or wholesale upon any premises which has
any access which leads from such premises to any other portion of the same
building used for dwelling or lodging purposes, and which is permitted to be
used by the public. Nothing herein shall prevent any connection with such
premises and such other portion of the building which is used only by the
licensee, his family, or personal guests. (Neb. RS 53-178)
§ 205-2.6. License display.
Every licensee under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act shall cause his
license to be framed and hung in plain public view in a conspicuous place
on the licensed premises. (Neb. RS 53-148)
§ 205-2.7. Licensee requirements. [Amended 11-4-1980 by Ord. No.
38-80; 12-6-1983 by Ord. No. 37-8377]
A. No license of any kind shall be issued to:
(1) A person who is not a resident of Nebraska, except in case of
railroad, airline, or boat licenses;
(2) A person who is not of good character and reputation in the
community in which he or she resides;
(3) A person who is not a Nebraska resident and legally able to work in
Nebraska;
(4) A person who has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty to a
felony under the laws of this state, any other state, or the United
States;
(5) A person who has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty to any
Class I misdemeanor pursuant to Neb. RS Chapter 28, Article 3, 4,
7, 8, 10, 11, or 12, or any similar offense under a prior criminal
statute or in another state, except that any additional requirements
imposed by this subsection on May 18, 1983, shall not prevent any
person holding a license on such date from retaining or renewing
such license if the conviction or plea occurred prior to May 18,
1983;
(6) A person whose license issued under the Nebraska Liquor Control
Act has been revoked for cause;
(7) A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued under the Act would not be eligible for such license upon
initial application;
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 205-2.5 SEWARD CODE § 205-2.7
1:204
(8) A partnership, unless one of the partners is a resident of Nebraska
and unless all the members of such partnership are otherwise
qualified to obtain a license;
(9) A limited-liability company, if any officer or director of the limitedliability
company or any member having an ownership interest in
the aggregate of more than 25% of such company would be
ineligible to receive a license under this section for any reason
other than the reasons stated in Subsection A(1) and (3) of this
section, or if a manager of a limited-liability company licensee
would be ineligible to receive a license under this section for any
reason;
(10) A corporation, if any officer or director of the corporation or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 25% of the stock of
such corporation would be ineligible to receive a license under this
section for any reason other than the reasons stated in Subsection
A(1) and (3) of this section, or if a manager of a corporate licensee
would be ineligible to receive a license under this section for any
reason. This subsection shall not apply to railroad licenses;
(11) A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or
agent unless such manager or agent possesses the same
qualifications required of the licensee;
(12) A person who does not own the premises for which a license is
sought or does not have a lease or combination of leases on such
premises for the full period for which the license is to be issued;
(13) Except as provided in this subsection, an applicant whose spouse is
ineligible under this section to receive and hold a liquor license.
Such applicant shall become eligible for a liquor license only if the
Commission finds from the evidence that the public interest will not
be infringed upon if such license is granted. It shall be prima facie
evidence that when a spouse is ineligible to receive a liquor license
the applicant is also ineligible to receive a liquor license. Such
prima facie evidence shall be overcome if it is shown to the
satisfaction of the Commission that:
(a) The licensed business will be the sole property of the applicant;
and
(b) Such licensed premises will be properly operated;
(14) A person seeking a license for premises which do not meet
standards for fire safety as established by the State Fire Marshal;
(15) A law enforcement officer, except that this subsection shall not
prohibit a law enforcement officer from holding membership in any
nonprofit organization holding a liquor license or from
participating in any manner in the management or administration
of a nonprofit organization; or
§ 205-2.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-2.7
1:205
§ 205-2.8. License application; municipal examination. [Amended
12-6-1983 by Ord. No. 37-83; 9-14-1984 by Ord. No. 26-84;
11-1-1988 by Ord. No. 24-88; 1-16-1990 by Ord. No. 5-90; 3-3-1992
by Ord. No. 8-92]
(16) A person less than 21 years of age.
B. When a trustee is the licensee, the beneficiary or beneficiaries of the
trust shall comply with the requirements of this section, but nothing in
this section shall prohibit any such beneficiary from being a minor or a
person who is mentally incompetent.
(Neb. RS 53-125)
A. Any person or persons desiring to obtain a license to sell alcoholic
liquor at retail shall file an application with the Liquor Control
Commission. Upon receipt from the Commission of the notice and copy
of the application as provided in Neb. RS 53-131, the governing body
shall fix a time and place at which a hearing will be held, and at which
time the governing body shall receive evidence, under oath, either
orally or in writing, from the applicant and any other person concerning
the propriety of the issuance of such license. Such hearing shall be held
not more than 45 days after the receipt of notice from the Commission.
The governing body may examine, or cause to be examined, under oath,
any applicant; examine, or cause to be examined, the books and records
of any such applicant; hear testimony, and take proof for its information
in the performance of its duties. For purposes of obtaining any of the
information desired, the governing body may authorize its agent, the
Municipal Clerk or the Municipal Attorney, to act on its behalf.
B. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a
legal newspaper in, or of general circulation in, the municipality one
time not less than seven days nor more than 14 days before the time of
the hearing. Such notice shall include, but not be limited to, a statement
that all persons desiring to give evidence before the governing body in
support of or in protest against the issuance of such license may do so
at the time of the hearing.
C. The governing body shall, after the hearing provided in Subsection A,
approve or deny the application within 45 days of receipt of such
application from the Commission, and shall cause to be spread at large
in the minute record of its proceedings a resolution approving or
denying such application. The Municipal Clerk shall thereupon mail or
deliver to the Commission a copy of the resolution within 10 days of the
decision to approve or deny the application.
D. Any resolution denying an application rendered by the governing body
shall be in writing or stated in the record and shall be accompanied by
findings. The findings shall consist of concise statements of the
conclusions upon each contested issue. The applicant shall be notified
of the decision in person or by mail.
§ 205-2.7 SEWARD CODE § 205-2.8
1:206
§ 205-2.9. Catering licenses. [Added 10-3-2000 by Ord. No. 37-00;
amended 3-15-2005 by Ord. No. 16-05]
§ 205-2.10. License renewal. [Amended 9-18-1979 by Ord. No. 1192;
12-6-1983 by Ord. No. 37-83; 3-15-2005 by Ord. No. 16-05]
(Neb. RS 53-131, 53-132, 53-134)
A. The holder of a license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail issued under
Neb. RS 53-14(5), a craft brewery license, a microdistillery license or a
farm winery license may obtain an annual catering license by filing an
application and license fee with the Nebraska Liquor Control
Commission.78
B. Upon receipt from the Commission of the notice and a copy of the
application as provided in Neb. RS 53-124.12, the governing body shall
process the application in the same manner as provided in § 205-2.8
above.
C. The governing body, with respect to catering licensees within its
corporate limits, may cancel a catering license for cause for the
remainder of the period for which such catering license is issued. Any
person whose catering license is canceled may appeal to the District
Court.
D. The governing body may impose an occupation tax on the business of a
catering licensee doing business within the liquor license jurisdiction of
the governing body. The tax may not exceed double the license fee for a
catering license.
[Neb. RS 53-124.12, 53-124.12(6)]
A. A retail license issued by the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission and
outstanding may be automatically renewed by the Commission in the
absence of a written request by the governing body to require the
licensee to submit an application for renewal. (Neb. RS 53-135)79
B. The Municipal Clerk shall cause to be published in a legal newspaper in
or of general circulation in the municipality, one time between January
10 and January 30 of each year, individual notice in the form prescribed
by law of the right of automatic renewal of each retail liquor and beer
license within the municipality, except that notice of the right of
automatic renewal of Class C licenses shall be published between the
dates of July 10 and July 30 of each year. If written protests to the
issuance of automatic renewal of a license are filed in the office of the
Municipal Clerk by three or more residents of the municipality on or
before February 10, or August 10 for Class C licenses, the governing
body shall hold a hearing to determine whether continuation of the
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 205-2.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-2.10
1:207
§ 205-2.11. Municipal powers and duties. [Amended 11-4-1980 by
Ord. No. 37-80; 12-6-1983 by Ord. No. 37-83; 10-3-2000 by Ord. No.
35-00; 3-15-2005 by Ord. No. 16-0580]
license should be allowed. Upon the conclusion of any hearing required
by this section, the governing body may request a licensee to submit an
application as provided in Neb. RS 53-135.
(Neb. RS 53-135, 53-135.01)
A. The governing body is authorized to regulate by ordinance, not
inconsistent with the Nebraska Liquor Control Act, the business of all
retail or craft brewery or microdistillery licensees carried on within the
corporate limits of the municipality. (Neb. RS 53-134.03)
B. During the period of 45 days after the date of receiving from the
Nebraska Liquor Control Commission notice and a copy of an
application for a new license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail or a craft
brewery or microdistillery license, the governing body may make and
submit to the Commission recommendations relative to the granting or
refusal to grant such license to the applicant. (Neb. RS 53-131)
C. The governing body, with respect to licenses within the corporate limits
of the municipality, has the following powers, functions, and duties with
respect to retail and craft brewery or microdistillery and entertainment
district licenses:
(1) To cancel or revoke for cause retail or craft brewery or
microdistillery licenses to sell or dispense alcoholic liquor issued to
persons for premises within its jurisdiction, subject to the right of
appeal to the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission;
(2) To enter or to authorize any law enforcement officer to enter at any
time upon any premises licensed under the Nebraska Liquor
Control Act to determine whether any provision of the Act, any rule
or regulation adopted and promulgated pursuant to the Act, or any
ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation adopted by the governing
body has been or is being violated, and at such time examine the
premises of such licensee in connection with such determination.
Any law enforcement officer who determines that any provision of
the Act, any rule or regulation adopted and promulgated pursuant
to the Act, or any ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation adopted
by the local governing body has been or is being violated shall
report such violation in writing to the Executive Director of the
Commission a) within 30 days after determining that such violation
has occurred, b) within 30 days after the conclusion of an ongoing
police investigation, or c) within 30 days after the verdict in a
prosecution related to such an ongoing police investigation if the
prosecuting attorney determines that reporting such violation prior
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 205-2.10 SEWARD CODE § 205-2.11
1:208
to the verdict would jeopardize such prosecution, whichever is
later;
(3) To receive a signed complaint from any citizen within its
jurisdiction that any provision of the Act, any rule or regulation
adopted and promulgated pursuant to the Act, or any ordinance,
resolution, rule, or regulation relating to alcoholic liquor has been
or is being violated and to act upon such complaints in the manner
provided in the Act;
(4) To receive retail license fees and craft brewery or microdistillery
license fees as provided in Neb. RS 53-124 and 53-124.01 and pay
the same, after the license has been delivered to the applicant, to
the Municipal Treasurer;
(5) To examine or cause to be examined any applicant or any retail
licensee or craft brewery or microdistillery licensee upon whom
notice of cancellation or revocation has been served as provided in
the Act, to examine or cause to be examined the books and records
of any applicant or licensee, and to hear testimony and to take
proof for its information in the performance of its duties. For
purposes of obtaining any of the information desired, the governing
body may authorize its agent or attorney to act on its behalf;
(6) To cancel or revoke on its own motion any license if, upon the same
notice and hearing as provided in § 205-2.26, Citizen complaints, it
determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of
the Nebraska Liquor Control Act or any valid and subsisting
ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation duly enacted, adopted,
and promulgated relating to alcoholic liquor. Such order of
cancellation or revocation may be appealed to the Commission
within 30 days after the date of the order by filing a notice of appeal
with the Commission. The Commission shall handle the appeal in
the manner provided for hearing on an application in Neb. RS
53-133;
(7) Upon receipt from the Commission of the notice and copy of
application as provided in Neb. RS 53-131, to fix a time and place
for a hearing at which the governing body shall receive evidence,
either orally or by affidavit from the applicant and any other
person, bearing upon the propriety of the issuance of a license.
Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a
legal newspaper in or of general circulation in the municipality, one
time not less than seven days and not more than 14 days before the
time of the hearing. Such notice shall include, but not be limited to,
a statement that all persons desiring to give evidence before the
governing body in support of or in protest against the issuance of
such license may do so at the time of the hearing. The hearing shall
be held not more than 45 days after the date of receipt of the notice
from the Commission, and after such hearing the governing body
shall cause to be recorded in the minute record of its proceedings a
§ 205-2.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-2.11
1:209
§ 205-2.12. Liability of owner of premises.
The owner of any premises used for the sale at retail of alcoholic beverages
shall be deemed guilty of a violation of these laws to the same extent as the
licensee if the owner shall knowingly permit the licensee to use the licensed
premises in violation of any Municipal Code section or Nebraska statute.
(Neb. RS 53-1, 101)
§ 205-2.13. Liability of employer.
The employer of any officer, director, manager, or employees working in a
retail liquor establishment shall be held to be liable and guilty of any act
resolution recommending either issuance or refusal of such license.
The Municipal Clerk shall mail to the Commission by first-class
mail, postage prepaid, a copy of the resolution which shall state the
cost of the published notice, except that failure to comply with this
provision shall not void any license issued by the Commission. If the
Commission refuses to issue such a license, the cost of publication
of notice shall be paid by the Commission from the security for
costs.
(Neb. RS 53-134)
D. Delivery of license to licensee.
(1) When the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission mails or delivers to
the Municipal Clerk a retail or craft brewery or microdistillery
license issued or renewed by the Commission, the Clerk shall
deliver the license to the licensee upon receipt from the licensee of
proof of payment of:
(a) The license fee if by the terms of Neb. RS 53-124(6) the fee is
payable to the Municipal Treasurer;
(b) Any fee for publication of notice of hearing before the
governing body upon the application for the license;
(c) The fee for publication of notice of renewal, if applicable, as
provided in Neb. RS 53-135.01; and
(d) Occupation taxes, if any, imposed by the municipality, except
Class J retail licensees as set forth in Neb. RS 53-132.
(2) Notwithstanding any ordinance or charter power to the contrary,
the municipality shall not impose an occupation tax on the business
of any person, firm, or corporation licensed under the Nebraska
Liquor Control Act and doing business within the corporate limits
of the municipality in any sum which exceeds two times the amount
of the license fee required to be paid under the Act to obtain such
license.
[Neb. RS 53-132, 53-132(4), 53-134]
§ 205-2.11 SEWARD CODE § 205-2.13
1:210
or omission or violation of any law or ordinance, if such act is committed
or omission made with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the
employer or licensee, and each such act or omission shall be deemed and
held to be the act of the employer and will be punishable in the same
manner as if the act or omission had been committed by him personally.
(Neb. RS 53-1, 102)
§ 205-2.14. Clear view of premises; lighting.
It shall be unlawful to use any screen, blind, curtain, partition, article,
or other device in the windows or upon the doors of any retail liquor
establishment, other than restaurants, hotels, and clubs, which will have the
effect of preventing a clear view into the interior of such licensed premises
from the street, road, or sidewalk at all times. All licensed premises shall
be continuously lighted during business hours by natural or artificial white
lights to ensure clear visibility into said establishment. Any licensee who
willfully violates the provisions of this section shall be subject to a
revocation of his license by the municipality as provided herein.
§ 205-2.15. Public front entrance to street required.
No person holding a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquors,
including beer, shall sell within this City any such liquors, or conduct any of
the business for which such license is required, in any room or premises not
provided with a public entrance at the front thereof, opening upon a public
street. No person holding such license shall permit the use of any entrance
other than such front entrance for any purposes other than the use thereof
by the licensee, his family or employees, or for ingress or egress by other
persons for the purpose of lawful labor or business other than the purchase
at retail or the consumption of alcoholic liquors.
§ 205-2.16. Credit sales. [Amended 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. 114081]
A. No person shall sell or furnish alcoholic liquor at retail to any person or
persons for credit of any kind, barter, or services rendered.
B. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent:
(1) Any club holding a Class C license from permitting checks or
statements for alcoholic liquor to be signed by members, or bona
fide guests of members, and charged to the accounts of said
members or guests in accordance with the bylaws of any such club;
(2) Any hotel or restaurant holding a retail alcoholic beverage license
from permitting checks or statements for liquor to be signed by
regular guests residing in the hotel, and charged to the accounts of
such guests; or
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 205-2.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-2.16
1:211
§ 205-2.17. Original package requirements. [Amended 3-3-1992 by
Ord. No. 7-92]
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons who own, manage, or lease
any premises in which the sale of alcoholic beverages is licensed to have
in their possession for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor contained in casks
or other containers except in the original package. Nothing in this section
shall prohibit the refilling of original packages of alcoholic liquor for strictly
private use and not for resale. (Neb. RS 53-184)
§ 205-2.18. Hours of sale. [Amended 3-2-1976 by Ord. No. 1044;
2-20-1979 by Ord. No. 1157; 9-18-1979 by Ord. No. 1193; 10-6-1981
by Ord. No. 36-81; 12-6-1983 by Ord. No. 36-83; 1-15-1985 by Ord.
No. 1-85; 10-3-1989 by Ord. No. 35-89; 7-3-1990 by Ord. No. 20-90;
6-1-1993 by Ord. No. 18C-93; 1-6-1998 by Ord. No. 1-98; 3-21-2000
by Ord. No. 17-00]
(3) Any licensed retailer engaged in the sale of wine or distilled spirits
from issuing tasting cards to customers.82
(Neb. RS 53-183)
A. It shall be unlawful for any licensed person or persons or their agents to
sell any alcoholic beverages within the municipality except during the
hours provided herein:
Hours of Sale
Alcoholic liquors (except beer and
wine)
Secular days
Off sale 6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
On sale 6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
Sundays
Off sale 12:00 noon to 1:00 a.m.
On sale 12:00 noon to 1:00 a.m.
Beer and wine
Secular days
Off sale 6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
On sale 6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
Sundays
Off sale 6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
On sale 6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
82.Editor's Note: Original § 10-117 of the 1976 Code, Spiking beer, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 205-2.16 SEWARD CODE § 205-2.18
1:212
§ 205-2.19. Hiring minors.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hire a minor, regardless of sex, under
the age of 19 years to serve or dispense alcoholic liquors, including beer, to
said licensee's customers.
§ 205-2.20. Consumption in public places or places open to public.
[Amended 8-3-1993 by Ord. No. 26-93; 10-3-2000 by Ord. No.
36-0084]
B. No person or persons shall consume any alcoholic beverages on
licensed premises for a period of time longer than 15 minutes after the
time fixed herein for stopping the sale of alcoholic beverages on the
premises. For the purposes of this section, "on sale" shall be defined as
alcoholic beverages sold by the drink for consumption on the premises
of the licensed establishment; "off sale" shall be defined as alcoholic
beverages sold at retail in the original container for consumption off the
premises of the licensed establishment.
C. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit licensed premises
from being open for other business on days and hours during which the
sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by this section.83
(Neb. RS 53-179)
A. Except when the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission has issued a
license as provided in Neb. RS 53-186(2) or 60-6, 211.08, it is unlawful
for any person to consume alcoholic liquor upon property owned or
controlled by the state or a governmental subdivision thereof unless
authorized by the governing bodies having jurisdiction over such
property. [Neb. RS 53-186(1)]
B. It is unlawful for any person owning, operating, managing, or
conducting any dance hall, restaurant, cafe, or club or any place open
to the general public to permit or allow any person to consume alcoholic
liquor upon the premises except as permitted by a license issued for
such premises pursuant to the Nebraska Liquor Control Act. It is
unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic liquor in any dance hall,
restaurant, cafe, or club or any place open to the general public except
as permitted by a license issued for such premises pursuant to the Act.
This subsection does not apply to a retail licensee while lawfully
engaged in the catering of alcoholic beverages or to limousines or
buses operated under Neb. RS 60-6, 211.08. (Neb. RS 53-186.01)
83.Editor's Note: Original § 10-120 of the 1976 Code, Sanitary conditions, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 205-2.18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-2.21
1:213
§ 205-2.21. Acquisition of alcoholic beverages. [Amended 11-4-1980
by Ord. No. 36-80; 10-15-1985 by Ord. No. 20-85; 3-5-1996 by Ord.
No. 15-96]
It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, receive, acquire, accept or
possess any alcoholic liquor acquired from any other person other than one
duly licensed to handle alcoholic liquor under the Nebraska Liquor Control
Act; provided that nothing in this section shall prevent:
A. The possession of alcoholic liquor for the personal use of the possessor
and his or her family and guests, as long as the quantity of alcoholic
liquor transported, imported, brought, or shipped into the state does
not exceed nine liters in any one calendar month;
B. The making of wine, cider, or other alcoholic liquor by a person from
fruits, vegetables, or grains, or the product thereof, by simple
fermentation and without distillation, if made solely for the use of the
maker and his or her family and guests;
C. Any duly licensed practicing physician or dentist from possessing or
using alcoholic liquor in the strict practice of his or her profession, any
hospital or other institution caring for the sick and diseased persons
from possessing and using alcoholic liquor for the treatment of bona
fide patients of such hospital or other institution, or any drugstore
employing a licensed pharmacist from possessing or using alcoholic
liquor in compounding of prescriptions of licensed physicians;
D. The possession and dispensation of alcoholic liquor by an authorized
representative of any religion on the premises of a place of worship for
the purpose of conducting any bona fide religious rite, ritual or
ceremony;85
E. Persons who are 16 years old or older from carrying alcoholic liquor
from licensed establishments when they are accompanied by a person
not a minor;
F. Persons who are 16 years old or older from handling alcoholic liquor
containers and alcoholic liquor in the course of their employment;
G. Persons who are 16 years old or older from removing and disposing of
alcoholic liquor containers for the convenience of the employer and
customers in the course of their employment;
H. Persons who are 19 years old or older from serving or selling alcoholic
liquor in the course of their employment; or
I. Persons who are 16 years old or older from completing a transaction for
the sale of alcoholic liquor in the course of their employment if they are
not handling or serving alcoholic liquor.86
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
86.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 205-2.21 SEWARD CODE § 205-2.21
1:214
§ 205-2.22. Entertainment on licensed premises.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee under the Nebraska Liquor Control
Act with a place of business within the City to permit, on premises where
alcoholic liquors are consumed thereon, entertainments other than music
from musical instruments or entertainment from radios.
§ 205-2.23. Floor shows.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee under the Nebraska Liquor Control
Act or under this article, whose licensed premises are located within the
corporate limits of the City, to permit any floor show or exhibition of any
kind or description on or about said premises. The word "premises," as used
herein, shall include the entire property used by the licensee in connection
with the conduct of any business operated by said licensee or other person
in connection with said licensee and shall not be construed to apply only to
a separate room in which said liquors are sold or dispensed.
§ 205-2.24. Removal of intoxicated persons from public or quasipublic
property. [Amended 9-18-1979 by Ord. No. 1194; 10-20-1981
by Ord. No. 39-81]
(Neb. RS 53-168.06, 53-175, 53-194.03)
A. Any law enforcement officer with the power to arrest for traffic
violations may take a person who is intoxicated and in the judgment of
the officer dangerous to himself, herself, or others, or who is otherwise
incapacitated, from any public or quasi-public property. An officer
removing an intoxicated person from public or quasi-public property
shall make a reasonable effort to take such intoxicated person to his or
her home or to place such person in any hospital, clinic, alcoholism
center, or with a medical doctor as may be necessary to preserve life or
to prevent injury. Such effort at placement shall be deemed reasonable
if the officer contacts those facilities or doctor which have previously
represented a willingness to accept and treat such individuals and
which regularly do accept such individuals. If such efforts are
unsuccessful or are not feasible, the officer may then place such
intoxicated person in civil protective custody, except that civil
protective custody shall be used only as long as is necessary to preserve
life or to prevent injury, and under no circumstances longer than 24
hours. The placement of such person in civil protective custody shall be
recorded at the facility or jail at which he or she is delivered and
communicated to his or her family or next of kin, if they can be located,
or to such person designated by the person taken into civil protective
custody.
B. The law enforcement officer who acts in compliance with this section
shall be deemed to be acting in the course of his or her official duty and
shall not be criminally or civilly liable for such actions. The taking of an
individual into civil protective custody under this section shall not be
§ 205-2.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-2.24
1:215
§ 205-2.25. Inspection of licensed premises. [Amended 11-4-1980
by Ord. No. 34-80; 3-15-2005 by Ord. No. 16-05]
The governing body shall cause frequent inspection to be made on the
premises of all retail licensees. If it is found that any such licensee is
violating any provision of this article, the Nebraska Liquor Control Act, or
the rules and regulations of the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission or is
failing to observe in good faith the purposes of this article or the Act, the
license may be suspended, canceled, or revoked after the licensee is given
an opportunity to be heard in his or her defense. (Neb. RS 53-116.01)
§ 205-2.26. Citizen complaints. [Amended 11-4-1980 by Ord. No.
34-80; 3-15-2005 by Ord. No. 16-05]
Any five residents of the municipality shall have the right to file a complaint
with the governing body stating that any retail licensee subject to the
jurisdiction of the governing body has been or is violating any provision of
the Nebraska Liquor Control Act or the rules or regulations issued pursuant
to the Act. Such complaint shall be in writing in the form prescribed
by the governing body and shall be signed and sworn to by the parties
complaining. The complaint shall state the particular provision, rule, or
regulation believed to have been violated and the facts in detail upon which
the belief is based. If the governing body is satisfied that the complaint
substantially charges a violation and that from the facts alleged there is
reasonable cause for such belief, it shall set the matter for hearing within
10 days from the date of the filing of the complaint and shall serve notice
upon the licensee of the time and place of such hearing and of the particular
charge in the complaint. The complaint shall in all cases be disposed of by
the governing body within 30 days from the date the complaint was filed
by resolution thereof, which resolution shall be deemed the final order for
purposes of appeal to the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission as provided
in Neb. RS 53-1, 115. (Neb. RS 53-116.01)
§ 205-2.27. Liquor applications; retail licensing standards.
[Amended 5-20-1986 by Ord. No. 6-86; 8-21-2007 by Ord. No. 26-07]
considered an arrest. No entry or other record shall be made to indicate
that the person has been arrested or charged with a crime.
C. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any public right-of-way, street, highway, alley,
park, or other state, county, or municipally owned property.
QUASI-PUBLIC PROPERTY — Includes private or publicly owned
property utilized for proprietary or business uses which invites
patronage by the public or which invites public ingress and egress.
(Neb. RS 53-1, 121)
§ 205-2.24 SEWARD CODE § 205-2.27
1:216
A. The City Council adopts the following licensing standards and criteria
for consideration by the Liquor Control Commission of any applicant for
a retail alcoholic liquor license, for the upgrading of a license to sell
alcoholic liquor, or for the expansion or change in location of the
premises:
(1) The adequacy of existing law enforcement resources and services
in the area.
(2) Existing motor vehicle and pedestrian traffic flow in the vicinity of
the proposed licensed premises, potential traffic and parking
problems, and the proximity and availability of on-street and offstreet
parking.
(3) Zoning restrictions.
(4) Sanitation or sanitary conditions on or about the proposed licensed
premises.
(5) The existing population and projected growth, both City-wide and
within the area to be served.
(6) The existence or absence of other retail licenses or craft brewery or
microdistillery licenses with similar privileges within the
neighborhood or community of the location of the proposed
licensed premises and whether, as evidenced by substantive,
corroborative documentation, the issuance of such license would
result in or add to an undue concentration of licenses with similar
privileges and, as a result, require the use of additional law
enforcement resources.87
(7) The nature and needs of the neighborhood or community where the
proposed premises are located as well as its projected growth.
(8) Whether the type of business or activity proposed to be operated in
conjunction with the proposed license is and will be consistent with
the public interest.
(9) Whether the applicant can ensure that all alcoholic beverages,
including beer and wine, will be handled by persons in accordance
with Neb. RS 53-168.06 of the Nebraska Liquor Control Act.
(10) Whether the applicant has taken every precaution to protect
against the possibility of shoplifting of alcoholic beverages, which
must be displayed, kept, and sold from an area which is secured to
the greatest extent possible.
(11) Whether the applicant is fit, willing, and able to properly provide
the service proposed in conformance with all provisions,
requirements, needs and regulations provided for.
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 205-2.27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-2.27
1:217
(12) Whether the applicant has demonstrated that the type of
management and control exercised over the license premises will
be sufficient to ensure that the licensee can conform to all the
provisions, requirements, rules and regulations provided for in the
Nebraska Liquor Control Act.
(13) The background information of the applicants established by
information contained in the public records of the Nebraska Liquor
Control Commission.
(14) Past compliance with state laws and liquor regulations and
municipal ordinances and regulations.
(15) If the application is for an on-sale license, whether it is adjunct to a
legitimate food service operation as evidenced by percent of gross
income allocated to food and liquor, and the type and extent of
kitchen facilities.
(16) Whether the application will provide an improvement to the
neighborhood, a betterment to the municipality, or a true increase
in service to the public at large.
(17) Proximity of and impact on schools, hospitals, libraries and public
institutions.
(18) Whether the type of entertainment to be offered, if any, will be
appropriate and nondisruptive to the neighborhood where the
premises are located and to the community at large.
(19) Whether the application is for a business, and the sole purpose for
which is the sale of dispensing of liquor, or when the sale or
dispensing of liquor is a substantial integral part of the business,
and not just incidental thereto.
(20) Applications for Class B, C, and D licenses (as defined by Neb. RS
53-124) must be for premises which are separate and distinct from
any other business activity. Premises shall be deemed separate and
distinct only when located in a building which is not adjacent to any
other building, or when located within the same building, they shall
be so separate by walls (floor to ceiling), that access cannot be had
directly from the area of alcoholic liquor sales to any other business
activity by means of doors or other openings; provided nothing
herein shall prevent the construction or maintenance of doors that
are used by employees; further, any nonconforming premises in
existence on the effective date of this article may be continued for
the life of the license. Such nonconforming premises may not be
enlarged, extended, or restored after damage during interim. For
the purposes of this section, "other business activity" shall mean
the sale or display of any food, produce, mercantile product, item
or service other than keeping or selling of alcoholic liquors at retail
for consumption off the premises and the sale or display of ice,
drink mix, tobacco, cups, or carbonated beverages.
§ 205-2.27 SEWARD CODE § 205-2.27
1:218
§ 205-2.28. Special designated liquor permits. [Amended 9-5-1995
by Ord. No. 35-95; 11-16-2004 by Ord. No. 35-04; 5-17-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-11; 1-3-2012 by Ord. No. 2-12]
(21) Whether or not applicant has ever forfeited bond to appear in court
to answer charges of having committed a felony, or charges of
having violated any law or ordinance enacted in the interest of
good morals and decency, or has been convicted of violating or
forfeiting bond to appear in court and answer charges for violating
any law or ordinance relating to alcoholic liquors.
(22) Other information and data that may reasonably be considered
pertinent to the issuance of the license.
B. The preceding standards are not necessarily of equal value that can be
computed in a mathematical formula. Rather, they are standards which
can be weighed and cumulated positively and negatively. The burden of
proof and persuasion shall be on the party filing the application. When
applicable, the term "applicants" as used herein is synonymous with
"licensee."
(Neb. RS 53-134)
A. As authorized by Neb. RS 53-124.11, the City Clerk-Treasurer or
Deputy Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized and designated as the
agents of the City of Seward, Nebraska to approve or deny special
designated liquor permits.
B. In determining whether an application shall be approved or denied for
any City of Seward liquor license holders with all occupation taxes paid
in full, or for any nonresident liquor license holder that has previously
been given approval for one special designated liquor permit by the
Mayor and Council, the following criteria are hereby established:
(1) That the applicant has not had two or more liquor license violations
within the past two years from the Nebraska Liquor Control
Commission.88
(2) That the application is for a location that has previously been
approved by the Mayor and Council.
(3) That no citizen's protest has been filed against said application.
(4) That the application is for an event held on any day of the week
except Sunday; in which case the regulations regarding Sunday
liquor permits shall be followed. However, special designated
permits may be approved for those days set forth in § 205-2.18
wherein the sale of alcoholic beverages on Sunday has been
authorized.
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 205-2.27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-2.28
1:219
§ 205-2.29. Violations and penalties.89
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who violates the
prohibitions or provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an amount not to exceed
$500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of said
payment the offender shall stand committed to the County Jail until such
fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on which a
violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(5) That if said application does not strictly comply with the criteria set
forth above, such application may be referred to the Mayor and
City Council for determination; further, that upon denial of any
application by the City Clerk-Treasurer or Deputy Clerk-Treasurer,
the applicant may further request that the application be submitted
to the Mayor and Council.
89.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 205-2.28 SEWARD CODE § 205-2.29
1:220
Chapter 209
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Offenses — See Ch. 290. Sexually oriented businesses — See Ch. 329.
§ 205-2.29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-2.29
1:221

ARTICLE I
Motion-Picture Shows
[Adopted as Ch. 10, Art. 4, of the 1976 Code]
§ 209-1.1. License required; exceptions; conditions.
It shall be unlawful to give, present, or conduct any motion-picture or
theatrical performance, for admission to which a fee is charged, except
performances given solely for the benefit of and under the supervision of
a religious, educational, or charitable organization, without having first
secured a license therefor as is herein provided. Application shall be made
to the Municipal Clerk. Said application form shall contain such information
and documents, or copies thereof, as the governing body deems necessary
to determine whether to grant or reject the application. Upon the
determination that the granting of the license would be proper and
beneficial to the municipality, the governing body shall immediately direct
the Municipal Clerk to issue the license to the applicant upon the payment
of all occupation taxes and other fees required by ordinance of the
governing body. Said license shall be subject to revocation at any time
for good and sufficient cause by the governing body upon the issuance of
proper notice, and a hearing if the licensee should make such a request. Any
person or persons so licensed shall be subject to any bond, fees, or other
rules and regulations as may be set by resolution of the governing body for
the benefit of the municipality. (Neb. RS 16-226)
§ 209-1.2. License period; revocation of license.
No license shall be issued for a longer period than one year, which license
shall permit the showing of motion pictures during each and every day,
including Sundays, during the term of said license, except as hereinafter
provided, and the same may be revoked by the Mayor and Council
whenever, upon due proof made, the person licensed shall be shown to have
violated any of the provisions of this article.
§ 209-1.3. Safety regulations; Sunday shows.
Any person who shall operate or manage a public motion-picture show shall
afford ample, sufficient and suitable means of entrance and exit. He shall
take due precaution against accident and casualty. He shall not exhibit,
produce or show any immoral or lewd picture; neither shall he show or
permit to be shown motion pictures before 1:00 p.m. on Sunday. Any person
violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
§ 209-1.4. Violations and penalties. [Added 4-3-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-10]
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who violates the
prohibitions or provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an amount not to exceed
§ 209-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-1.4
1:223
$500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of said
payment the offender shall stand committed to the County Jail until such
fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on which a
violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.90
90.Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Amusement Devices, adopted 12-6-1983 by Ord. No. 30-83
(Ch. 10, Art. 10, of the 1976 Code), as amended, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed 5-7-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-14.
§ 209-1.4 SEWARD CODE § 209-1.4
1:224
Chapter 213
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning and subdivision — See Ch. 410.
§ 209-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-1.4
1:225

ARTICLE I
Dogs
[Adopted as Ch. 6, Art. I, of the 1976 Code]
§ 213-1.1. License required; fees. [Amended 4-5-1994 by Ord. No.
20-94; 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 18-10]
§ 213-1.2. Rabies vaccination required.
A. Any person who shall own, keep, or harbor a dog over the age of four
months within the municipality shall, within 10 days after acquisition of
the dog, acquire a license for each such dog annually by or before the
first day of January of each year. Licenses shall be issued by the Police
Department upon the payment of a license fee of $4 for each male dog
and spayed female dog and $6 for each unspayed female dog. Said
license shall not be transferable and no refund will be allowed in case of
death, sale, or other disposition of the licensed dog. The owner shall
state at the time the application is made, and upon printed forms
provided for such purpose, his name and address and the name, age,
breed, color, and sex of each dog owned and kept by him and such other
information as the governing body may require. A certificate that the
dog has had a rabies shot, effective for the ensuing year of the license,
shall be presented when the license is applied for and no license or tag
shall be issued until the certificate is shown.
B. Every service animal shall be licensed as required by this article, but no
license fee shall be charged. Upon the retirement or discontinuance of
the animal as a service animal, the owner of the animal shall be liable
for the payment of a license tax as prescribed by this article.91
C. The City shall also collect from the licensee a fee of $1.25 for the state
Commercial Dog and Cat Operator Inspection Program Cash Fund in
accordance with Neb. RS 54-603(3).92
(Neb. RS 16-206, 54-603, 71-4412)
A. It shall be the duty of each veterinarian, at the time of vaccinating any
dog, to complete a certificate of rabies vaccination which shall include,
but not be limited to, the following information:
(1) The owner's name and address;
(2) An adequate description of the dog, including, but not limited to,
such items as the dog's breed, sex, age, name, and distinctive
markings;
(3) The date of vaccination;
(4) The rabies vaccination tag number;93
91.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
92.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 213-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-1.2
1:227
§ 213-1.3. License tags. [Amended 5-2-1995 by Ord. No. 24-95]
Upon the payment of the license fee, the Police Department shall issue to
the owner of a dog a license certificate and a metallic tag for each dog
so licensed. The tags shall have stamped thereon the license number, the
words "SEWARD DOG TAG," and the year for which issued. The metallic
tags shall be properly attached to the collar or harness of all dogs so
licensed and shall entitle the owner to keep or harbor said dog until the 31st
day of December following such licensing. In the event that a license tag is
lost and upon satisfactory evidence that the original plate or tag was issued
in accordance with the provisions herein, the Police Department shall issue
a duplicate or new tag for the balance of the year for which the license tax
has been paid and shall charge and collect a fee set by resolution of the
governing body for each duplicate or new tag so issued. All license fees and
collections shall be immediately credited to the General Fund. It shall be
the duty of the Police Department to issue tags of a suitable design that are
different in appearance each year. (Neb. RS 54-603)
§ 213-1.4. Dog kennels. [Amended 4-7-1987 by Ord. No. 9-8795]
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, or permit to be kept upon
premises occupied by him or under his charge or control, any dog kennel,
without having first obtained a kennel permit from the Council. Kennel
permits may be issued by the Council upon written application, setting forth
a description of the premises, and location of the same and such other
information as the Council may require. Kennel permits shall be required
for any person or persons who keep more than three dogs over the age
of four months upon premises occupied by them or under their charge
or control. No kennel permit shall be issued for any premises unless it
complies with the City's Zoning Codes96 and until the Council, or its duly
authorized personnel, shall first determine upon actual view and inspection
that the operation of such kennel will not constitute a violation of the
provisions of this article. Kennel permits issued under the provisions of
(5) The type of rabies vaccine administered;
(6) The manufacturer's serial number of the vaccine used; and
(7) The site of vaccination.94
B. Such veterinarian shall issue a tag with the certificate of vaccination as
required by state law but such shall not relieve the owner of obtaining a
license from the City for any dog. The cost of rabies vaccination shall be
borne by the owner of the dog.
(Neb. RS 71-4403)
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
94.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
96.Editor's Note: See Ch. 410, Zoning and Subdivision.
§ 213-1.2 SEWARD CODE § 213-1.4
1:228
this article shall be effective from January 1 to December 31 of each year,
and all permits shall expire on December 31 of the year for which issued;
provided the City Clerk is hereby authorized to pro-rate kennel permits
based upon the month in which they were applied for. The annual fee for
kennel permits shall be set from time to time by the City Council. The
Council shall have power and authority to revoke any kennel permit at any
time in its sole discretion by refunding the kennel permit fee to the holder
thereof; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to
the Animal Shelter or to animal hospitals operated by veterinarians duly
licensed under the laws of the State of Nebraska, keeping dogs for others
for treatment or boarding.
§ 213-1.5. Licensing prohibitions.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper, or harborer of any dog to permit
or allow such dog to wear any license, metallic tag or other municipal
identification other than that issued by the Municipal Clerk for dogs, nor
shall the owner, keeper, or harborer wrongfully and knowingly license an
unspayed female dog with a license prescribed for a male or spayed female
dog. (Neb. RS 54-603)
§ 213-1.6. Licensing exception for transient dogs.
The provisions of this article with respect to licensing and vaccination shall
not apply to a dog owned by a person temporarily remaining within the City
for fewer than 30 days or to any dog brought into the City for field trial
or show purposes. Such dog shall be kept under strict supervision of the
owner. It shall be unlawful to bring any dog into the City which does not
comply with the animal health laws and import regulations of the State of
Nebraska which are applicable to dogs.
§ 213-1.7. Owner defined.
Any person who shall harbor or permit any dog to be in or about his or her
house, store, or enclosure, or to remain to be fed, for 10 days or more shall
be deemed the owner and possessor of such dog and shall be deemed to be
liable for all penalties herein prescribed. (Neb. RS 54-606, 71-4401)
§ 213-1.8. Proclamation of dog dangers; duty to confine dogs.
It shall be the duty of the governing body, whenever in its opinion the
danger to the public safety from rabid dogs is great or imminent, to issue
a proclamation ordering all persons owning, keeping, or harboring any dog
to muzzle the same, or to confine it for a period of not less than 30 days nor
more than 90 days from the date of such proclamation, or until such danger
is passed. The dogs may be harbored by any good and sufficient means in
a house, garage, or yard on the premises wherein the owner may reside.
Upon issuing the proclamation, it shall be the duty of all persons owning,
keeping, or harboring any dog to confine the same as herein provided.
§ 213-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-1.9
1:229
§ 213-1.9. Dogs at large without collar or harness.
All dogs found running at large upon the streets and public grounds of
the municipality without a collar or harness are hereby declared a public
nuisance. Uncollared dogs found running at large shall be killed or
impounded in the Municipal Dog Shelter by the Pound Superintendent.
(Neb. RS 54-605)
§ 213-1.10. Running at large. [Amended 8-1-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-13]
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to allow such dog to run at
large at any time within the corporate limits of the municipality, except
within the confines of an approved dog park. It shall be the duty of the
Municipal Pound Superintendent or Municipal Police to cause any dog
found to be running at large within the municipality to be taken up and
impounded. "Running at large" shall mean any dog found off the premises
of the owner, and not under control of the owner or a responsible person,
either by leash, cord, chain, wire, rope, cage or other suitable means of
physical restraint. (Neb. RS 16-206, 54-607)
§ 213-1.11. Destruction of dogs.
The Municipal Pound Superintendent or Municipal Police shall have the
authority to kill any animals showing vicious tendencies or characteristics
of rabies which make capture impossible because of the danger involved.
(Neb. RS 16-206)97
§ 213-1.12. Interference with police.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, delay, or interfere with any
municipal policeman who is performing any duty enjoined upon him by the
provisions of this article, or to break open, or in any manner directly or
indirectly to aid, counsel, or advise the breaking open of the animal shelter,
any ambulance wagon, or other vehicle used for the collecting or conveying
of dogs to the shelter. (Neb. RS 28-906)
§ 213-1.13. Killing and poisoning prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to kill, or to administer, or cause to be administered,
poison of any sort to a dog, or in any manner to injure, maim, or destroy,
or in any manner attempt to injure, maim, or destroy any dog that is the
property of another person, or to place any poison, or poisoned food where
the same is accessible to a dog; provided that this section shall not apply to
the Municipal Pound Superintendent or municipal policemen acting within
their power and duty.
97.Editor's Note: Original § 6-112 of the 1976 Code, Dogs; Vicious, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 12-2-1986 by Ord. No. 17-86.
§ 213-1.9 SEWARD CODE § 213-1.14
1:230
§ 213-1.14. Barking and offensive noise; dogs chasing vehicles or
pedestrians.
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor any dog which
by loud, continued, or frequent barking, howling, or yelping shall annoy or
disturb any neighborhood, or person, or which habitually barks at or chases
pedestrians, drivers, or owners of horses or vehicles while they are on any
public sidewalks, streets, or alleys in the municipality.
§ 213-1.15. Fighting prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, by agreement or otherwise, to set dogs
to fighting, or by any gesture or word to encourage the same to fight. (Neb.
RS 28-1004 through 28-1006)
§ 213-1.16. Liability of owner for destruction by dog.
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow a dog owned, kept, or harbored
by him, or under his charge or control, to injure or destroy any real or
personal property of any description belonging to another person. The
owner or possessor of any such dog, in addition to the usual judgment upon
conviction, may be made to be liable to the persons so injured in an amount
equal to the value of the damage so sustained. (Neb. RS 54-601, 54-602)
§ 213-1.17. Removal of tags.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, or cause to be removed, the
collar, harness, or metallic tag from any licensed dog without the consent of
the owner, keeper, or possessor thereof. (Neb. RS 17-526)
§ 213-1.18. Impounding; fees. [Amended 2-7-1978 by Ord. No.
1125; 10-20-1981 by Ord. No. 40-81; 3-1-1994 by Ord. No. 8-94]
It shall be the duty of the Municipal Police to capture, secure, and remove
in a humane manner to the Municipal Animal Shelter any dog violating any
of the provisions of this article. The dogs so impounded shall be treated in
a humane manner and shall be provided with a sufficient supply of food and
fresh water each day. Each impounded dog shall be kept and maintained at
the pound for a period of not less than five days after public notice has been
given unless reclaimed earlier by the owner. Notice of impoundment of all
animals, including any significant marks or identifications, shall be posted
at the office of the Municipal Clerk within 24 hours after impoundment
as public notification of such impoundment. Any dog may be reclaimed
by its owner during the period of impoundment by payment of a general
impoundment fee and daily board fee as set by resolution of the governing
body and on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk. The owner shall then be
required to comply with the licensing and rabies vaccination requirements
upon release. If the dog is not claimed at the end of required waiting period
after public notice has been given, the Municipal Police may dispose of
the dog in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations pertaining
to the same; provided that if, in the judgment of the Municipal Police, a
§ 213-1.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-1.18
1:231
suitable home can be found for any such dog within the municipality, the
dog shall be turned over to that person and the new owner shall then be
required to pay all fees and meet all licensing and vaccinating requirements
provided in this article. The municipality shall acquire legal title to any
unlicensed dog impounded in the Animal Shelter for a period longer than
the required waiting period after giving notice. All dogs shall be destroyed
and buried in the summary and humane manner as prescribed by the Board
of Health unless a suitable home can be found for such dog. (Neb. RS
16-235, 16-236, 71-4408)
§ 213-1.19. Contract for animal shelter and services.
The City Council shall have the authority to enter into a contract with
any veterinarian, kennel, or any like institution for the purpose of carrying
out the provisions for an animal shelter. The Superintendent of the Animal
Shelter shall receive all orders from the Council and shall make all reports
to the Council.
§ 213-1.20. Animal shelter; authority to impound dogs.
The City shall provide an animal shelter wherein all dogs in violation
of this article shall be required to be impounded under the provisions
of this article. The Council may, when necessary, employ or appoint a
Superintendent of the Animal Shelter and such other assistants with
authority to arrest under the provisions of this article, or when convenient,
designate and detail a police officer to work in conjunction with said
Superintendent with like authority. It shall be unlawful for any person, other
than authorized personnel, to take up, detain or confine any dog not the
property of such person.
§ 213-1.21. Animal Shelter Superintendent.
The Council shall appoint the Superintendent of the Animal Shelter and fix
his salary. The Superintendent shall hold his office at the pleasure of the
Council and may be removed by the Council at any time. The Council may in
its discretion designate the Chief of Police as Superintendent of the Animal
Shelter and fix his salary, if any, for such duties.
§ 213-1.22. Shelter records and reports.
The Superintendent shall keep accurate account of all dogs received by him
at the shelter and released by him to the owner or purchaser, showing the
date and from whom received, the description of the dog, the name and
address of the person or persons releasing or purchasing. He shall keep a
like accurate account and description of all dogs destroyed by him. On the
last day of each month, the Superintendent shall forward to the Council an
accurate and complete account of all moneys received by him during the
month under the provisions of this article, together with a statement of the
number of dogs in the shelter at the first of the month, the number received,
§ 213-1.18 SEWARD CODE § 213-1.22
1:232
the number destroyed, the number released or sold, and the number on
hand at the end of the month.
§ 213-1.23. Information required by shelter.
The Superintendent shall not receive a dog into the shelter from any person
unless such person shall give his full name and place of residence, which
shall be registered in a proper book kept by the Superintendent. It shall be
unlawful for any person delivering to or receiving any dog from said shelter
to give any false information concerning the same.
§ 213-1.24. Maintenance of shelter.
The Animal Shelter shall be safe, suitable, and conveniently located for the
impounding, keeping, and destruction of dogs. The shelter shall be sanitary,
ventilated, and lighted.
§ 213-1.25. Dogs held for observation.
The Superintendent may take into custody for observation at the Animal
Shelter any dog which has bitten any person or another animal, or any dog
that manifests a disposition to bite, or any dog suspected of being afflicted
with rabies, or any dog not vaccinated or re-vaccinated in accordance with
this article, or any dog that in the opinion of the Superintendent needs
observation; and may hold such dog for the period of time necessary, not
exceeding 10 days, to observe and determine its condition. Should any dog
so held for observation be found to be suffering from rabies or be of such a
nature as to endanger the public generally, the Superintendent shall cause
such dog, after examination by a licensed veterinarian, to be destroyed in
a humane manner. The Superintendent and any police officer may enter
upon any private premises for the above purposes. The Superintendent
shall, upon the request of the City or County Board of Health, take into
custody any dog for observation and shall hold such dog for the period of
time necessary, not to exceed 10 days, and shall not release any such dog
except upon examination by a veterinarian and upon the direction of the
Seward Board of Health. Before any such dog shall be released, the person
to whom it is released shall submit proof, in the form of a certificate issued
and signed by a licensed veterinarian or other person, authorized by law to
administer rabies vaccination, that such dog has been vaccinated for rabies
as provided by this article.
§ 213-1.26. Dog park. [Added 8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-13]
A. Establishment and regulation of a dog park. The City of Seward hereby
establishes a dog park located along East Seward Street and Plum
Creek Trail. The City of Seward Parks and Recreation Department shall
be responsible for establishing the boundaries of the dog park. The
Seward Parks and Recreation Department may promulgate and post
guidelines at the dog park based on the rules and regulations herein.
B. Dog park rules and regulations.
§ 213-1.22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-1.26
1:233
(1) Dogs are permitted to run loose in the dog park, but must be on a
leash prior to entering the dog park and returned to a leash prior to
exiting the dog park.
(2) The City of Seward shall not be responsible for any person or dog
using the dog park.
(3) All dog owners are responsible for their own dog or dogs once
entering the fenced-in area of the dog park.
(4) All dogs must bear a permit ID pursuant to the Seward City Code.
(5) Female dogs that are in season or in heat are not permitted in the
dog park.
(6) Dogs known to exhibit vicious, fierce, aggressive or dangerous
behavior are not permitted in the park at any time.
(7) No food, whether for animal or human consumption, shall be
allowed within the dog park.
(8) All dog owners must clean up dog droppings made by their dogs.
All droppings must be placed in a bag and deposited in receptacles
provided by the dog park. Failure of an owner to clean up after his
or her pet can lead to dismissal from the park.
(9) Digging is not permitted, and dog owners must fill in any holes left
by their dog.
(10) Children must be accompanied by an adult at all times.
(11) All dogs must have current vaccinations.
(12) No smoking is allowed in the dog park.
(13) Glass containers are not allowed in the dog park.
(14)No bicycles, skateboards or motorized vehicles are allowed in the
park.
(15) Dog owners shall maintain visual contact with their dogs at all
times.
(16) All gates shall be immediately closed after any person enters or
exits the dog park.
(17) No alcohol is permitted in the dog park.
(18) The dog park may only be used between sunrise and sunset. No
person or animal shall be allowed in the dog park between sunset
and sunrise.
(19) All Seward recreation and park rules and the Municipal Code of
Seward apply to the dog park, except as provided herein.
§ 213-1.26 SEWARD CODE § 213-1.27
1:234
§ 213-1.27. Violations and penalties.98
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
98.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 213-1.27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-1.27
1:235

ARTICLE II
Other Animals
[Adopted as Ch. 6, Art. 2, of the 1976 Code]
§ 213-2.1. Running at large.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper, or harborer of any animal, or any
person having the charge, custody, or control thereof, to permit a horse,
mule, cow, sheep, goat, swine, or other animal to be driven or run at large
on any of the public ways and property, or upon the property of another, or
to be tethered or staked out in such a manner so as to allow such animal to
reach or pass into any public way. (Neb. RS 16-235)
§ 213-2.2. Animal cruelty.
No person shall cruelly or unnecessarily beat, overwork, or insufficiently
shelter or feed any animal within the municipality. (Neb. RS 16-210)
§ 213-2.3. Killing and injuring.
No person shall kill or injure any animal by the use of firearms, stones,
clubs, poisons, or any other manner unless the animal is vicious or
dangerous and cannot be captured without danger to the persons
attempting to effect a capture of the animal. (Neb. RS 16-210)
§ 213-2.4. Enclosures.
All pens, cages, sheds, yards, or any other area or enclosure for the
confinement of animals and fowl not specifically barred within the corporate
limits shall be kept in a clean and orderly manner so as not to become a
menace or nuisance to the neighborhood in which the enclosure is located.
§ 213-2.5. Fowl running at large.
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow poultry, chickens, turkeys, geese,
or any other fowl to run at large within the corporate limits, except in
enclosed places on private property. (Neb. RS 16-235)99
§ 213-2.6. Removal of animal excrement. [Added 8-3-1999 by Ord.
No. 24-99]
A. No person owning or keeping any animal shall fail to prevent such
animal from defecating upon any property other than the premises of
the owner or keeper.
99.Editor's Note: Original §§ 6-206, Dangerous dogs and animals, 6-207, Impoundment
during proceedings, 6-208, Confinement, 6-209, Leashing, 6-210, Proof of insurance, and
6-211, Destruction of dangerous at-large animals, of the 1976 Code, added 12-2-1986 by
Ord. No. 17-86, as amended, which immediately followed this section, were repealed at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). See now Art. III of this
chapter.
§ 213-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-2.6
1:237
§ 213-2.7. Violations and penalties.100
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who violates the
prohibitions or provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an amount not to exceed
$500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of said
payment the offender shall stand committed to the County Jail until such
fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on which a
violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
B. It is a specific defense to the charge of violating this section that the
defecation occurred on private property with the express permission of
the owner or all tenants thereof. It is further a specific defense to a
charge of violating this section that the owner or keeper immediately
removed or cleaned up such deposit and disposed of it thereof by
depositing it in a toilet or receptacle ordinarily used for garbage and
covered by a lid or in an otherwise lawful and sanitary manner.
C. Every person convicted of a violation of this section shall pay at least a
minimum fine according to the following schedule: first conviction, $10;
second conviction, $25; third and each subsequent conviction, $50. The
record of the violator for two years prior to the date of the current
violation will be considered.
100. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 213-2.6 SEWARD CODE § 213-2.7
1:238
ARTICLE III
Exotic Animals; Animal Control
[Adopted 11-17-1992 by Ord. No. 26-92; amended in its entirety
8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-13]
§ 213-3.1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
following meanings respectively ascribed to them:
ANIMAL — Any living creature, domestic or wild.
ANIMAL SHELTER — Any premises designated by City administrative
authority for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals held under
authority of this article.
AT LARGE — Every animal shall be considered running at large when it
is physically off the property of the owner and not under the immediate
restraint of a competent person.
EXOTIC ANIMAL — Includes:
FOWL — Any two-legged, feathered, winged creature.
KENNEL — Any person engaged in the business of breeding, buying, selling
or boarding dogs, cats and/or other domestic animals.
LIVESTOCK — All cattle, swine, horses, mules, bison, sheep, goats and
other grazing animals.
OWNER — Any person, group of persons, association of persons,
partnership or corporation who or which shall own, keep or harbor any
animal or permit the same to habitually remain or be fed in or about such
owner's premises.
RESTRAINT — An animal is under restraint only when controlled by a leash
or when in the immediate company of a competent person and obedient
to that person's command or when on or within a vehicle being driven or
parked on the streets of the City.
WILD ANIMAL — Any live monkey or ape, raccoon, skunk, fox, opossum,
coyote, wolf, snake or other reptile, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any
other animal or any bird of prey which can normally be found in the wild
state.
Canines, felines and other animals not customarily domesticated in the
United States;
A.
B. Marsupials, primates, bears, and birds of prey;
Any species prohibited and/or regulated by the State of Nebraska by
statute; and
C.
D. Any mix or breed of any of the species mentioned above.
§ 213-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-3.2
1:239
§ 213-3.2. Permit required for certain animals; venomous snakes
prohibited; notice requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, own or harbor any fowl,
livestock, hoofed, exotic or wild animal within the City limits of the City
of Seward unless a permit has been obtained. This section shall not
apply to educational institutions, exhibitions sponsored by the Seward
County Agricultural Society or veterinary clinics.
B. Permits authorizing the keeping of fowl, livestock, hoofed, exotic or
wild animals within the City limits shall be issued by the City
Administrator in his sound discretion, with right of appeal to the City
Council. The following criteria shall be considered by the City
Administrator when issuing such permits:
(1) The applicant must comply with all City, state and federal statutes
regarding the animal in question.
(2) The applicant must provide proof that there are no objections from
property owners or residents living within 75 feet in all directions
from the property lines of the applicant. [Amended 5-15-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-13]
(3) The applicant must provide a description of the type of enclosure
for confinement of the animal, and the same must be suitable for
the type of animal and approved by the City Administrator.
(4) The applicant, after issuance of the permit, must continue to
comply with all City, state and federal statutes or the permit can be
revoked by the City Administrator, subject to right of appeal to the
City Council.
(5) The applicant must provide a certificate from a licensed
veterinarian verifying that the animal has no health problems that
could adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens
of the City of Seward.
C. No household or residence shall have more than three animals
requiring a permit. This subsection shall not apply to chickens or small
caged birds or aquatic or amphibious animals kept solely as pets.
[Amended 5-15-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-13]
D. A person who keeps or houses chickens on his or her property shall
comply with all of the following requirements: [Amended 5-15-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-13101]
(1) No more than 10 chickens may be kept on any one lot. Any chickens
under the age of 30 days are excluded from this number.
(2) The principal use of the property shall be a single-family dwelling.
101. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections D
and E as Subsections E and F, respectively.
§ 213-3.2 SEWARD CODE § 213-3.2
1:240
(3) No person shall keep any rooster.
(4) No person shall slaughter any chickens within the City limits.
(5) The chickens shall be provided with a covered enclosure. Such
covered enclosure (or coop) shall contain at least four square feet
of floor area per hen, and the fenced enclosure shall provide at
least 10 square feet of open area per hen. No covered enclosure
shall exceed 120 square feet of floor area.
(6) A person shall not keep chickens in any location on the property
other than in the rear yard. For purposes of this section, "rear yard"
means that portion of a lot enclosed by the property's rear lot line
and the side lot lines to the points where the side lot lines intersect
with an imaginary line established by the rear of the dwelling and
extending to the side lot lines.
(7) No covered enclosure or fenced enclosure shall be located closer
than 10 feet to any property line of an adjacent property.
(8) All enclosures for the keeping of chickens shall be so constructed
or repaired as to prevent rats, mice, or other rodents from being
harbored underneath, within, or within the walls of the enclosure.
A covered enclosure or fenced enclosure shall not be located closer
than 40 feet to any residential structure on another person's
property.
(9) All feed and other items associated with the keeping of chickens
that are likely to attract or to become infested with or infected by
rats, mice, or other rodents shall be protected so as to prevent rats,
mice, or other rodents from gaining access to or coming into
contact with them.
(10) All chickens and other items associated with the keeping of
chickens must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition so as not to
give off offensive odors which are a source of discomfort to persons
residing in the vicinity thereof.
(11) The owner of any chickens shall not allow offal, manure, or waste
material of such animal to accumulate or remain in the coop,
enclosures, and shelter areas in which such animal or chickens
reside or are confined in any manner which is conducive to the
breeding or attraction of flies, mosquitoes, or other noxious insects
or in any manner which endangers the public health or safety or
which creates an unhealthy environment.
(12) The owner of any chickens shall, in a sanitary manner, remove or
dispose of all offal, manure, and waste material accumulating from
such chickens at least once every seven days.
(13)No person keeping or harboring any chickens shall permit such
chickens to go loose or run at large. In the event that any chicken
§ 213-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-3.2
1:241
§ 213-3.3. Public nuisances prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to exercise proper care and
control of his animals to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance.
Excessive, continuous or untimely barking, molesting passersby, chasing
vehicles, habitually attacking other domestic animals, trespassing upon
private property, noxious or offensive odors emanating from their living
conditions or unsanitary living conditions shall be deemed a nuisance.
§ 213-3.4. Animals running at large prohibited.
It is unlawful for any animal to run at large within the City, except within the
confines of an approved dog park. Every animal shall be considered running
at large when it is physically off the property of the owner of the animal,
and not under immediate restraint of a competent person.
§ 213-3.5. Securing of vicious animals required; destruction by City.
found running at large is creating a hazard to the safety of others
or another person's property, such chicken shall be destroyed if it
cannot be confined or captured. The City shall not be required to
give notice to the owner of the chicken prior to its destruction.
(14) The maintenance or permitting of any of the foregoing conditions
on any such lot or parcel of ground is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance.
(15) Eggs produced by permitted chickens may be sold by the permit
holder.
E. No venomous snakes shall be permitted in the City of Seward.
F. Upon issuance of a permit authorized under this section, the permit
holder shall immediately post a notice provided by the City which states
"Animal(s) Requiring City Permit Located on the Premises." Such notice
shall be displayed in a conspicuous location visible to the public at the
front entrance of the house.
A. No person shall have, keep, harbor or allow to remain upon his
premises any vicious or notoriously cross animal or an animal that may
manifest a disposition to bite or attack any person without having the
same properly secured and muzzled.
B. Proof of the fact that the animal has bitten or attacked any person at
any place where a person is legally entitled to be is evidence that the
animal is vicious within the meaning of this section.
C. If, after conviction under this section, it appears that the animal is still
living, the County Judge may, in addition to any other penalties provided
for in this section, order the Chief of Police or his designee to forthwith
cause such animal to be destroyed, and for that purpose any such
§ 213-3.2 SEWARD CODE § 213-3.5
1:242
§ 213-3.6. Residences with over three pets deemed kennels.
§ 213-3.7. Violations and penalties.103
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
person in charge of such duty shall have the right to enter upon any
premises within the City.
A. Any residence which shall keep over three pets of the same species,
over the age of four months, shall be considered a kennel, and shall be
subject to all ordinances covering kennels and all zoning ordinances in
connection therewith.102
B. Subsection A shall not apply to small caged birds or aquatic or
amphibian animals kept solely as pets.
102. Editor's Note: See Ch. 410, Zoning and Subdivision. Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 213-3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-3.7
1:243

ARTICLE IV
Dangerous Dogs104
§ 213-4.1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — The entity authorized to enforce the
City's animal control laws and includes any local law enforcement agency
or other agency designated by the City to enforce the City's animal control
laws.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Any individual employed, appointed, or
authorized by an animal control authority for the purpose of aiding in the
enforcement of this article or any other law or ordinance relating to the
licensure of animals, control of animals, or seizure and impoundment of
animals and includes any state or local law enforcement officer or other
employee whose duties in whole or in part include assignments that involve
the seizure and impoundment of any animal.
DANGEROUS DOG —
A dog that, according to the records of an animal control authority:
(1) Has killed a human being;
Has inflicted injury on a human being that requires medical
treatment;
(2)
(3) Has killed a domestic animal without provocation; or
Has been previously determined to be a potentially dangerous dog
by an animal control authority, the owner has received notice from
an animal control authority or an animal control officer of such
determination, and the dog inflicts an injury on a human being that
does not require medical treatment, injures a domestic animal, or
threatens the safety of humans or domestic animals.
(4)
A.
Exceptions.
A dog shall not be defined as a dangerous dog under Subsection
A(2) of this definition, and the owner shall not be guilty under
§ 213-4.7, if the individual was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting
the dog at the time of the injury or has, in the past, been observed
or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog.
(1)
A dog shall not be defined as a dangerous dog under Subsection
A(4) of this definition, and the owner shall not be guilty under
§ 213-4.7, if the injury, damage, or threat was sustained by an
individual who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass as
defined in Neb. RS 20-203, 28-520, or 28-521, was committing
(2)
B.
104. Editor's Note: Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 213-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-4.1
1:245
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — A cat, a dog, or livestock. Livestock includes buffalo,
deer, antelope, fowl, and any other animal in any zoo, wildlife park, refuge,
wildlife area, or nature center intended to be on exhibit.
MEDICAL TREATMENT — Treatment administered by a physician or other
licensed health care professional that results in sutures or surgery or
treatment for one or more broken bones.
OWNER — Any person, firm, corporation, organization, political
subdivision, or department possessing, harboring, keeping, or having
control or custody of a dog.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG —
(Neb. RS 54-617)
§ 213-4.2. Actions required; costs; limitations on transport;
permanent relocation.
any other tort upon the property of the owner of the dog, was
tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog, or has, in the past, been
observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the
dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime.
A dog shall not be defined as a dangerous dog under Subsection A
of this definition if the dog is a police animal as defined in Neb. RS
28-1008
(3)
Any dog that, when unprovoked:
Inflicts an injury on a human being that does not require medical
treatment;
(1)
(2) Injures a domestic animal; or
Chases or approaches a person upon streets, sidewalks, or any
public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of
attack; or
(3)
A.
Any specific dog with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to
attack when unprovoked, to cause injury, or to threaten the safety of
humans or domestic animals.
B.
A. A dangerous dog that has been declared as such shall be spayed or
neutered and implanted with a microchip identification number by a
licensed veterinarian within 30 days after such declaration. The cost of
both procedures is the responsibility of the owner of the dangerous dog.
Written proof of both procedures and the microchip identification
number shall be provided to the animal control authority after the
procedures are completed.
B. No owner of a dangerous dog shall permit the dog to go beyond the
property of the owner unless the dog is restrained securely by a chain
or leash.
§ 213-4.1 SEWARD CODE § 213-4.2
1:246
§ 213-4.3. Confinement required; warning signs.
C. Except as provided in Subsection D of this section or for a reasonable
veterinary purpose, no owner of a dangerous dog shall transport such
dog or permit such dog to be transported to another county, city, or
village in this state.
D. An owner of a dangerous dog may transport such dog or permit such
dog to be transported to another county, city, or village in this state for
the purpose of permanent relocation of the owner if the owner has
obtained written permission prior to such relocation from the animal
control authority of the county, city, or village in which the owner
resides and from the county, city, or village in which the owner will
reside. Each animal control authority may grant such permission based
upon a reasonable evaluation of both the owner and the dog, including
if the owner has complied with the laws of this state and of the county,
city, or village in which he or she resides with regard to dangerous dogs
after the dog was declared dangerous. An animal control authority shall
not grant permission under this subsection if the county, city, or village
has an ordinance or resolution prohibiting the relocation of dangerous
dogs. After the permanent relocation, the animal control authority of
the county, city, or village in which the owner resides shall monitor the
owner and such dog for a period of at least 30 days, but not to exceed
90 days, to ensure the owner’s compliance with the laws of this state
and of such county, city, or village with regard to dangerous dogs.
Nothing in this subsection shall permit the rescindment of the
declaration of dangerous dog.
(Neb. RS 54-618)
A. No person, firm, partnership, limited-liability company, or corporation
shall own, keep, or harbor or allow to be in or on any premises occupied
by him, her, or it or under his, her, or its charge or control any
dangerous dog without such dog being confined so as to protect the
public from injury.
B. While unattended on the owner’s property, a dangerous dog shall be
securely confined, in a humane manner, indoors or in a securely
enclosed and locked pen or structure suitably designed to prevent the
entry of young children and to prevent the dog from escaping. The pen
or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top. If the pen or
structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides shall be
embedded into the ground at a depth of at least one foot. The pen or
structure shall also protect the dog from the elements. The pen or
structure shall be at least 10 feet from any property line of the owner.
The owner of a dangerous dog shall post warning signs on the property
where the dog is kept that are clearly visible from all areas of public
access and that inform persons that a dangerous dog is on the property.
Each warning sign shall be no less than 10 inches by 12 inches and shall
contain the words "warning" and "dangerous animal" in high-contrast
lettering at least three inches high on a black background.
§ 213-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-4.3
1:247
§ 213-4.4. Confiscation; liability for costs.
Any dangerous dog may be immediately confiscated by an animal control
officer if the owner is in violation of this article. The owner shall be
responsible for the reasonable costs incurred by the animal control
authority for the care of a dangerous dog confiscated by an animal control
officer or for the destruction of any dangerous dog if the action by the
animal control authority is pursuant to law and if the owner violated this
article. (Neb. RS 54-620)
§ 213-4.5. Disposal by court order.
In addition to any other penalty, a court may order the animal control
authority to dispose of a dangerous dog in an expeditious and humane
manner. (Neb. RS 54-621)
§ 213-4.6. Violations and penalties.
Except as provided in § 213-4.7, any owner who violates §§ 213-4.1 through
213-4.5 shall be guilty of a Class IV misdemeanor. (Neb. RS 54-622)
§ 213-4.7. Serious bodily injury; penalty; defense.
§ 213-4.8. Limitation on future dog ownership; repeat offenders.
(Neb. RS 54-619)
A. Any owner whose dangerous dog inflicts on a human being a serious
bodily injury as defined in Neb. RS 28-109 is guilty of a Class I
misdemeanor for the first offense and a Class IV felony for a second or
subsequent offense, whether or not the same dangerous dog is
involved.
B. It is a defense to a violation of Subsection A of this section that the
dangerous dog was, at the time of the infliction of the serious bodily
injury, in the custody of or under the direct control of a person other
than the owner or the owner’s immediate family.
(Neb. RS 54-622.01)
A. Any owner convicted of a violation of this article shall not own a
dangerous dog within 10 years after such conviction. Any owner
violating this subsection shall be guilty of a Class IIIA misdemeanor,
and the dog shall be treated as provided in Subsection B of this section.
B. Except as provided in § 213-4.7, if a dangerous dog of an owner with a
prior conviction under this article attacks or bites a human being or
domestic animal, the owner shall be guilty of a Class IIIA misdemeanor.
In addition, the dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by an
animal control authority, placed in quarantine for the proper length of
time, and thereafter destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner.
§ 213-4.3 SEWARD CODE § 213-4.8
1:248
(Neb. RS 54-623)
§ 213-4.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-4.8
1:249
Chapter 220
BINGO
§ 213-4.8 SEWARD CODE § 213-4.8
1:250
ARTICLE I
Rules and Regulations
§ 220-1.1. Permit required; operating restrictions. [Amended
9-19-1978 by Ord. No. 1141; 9-4-1984 by Ord. No. 27-84105]
Games of bingo shall be conducted within the municipality in accordance
with all laws of the municipality and the State of Nebraska if the game of
bingo is played for or involves profit or gain. Any association duly licensed
by the State of Nebraska to conduct the game of bingo shall obtain a written
permit from the governing body before commencing operation of said game.
Application shall be made to the Municipal Clerk for such permit. Said
application form shall contain such information and documents or copies
thereof as the governing body deems necessary to determine whether to
grant or reject the application. Upon the determination that granting the
application would be proper, the governing body shall immediately direct
the Municipal Clerk to issue the license to the applicant upon the payment
of a permit fee in an amount set from time to time by the City Council.
Said license shall be subject to revocation at any time for good cause. Any
person or persons so licensed shall be subject to any other fees, rules,
and regulations which the governing body may designate. All permits so
issued will automatically expire on September 30 following their issuance
or renewal. The fee for each renewal, unless otherwise prescribed, shall be
set from time to time by the City Council. Said fee shall be credited to the
General Fund. The permit shall be on display at any place where a game of
bingo is conducted.106
§ 220-1.2. Applicability of state law.
All applicable state statutes as they now exist or may hereafter be amended
shall be, and will constitute, a part of this article as if repeated verbatim
herein, and violation of any state statute will be a distinct and separate
offense against the municipality as well as against the state. Violators
thereof shall be separately prosecuted by the municipality for each of such
offenses, and if convicted shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Neb. RS 9-201 through 9-266)
105. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
106. Editor's Note: Original §§ 10-302, Tax, as amended, and 10-303, Quarterly report, of the
1976 Code, which immediately followed this section, were repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 220-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-1.2
1:251
Chapter 225
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical system — See Ch. 237.
Fair housing — See Ch. 244.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 252.
Sewers — See Ch. 325.
Utilities — See Ch. 370.
Water — See Ch. 390.
Zoning and subdivision — See Ch. 410.
§ 220-1.2 SEWARD CODE § 220-1.2
1:252
ARTICLE I
Building Inspector
§ 225-1.1. Power and authority.
The Building Inspector shall be the municipal official who shall have the
duty of enforcing all building and housing regulations of the municipality.
The Building Inspector shall inspect all buildings repaired, altered, built,
or moved in the municipality as often as necessary to ensure compliance
with all municipal ordinances. The Building Inspector shall have the power
and authority to order all work stopped on any construction, alteration,
or relocation which violates any building or housing regulations of the
municipality. The Building Inspector shall issue permission to continue
any construction, alteration, or relocation when the Building Inspector is
satisfied that no provision will be violated. If the stop order is an oral one,
it shall be followed by a written stop order within 24 hours. Such written
order may be served by any municipal police officer. (Neb. RS 16-308)
§ 225-1.2. Right of lawful entry.
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to inspect, as often as
necessary, any building which is being constructed, altered, repaired or
relocated to determine if the work being done therein is in conformity with
all municipal building and housing regulations.
§ 225-1.3. Appeal from decisions; variances.
In the event it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of this chapter
has been wrongly interpreted by the Building Inspector; that the time
allowed for compliance with any order of the Building Inspector is too short;
or that conditions peculiar to a particular building make it unreasonably
difficult to meet the literal requirements prescribed by this chapter and the
Building Inspector, the owner, his agent, or the occupant may file a notice of
appeal within a reasonable time after the decision or order of the Building
Inspector has been made. The Board of Adjustment shall hear all appeals
and shall have the power and authority, when appealed to, to modify the
decision or order of the Building Inspector. Such a decision shall be final,
subject only to any remedy which the aggrieved person may have at law or
equity. Applications for review shall be in writing and shall state the reasons
why the variance should be made. A variance to the interpretation of the
code shall be granted only where it is evident that reasonable safety and
sanitation are assured and may include conditions not generally specified
by this code to achieve that end. A copy of any variance so granted shall be
sent to both the Building Inspector and the applicant.
§ 225-1.4. Plans, maps and specifications.
A municipal official charged with the duty or responsibility of accepting
or approving plans, specifications, geological maps, and reports shall not
accept or approve plans, specifications, geological maps, or reports which
§ 225-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-1.4
1:253
have not been prepared in accordance with the Geologists Regulation Act
(Neb. RS 81-3501 et seq.).
§ 225-1.4 SEWARD CODE § 225-1.4
1:254
ARTICLE II
Building Permits
§ 225-2.1. Building permit required; application; fees.107
Any person desiring to commence or proceed to erect, construct, enlarge,
alter, repair, improve, remove, convert or demolish any building or dwelling,
or cause the same to be done, shall file with the Building Official an
application for a building permit. The application shall be in writing on a
form to be furnished by the Building Official for that purpose. Every such
application shall set forth the legal description of the land upon which the
construction, relocation or demolition is to take place, the nature of the
use or occupancy, the principal dimensions of the building or dwelling,
the estimated cost, the names of the owner, architect, and contractor, and
such other information as may be requested thereon. Applications shall
be accompanied by three sets of building plans. The Building Official will
be responsible for the issuing of permits, plan review, collecting of permit
fees, and ensuring that the repairing, remodeling or new construction is in
compliance with zoning district regulations, and all adopted City building
and housing codes. Fees payable upon a permit granted for the work listed
and above set forth shall be based on the estimated costs as listed in
Subsections A through H below:
A. Valuation schedule - residential.
(1) Residential construction fees shall be assessed in accordance with
the provisions of this section. The method used for the
determination of value or valuation for the purpose of assessing the
permit fee shall be made by the Building Inspector calculated from
the square-footage costs provided below. The value to be used in
computing the building permit and plan review fees shall be the
total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued.
The valuation will be set forth during the plan review, figured at no
less than the following:
(a) Per square foot of finished new construction: $112.65.
(b) Per square foot for finished basement: $56.30.
(c) Per square foot for unfinished basement: $15.
(d) Per square foot for garage, attached or detached: $44.63.
(e) Note: The square footage costs indicated above are from the
Building and Standards tabulation charts. These costs are
periodically updated, and will be kept current by the Building
and Inspection Department for establishing the valuation.
107. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-2.1
1:255
(2) Once the valuation of the building has been established, the fee will
be calculated from the Fee Schedule provided below in Subsection
D.
B. Valuation schedule - commercial. The commercial fee for each building
permit shall be determined by the valuation provided by the owner and/
or contractor on the building permit application. However, during the
plan review this valuation will be adjusted to a valuation of no less than
the square footage construction costs provided by the Building and
Standards tabulation charts. Once the valuation of the building has
been established, the fee will be calculated from the Fee Schedule
provided below. The determination of value or valuation for the purpose
of assessing the permit fee shall be made by the Building Inspector. The
value to be used in computing the building permit and plan review fees
shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is
issued.
C. Valuation schedule method - remodels, additions, and accessory
buildings.
(1) For all additional types of building permits, such as for remodel/
additions and other accessory-type construction, the fees shall be
determined by the valuation set forth by the owner and/or
contractor on the building permit application. However, during the
plan review this valuation will be adjusted to a valuation of no less
than the square footage construction costs provided by Building
and Standards tabulation charts. Once the valuation of the building
has been established, the fee will be calculated from the Fee
Schedule provided below.
(2) The determination of value or valuation for the purpose of
assessing the permit fee shall be made by the Building Inspector.
The value to be used in computing the building permit and plan
review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for
which the permit is issued.
D. Building permit fee schedule.
(1) Once the valuation of the building has been established, the
subsequent fee will be calculated according to the fee schedule
established from time to time by the City Council.108
(2) Additional costs associated with the residential permit fee are as
follows:
(a) The plan review fee is equal to 10% of the building permit.
(b) Energy fees are valued at $25 per dwelling.
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-2.1 SEWARD CODE § 225-2.1
1:256
(3) Additional costs associated with the commercial permit fee are as
follows:
(a) The plan review fee is equal to 25% of the building permit.
(b) Energy fees are valued at $0.01 per square foot of building
($25 minimum).
(4) The building permit fees provided by the City ordinances shall
apply and be controlling throughout the municipality and
throughout its zoning jurisdiction.
E. Accessory permit fees.
(1) Permits are also required on the following accessory items, and the
fees for each shall be set from time to time by the City Council:109
(a) Fences (regardless of valuation).
(b) Utility buildings (up to 200 square feet).
(c) Sign permits.
(d) Moving permits.
(e) Demolition permits.
(f) Re-roofing permits.
(2) Note: Buildings or structures over 200 square feet shall have the
permit fee calculated by valuation of construction of said structure.
F. Moving permit requirements. For the purposes of this section and
chapter, all houses and/or structures that are to be moved out of this
jurisdiction shall be treated as a demolition of a structure, and
therefore shall maintain the same fees and deposits as provided in
Subsection G of this section for the demolition of structures. All houses
and/or structures being moved into this jurisdiction shall be treated as a
new construction addition and meet the applicable code guidelines and
fees associated with this type of permit. (Refer to Article III for building
moving regulations.)
G. Demolition permit requirements.110
(1) For demolition of a structure, in addition to the permit fee
authorized in this section, a deposit in an amount set from time to
time by the City Council shall be paid by the applicant to defray
costs of services associated with the demolition of a structure as
listed below:
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
110. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-2.1
1:257
(a) Sewer and water lines must be abandoned at the main and
inspected before a demolition permit will be issued. The
applicant shall ensure that the water service is disconnected
from the water main, and that the sewer line is capped from
the main at the property line. The customer shall hire a Citylicensed
plumber or drainlayer for this purpose.
(b) Electric and gas companies must be contacted and services
must be disconnected before commencing any demolition
work.
(c) A qualified inspection agency shall make an inspection of the
structure to be razed to ensure that no asbestos or other
hazardous materials are present prior to demolition, with the
applicable report submitted to the Building and Inspection
Department.
(d) Barricades must be provided and maintained around the
location until the structure is completely demolished. Should
the demolition of the structure/s include the removal and filling
of a basement, and the job is not completed during daylight
hours, barricades shall be maintained until the hole is entirely
cleared of debris and completely filled and leveled, with clean
fill materials.
(e) If during the course of demolition any damage is done to City
sidewalks, alleys, streets or utilities, such damage shall be
repaired at the contractor's expense.
(f) Streets and alleys that might be barricaded during the actual
demolition will be cleared of debris and opened to normal
traffic when work is completed each workday.
(2) Upon verification from all City departments that the project is
completed, and has met with the above-listed requirements, and
there are no outstanding debts, liens, or judgements against said
property, the balance of the deposit, if any, will be refunded to the
consumer with an itemized statement of costs.
(Neb. RS 16-222, 16-233, 16-234)
H. Work exempt from permits. The following repairs and remodeling to
structures are exempt from obtaining permits and payment of any fees
therefor:
(1) The installation or replacement of storm doors and/or storm
windows.
(2) The installation or replacement of gutters.
(3) Painting, papering, floor covering and similar work.
§ 225-2.1 SEWARD CODE § 225-2.1
1:258
(4) Movable cases, counters and partitions not over five feet nine
inches high.
(5) Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R, Division 3,
occupancy in which the pool walls are entirely above the adjacent
grade.
(6) Residential handicap ramps.
I. Other inspections and fees shall be in an amount set from time to time
by the City Council for the following:111
(1) Inspections outside of normal business hours (8:00 p.m. to 5:00
p.m. week days).
(2) Re-inspection fees.
(3) Additional plan review (required by changes, alterations or
revisions).
(4) Use of outside consultant costs.
(5) Investigation fees; work without a permit: double permit fee.
(a) Whenever any work for which a permit is required by the
adopted codes of the City has been commenced without first
obtaining said permit, a investigative fee in addition to the
permit fee shall be collected, whether or not the permit is then
or subsequently issued. The minimum investigation fee shall be
equal to the amount of the permit fee required.
(b) Exception: No double-fee penalty set forth in this section shall
be imposed if:
[1] The work performed is due to an emergency situation
where a delay in performing the work may cause a risk to
life or health or will significantly increase the risk of
property damage, provided a permit is applied for within
48 hours of completion of the work, in which case no
penalty shall be imposed; or
[2] An applicant applies for a permit after the work has begun,
but before the work is observed and recorded by a City
inspector, in which case a 1 1/2 fee shall be imposed.
J. Fee refunds.
(1) The Building Official may authorize refunding of any fee paid
hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. The Building
Official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except upon
written application filed by the original permittee not later than
180 days after the date of fee payment.
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-2.1
1:259
§ 225-2.2. Permit void if work not carried out.
If the work for which a permit has been issued shall not have begun within
six months of the date thereof, or if the construction shall be discontinued
for a period of six months, the permit shall be considered void. Before any
work can be resumed, a new permit shall be obtained in the same manner
and form as the original permit.113
§ 225-2.3. Sidewalk construction.
On each building permit application, on the plot plan, sidewalks will be
drawn in before a permit is issued. Sidewalks will be required to be
constructed in all zoned districts within the City limits. The person signing
the building permit application will be the individual responsible for the
construction of the sidewalk, whether he be the property owner, contractor
or the subdivider. All sidewalks will be constructed as outlined by Chapter
340, Article II, Sidewalks, of the Seward Municipal Code.
§ 225-2.4. Duplicate to County Assessor.114
Whenever a building permit is issued for the erection, alteration or repair
of any building within the municipality's jurisdiction, and the improvement
is $2,500 or more, a duplicate of such permit shall be issued to the County
Assessor. (Neb. RS 18-1743)
§ 225-2.5. Sediment in public right-of-way or storm drainage
system; notice to remove.
(2) The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than
80% of the building permit fee when work authorized by said
permit has not been commenced. The plan review fee is not
refundable. Exception: If no plan review has been performed at the
time an application for refund is received, the Building Official may
authorize refunding of not more than 80% of the plan review.
K. Property maintenance inspector fees shall be set from time to time by
the City Council for the following:112
(1) Failure to meet first notice compliance deadline.
(2) Failure to meet second notice compliance deadline.
(Neb. RS 16-222, 16-233, 16-234)
A. Any person responsible for sediment deposited into or upon any street,
alley, sidewalk, public way, storm drainage system, or public ground as
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
113. Editor's Note: Original 9-203 of Ord. No. 2017-05, Building permit fees; application to
zoning jurisdiction, which immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). See § 225-2.1D(4).
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-2.1 SEWARD CODE § 225-2.5
1:260
a result of tracking, runoff or other erosion and sedimentation from a
building or development site shall remove the same within a reasonable
period of time as required by the City of Seward, Department of
Environmental Quality, or other agency. Whenever the person
responsible for sediment deposited into or upon any street, alley,
sidewalk, public way, storm drainage system, or public ground refuses
or neglects to remove the same, the City may elect to remove the
sediment and the expense of such removal shall be recoverable by the
City.
B. If the City of Seward, Department of Environmental Quality, or other
agency determines that the conditions described above constitute an
immediate nuisance and hazard to public safety, the City shall issue a
written notice to abate and remove such nuisance or hazard within 24
hours. If such person responsible shall have failed or refused to abate
and remove such nuisance at the expiration of 24 hours from delivery of
notice, the City may remove such nuisance and the expense of such
removal shall be recoverable by the City.
§ 225-2.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-2.5
1:261

ARTICLE III
Moving Of Buildings
§ 225-3.1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — A structure for business, residence or public use or for the
shelter of man or beast or for the storage or display of goods, wares and
merchandise for sale; or any erection connected with the temporary or
permanent use of man; any fixture or article of a chattel nature which
can be severed from the land after having been attached to it. The word
"building" shall be construed to include in its meaning parts of buildings.
STRUCTURE — Any production or piece of work artificially built up or
composed of parts joined together in some definite manner and not
necessarily affixed to the land although resting upon it and capable of being
moved from one place to another.
§ 225-3.2. Permit required; application; hearing; decision.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to move any building
or structure within the municipality or its zoning jurisdiction without a
written permit to do so. Applications for moving permits shall be filed
in writing with the administrative official, and shall disclose thereon the
following information: name of the applicant, present location of the
building or structure to be moved, legal description of the site to which it is
proposed to move said building or structure, name of owner of said building
or structure, name of the owner of the site to which it is proposed to move
said building or structure, name and address of the person the applicant
intends to hire or has employed to move said building or structure, the
date or dates on which it is proposed to move said building or structure,
and the route and streets upon which it is proposed to move said building
or structure, a list of alterations, changes, improvements or repairs said
applicant intends to make upon said building and structure, and such other
information as the Council may require. Upon filing such application, the
administrative official shall cause a notice to be published in one issue of a
legal newspaper printed and published in the City, giving public notice that
such application has been filed and that the same will be considered by the
Council at a time and place therein specified, which shall be not less than
seven days after the publication of said notice, nor more than 21 days after
the filing of said application. The publication fee for said notice shall be paid
by the applicant, and the amount thereof paid to the administrative official
with the filing of said application. At the time and place stated in said notice,
the Council shall consider said application, and the applicant shall be
required to appear and present satisfactory evidence that said building or
structure is not unsafe, unsound, hazardous, unsightly, dilapidated, vermininfested,
and does not constitute a fire hazard, or a public or private
nuisance. At said hearing, any applicant may be represented by legal
counsel, and any interested person or persons may appear in person or by
§ 225-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-3.2
1:263
legal counsel and be heard. The Council may grant or deny said application
as filed, or may grant said application on condition, in which event there
shall be endorsed upon the application and permit the following words:
"Granted on Condition That," followed by a statement of all terms and
conditions on which said application was granted. Moving permits issued
under this article shall be in writing signed by the administrative official and
shall state the duration of validity and the route over which such buildings
or structures may be moved.
§ 225-3.3. Fees and charges.115
Upon the approval of an application to move a building or structure, the
applicant shall at the time the moving permit is issued pay a license fee in
an amount set from time to time by the City Council, payable to the City,
and collected by the administrative official, and no other charge shall be
made or assessed against said applicant by the City; provided, however, in
the event it is necessary to disconnect, remove, lift, or shift any electrical
lines or appurtenances of any other utilities or instrumentalities of said City
to permit said building or structure to be moved, the applicant shall, in
addition to said license fee, pay the actual cost of repairs or replacement,
or in the event of any other damage to the City, the applicant will pay the
actual amount thereof.
§ 225-3.4. Bond.116
Before any building or structure may be moved on a moving permit issued
under this article, the holder thereof shall file with the administrative
official a good and sufficient bond in a sum set from time to time by the
City Council, with two or more personal sureties, or one corporate surety,
conditioned for the payment of any damages sustained by any person, and
also any damages sustained by the City, resulting from the moving of any
house, building or structure within the City. Any bond as specified in this
section may be sued upon for the recovery of any and all damages sustained
by any individual or corporation, and also any damages sustained by the
City, including amounts due the City under § 225-3.3 hereof, by reason of
the moving of any such building or structure.
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-3.2 SEWARD CODE § 225-3.4
1:264
ARTICLE IV
Barricades, Lights And Dumpsters
§ 225-4.1. Barricades and lights.
It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant, or lessee causing the construction,
demolition, or moving of any building or improvement within the
municipality to have during such work of all excavations, open basements,
building materials, and debris, protected by suitable guards or barricades
by day, and by warning lights at night. The failure, neglect, or refusal of
said persons to erect such guards shall constitute a violation of this section
and the municipal police or the Building Inspector shall stop all work until
guards are erected and maintained as required.
§ 225-4.2. Roll-off dumpsters.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person within the City to park on or permit
any roll-off dumpster to be on any City property or right-of-way without
first making application to the City and obtaining a written permit from
the City. The permit shall be issued by the Building and Inspection
Department, and shall list the name, address, and telephone number of
the owners of the dumpster and the name, address, and telephone
number of the person renting the dumpster. The permit shall state the
place where the dumpster will be located and the period of time the
dumpster will be located at the designated location. The fee schedule
for having a dumpster on City property or a City right-of-way shall be
set from time to time by the City Council. Variance from said fees may
be granted by the governing body upon a showing of undue hardship.117
B. The owner and renter of the dumpster shall be jointly and severally
liable for payment of the permit fee. All fees shall be paid in advance,
and in the event said dumpster is removed prior to the expiration date
on the permit, a pro-rata refund shall be made by the City. Any owner
and/or renter of a dumpster in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a citation and fine in the amount of $15 per day of
noncompliance.
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-4.2
1:265

ARTICLE V
Property Maintenance
§ 225-5.1. International Property Maintenance Code adopted by
reference.
Except as hereinafter provided by specific changes, the International
Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, is hereby adopted by reference.
One copy of this document is filed in the office of the Building Inspector and
the City Clerk's office of the City of Seward for use of and examination by
the public.
§ 225-5.2. Property Maintenance Code amendments.
The International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, is amended
and changed in the following respects:
A. Chapter 1, Scope and Administration; Section 101, General. In 101.1,
Title, insert: "City of Seward, Nebraska."
B. Section 111, Means of Appeal is repealed (see Article XIV).
C. Add:
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 301
GENERAL
Section 301.3.1 Whenever there has been damage to the
nonstructural building elements of a closed or vacated residence, see
Section 108.2, the owner of any such property is required to secure,
and keep secure, any such structure that is in noncompliance with this
code. Any such structure that has had its windows, skylights, and door
frames covered to secure the building due to damage of such windows,
skylights and door frames may only be allowed to cover the damaged
openings for period of 30 days after receiving the "Notice and Orders"
to correct from the Building Official. After such time, the owner shall
then be required to make permanent corrections to the openings. If
after such time the repairs are not corrected through the time frame
stated above, the Building Official is authorized to order the structure
to be corrected through any available public agency or by contract
or arrangement by private persons, and the costs thereof shall be
charged against such real estate upon which the structure is located,
and shall file a lien upon such real estate, and may be collected by any
other legal resource.
§ 225-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-5.2
1:267
Section 301.3.2 Whenever there has been damage to the
nonstructural building elements of a closed or vacated residence, see
Section 108.2, the owner of any such property is required to secure,
and keep secure, any such structure that is in noncompliance with this
code. The owner of such property is required to acquire a building
permit to correct violations, and comply with any "Notice and Orders"
that may have been issued, within six months of such notice and order.
Violations shall include but not be limited to: doors, windows, siding,
roofing, and building openings. If after such time the repairs are not
corrected within the time frame stated above, the Building Official is
authorized to order the structure to be corrected through any available
public agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons, and
the costs thereof shall be charged against such real estate upon which
the structure is located, and shall file a lien upon such real estate, and
may be collected by any other legal resource.
§ 225-5.2 SEWARD CODE § 225-5.2
1:268
ARTICLE VI
Building Code
§ 225-6.1. International Building Code and International
Residential Code adopted by reference; exceptions.118
In order to provide certain minimum standards, provisions, and
requirements for safe and stable design, methods of construction, and
uses of materials in buildings, and residential dwellings, hereafter erected,
constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, relocated, and converted, to
ensure that structures are safe, sanitary, and fit for occupation and use; and
the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy
and use and the demolition of such structures; certain documents, known
as the "International Building Code" and "International Residential Code"
(2012 Editions), recommended by the International Code Council, and
printed in book or pamphlet form, are hereby adopted, insofar as said
codes do not conflict with the statutes of the State of Nebraska, and
the City ordinances. One copy of the International Building Code and the
International Residential Code shall be on file at the office of the Municipal
Clerk and available for public inspection at any reasonable time. The
provisions of the International Building Code and International Residential
Code shall be controlling throughout the municipality and throughout its
zoning jurisdiction. (Neb. RS 18-132, 19-902, 19-922)
§ 225-6.2. International Building Code amendments.
The following sections of the International Building Code (2012 Edition) are
hereby revised:
A. Chapter 1, Scope and Administration.
(1) Section 101, General; Section 101.1. Insert: City of Seward (for
name of jurisdiction).
(2) Section 105, Permits; Section 105.2, Work exempt from permit.
Replace:
1. One-story detached accessory structures used as playhouses
and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120
square feet (11.15 m2).
2. Retaining walls which are implemented for landscape
purposes and are not over four feet (1,219 mm), measured
from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall.
3. Sidewalks, driveways and patio slabs.
4. Painting, papering, carpet and similar finish work.
5. Temporary motion-picture, television and theater stage sets
and scenery
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-6.2
1:269
§ 225-6.3. International Residential Code amendments.
The following sections of the International Residential Code (2012 Edition)
are hereby revised:
6. Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3
occupancy, as applicable in Section 101.2, and which are
installed entirely above ground.
7. Swings and other playground equipment accessory to oneand
two-family dwellings.
8. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall of Group R-3,
as applicable in Section 101.2, and Group U occupancies.
9. Movable cases, counters and partitions not over five feet nine
inches (1,753 mm) in height.
B. Chapter 16, Structural Design; Section 1612, Flood Loads; Section
1612.3, Establishment of flood hazard areas. Insert: City of Seward (for
name of jurisdiction) and 9-30-1993 (for date of issuance).
C. Chapter 34, Existing Buildings and Structures; Section 3412,
Compliance Alternatives; Section 3412.2, Applicability. Insert:
3-18-2003 (for effective date).
A. Chapter 1, Scope and Administration.
(1) Section R101, General; Section R101.1. Insert: City of Seward (for
name of jurisdiction).
(2) Section R105, Permits; Section R105.2, Work exempt from permits.
Replace:
Building:
1. One-story detached accessory structures used as playhouses
and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120
square feet (11.15 m2).
2. Retaining walls which are implemented for landscape
purposes and are not over four feet (1,219 mm), measured
from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall.
3. Sidewalks, driveways and patio slabs.
4. Painting, papering, carpet and similar finish work.
5. Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3
occupancy, as applicable in Section 101.2, and which are
installed entirely above ground.
6. Swings and other playground equipment accessory to one- and
two-family dwellings.
7. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall.
B. Chapter 2, Definitions. Add the following definition:
§ 225-6.2 SEWARD CODE § 225-6.3
1:270
SLEEPING ROOM. Any room in the house that has a built-in closet
and typically could be used as a bedroom.
C. Chapter 3, Building Planning.
(1) Section R301, Design Criteria; Table R301.2(1). Insert: Design
Criteria into Table R301.2 as follows:
1. Ground snow for area load: 30 lb.
2. Wind speed for area: 90 mph at three-second gust (20 to 25
sf1).
3. Seismic Design Category: Zone B.
4. Weathering: severe.
5. Frost line depth: 36 inches.
6. Termite: moderate to heavy.
7. Winter design temp: apd IRP -2.
8. No.
9. Flood hazards: 1993 City of Seward FEMA Rate Map.
10. One-hundred-year freezing index: 1,500 or less.
11. Annual freezing index: 51.3.
(2) Section R302.2.2. Amend: Change "one-hour separation' to "twohour
separation."
(3) Section R302.5.1. Delete: Requirement for self-closing hinges or
device on the door between house and garage.
(4) Section R303.4. Delete: Blower door testing from IRC.
(5) Section R308.4.5. Delete: Item 3.
(6) Section R309.5. Delete: Requirements for fire sprinklers in oneand
two-family garages.
D. Chapter 4, Foundations; Section R403, Footings; Section R403.1. Add:
Exception: Buildings structures under 200 square feet in size may use
slab-on-ground with integral thickened edge footings for foundations.
All buildings or structures over 200 square feet in size shall require
frost-depth footings.
E. Chapter 5, Floors; Section R501.3. Replace:
R501.3 Fire protection of floors.
Once the basement reaches a finished condition, floor assemblies, not
required elsewhere in this code to be fire-resistance rated, shall be
provided with a 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum membrane wallboard, 5/
8-inch (16 mm) wood structural panel membrane, or equivalent on the
underside of the framing member.
§ 225-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-6.3
1:271
F. Chapter 11, Energy Efficiency.
(1) Section N1101, General; Section N1101.16. Delete: Requirement
for posting res-check near electrical panel.
(2) Section N1102.2.4. Delete: Requirement of weather stripping
around the lid of the attic access.
(3) Section N1102.4.1.2. Delete: Requirement for blower door testing.
(4) Section N1103.2.2. Delete: Procedures for duct-leakage test.
(5) Section N1103.2.3. Delete: Removes requirement to seal cold air
returns in stud cavity.
(6) Section N1103.4.2. Delete: Item 3 - Requirement for insulation of
water pipe from water heater to kitchen.
G. Chapter 29, Water supply and distribution; Section P2904.1.1. Delete:
Requirements for fire sprinklers in one- and two-family dwellings.
Note: Whenever a residential dwelling unit fire sprinkler system is
provided and installed, the design and installation of the residential
fire sprinkler system shall be in accordance with NFPA 13D or Section
2904, which shall be considered equivalent to NFPA 13D.
§ 225-6.3 SEWARD CODE § 225-6.3
1:272
ARTICLE VII
Housing Code
§ 225-7.1. Uniform Housing Code adopted by reference.119
To provide certain minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for
safe and stable design, model of construction, and uses of materials in
houses hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired,
relocated, and converted, the Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition,
published by the International Conference of Building Officials, and printed
in book or pamphlet form, is hereby adopted and is hereby incorporated by
reference in the City ordinances, as though printed in full herein, insofar
as said code does not conflict with the statutes of the State of Nebraska
and the City ordinances. One copy of the Uniform Housing Code shall
be on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk and is available for public
inspection at any reasonable time. The provisions of the Housing Code
shall be controlling throughout the municipality and throughout its zoning
jurisdiction. Whenever any of the provisions of said Housing Code come into
conflict with any of the provisions of this article, the provision contained
therein shall control. (Neb. RS 18-132, 19-901, 19-922)
§ 225-7.2. Housing Enforcement Official.
§ 225-7.3. Board of Housing Appeals.
A. Established. The Office of Housing Enforcing Official is hereby created.
The Building Official shall be appointed as Housing Enforcement
Official by the Mayor subject to confirmation of the Council. His
appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory
service. He shall not be removed from office except for cause after full
opportunity has been given him to be heard on specific charges.
B. Duties. It shall be the duty of the Housing Enforcing Official to enforce
all laws and provisions specified in the Uniform Housing Code adopted
by this article.
C. Right of entry. The Housing Enforcement Official, in the discharge of his
official duties, and upon proper identification, shall have authority to
enter any building, structure, or premises at any reasonable hour.
A. There is hereby created a Board of Housing Appeals, which shall consist
of five members appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation of the
Council. One member shall be appointed to serve one year, two
members to serve two years, and two members to serve three years.
B. This Board shall act by majority vote of members present. Said Board
shall have the power and be required to hold public hearings in
deciding appeals where it is alleged there is an error in law or fact in
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-7.3
1:273
any order or decision of the Housing Enforcement Official in the
enforcement of this article.
§ 225-7.3 SEWARD CODE § 225-7.3
1:274
ARTICLE VIII
Plumbing Code
§ 225-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-7.3
1:275

PART 1
Licensing Requirements
§ 225-8.1. License required.120
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the plumbing business
as a master or contracting plumber in the City and the two-mile zoning
jurisdiction without having first secured a license to do so from the Building
and Inspection Department. For the purposes of this chapter, the areas
within the City and within two-mile jurisdiction of the City shall be
collectively referred to as the "jurisdiction of the City."
§ 225-8.2. Application for license.121
Each applicant for a license required by § 225-8.1 shall make application
to the Building and Inspection Department on blank forms prepared and
furnished by such department and indicating thereon whether the
application is for a master plumber or a journeyman plumber license.
§ 225-8.3. Examination required.
§ 225-8.4. Plumber's license fee; issuance of license; term.124
At the time of approval by the Building Official and the payment of a license
fee in an amount set from time to time by the City Council for a master
plumber, journeyman plumber, or apprentice plumber, the Building Official
A. As a member of the International Code Council, Inc., all examination
and testing examinations will no longer be administered by this
jurisdiction. Each applicant for a license required by the Building and
Inspection Department shall provide proof of an associated passed
exam given through the procedures set forth by the International Code
Council, Inc. All exam and testing information can be located on the
internet at iccsafe.org, under the contractor's testing section.122
B. After completion of the exam, each applicant for a license required by
the Building and Inspection Department shall appear before the
Building and Inspection Department, and submit proof of passing
examination and testing of his/her education and competency as may be
required by such department.123
C. Metropolitan licensee. The holder of a valid plumbing license issued by
a metropolitan city in the State of Nebraska will be accepted in the City
of Seward's jurisdiction without the examination requirements listed
previously in this section.
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
123. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-8.4
1:277
shall issue the applicable license to do plumbing work in the City, which
shall be effective and valid through December 31 of each calendar year.
§ 225-8.5. Certificate of insurance required for master license.
Prior to receiving a license under § 225-8.4, an applicant who has
successfully passed the master's examination shall provide a certificate of
insurance which provides combined coverage for bodily injury and property
damage in a minimum amount of $300,000 and shall strictly comply with
this code and any other ordinances of the City relating to the installation,
alteration or repair of any plumbing system within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the City.
§ 225-8.6. Sewer layer's license; fee; term.125
At the time of approval by the Building Official, and the payment of a license
fee in an amount set from time to time by the City Council, the Building
Official shall issue a license to do sewer laying work in the City, which shall
be effective and valid through December 31 of each calendar year.
§ 225-8.7. Appeal of denial of license.
Any person who has been denied a license under the provisions of this
article may, within a period of 10 days, appeal the decision of the Building
Official to the City Council.
§ 225-8.8. Retired master's license.
A. A licensed master plumber who wishes to fully retire from the plumbing
trade may apply to the Building Official for a retired master plumber's
license. Upon such application and payment of renewal fees ordinarily
applicable to a master plumber's license, the Building Official may
grant such person a retired master plumber's license. The holder of a
retired master plumber's license shall not engage in any plumbing
activities for which a master's license is required under this code.
Nothing shall prevent the holder of a retired master plumber's license
from acting in the capacity of a journeyman under the requirements of
this article.
B. The insurance requirements of § 225-8.5 shall not be required as
prerequisite for the issuance, maintenance, or renewal of the retired
master plumber's license.
C. The holder of a retired master plumber's license may make application
to the Building Official for a reactivation of his/her status as a master
plumber. The Building Official may issue such master's license upon
compliance with the following:126
125. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-8.4 SEWARD CODE § 225-8.8
1:278
§ 225-8.9. Temporary license.
In the case of the death of the holder of a valid master's license, the
Building Official may issue a temporary master license to the company or
corporation at which such master plumber was employed, if such company
or corporation has in its employ an individual with a valid Seward
journeyman's license. Such license shall be valid for a period of not more
than six months and shall not be extended to another member of the firm or
corporation during such grace period. Such temporary license shall be void
if the company or corporation to which the license is assigned fails to keep
in its employ an individual with a valid Seward journeyman's license.
§ 225-8.10. Master plumber required for contract plumbing work.
Only a licensed master plumber shall be allowed to contract for plumbing
work in the jurisdiction of the City. At least one person of the firm or
corporation wishing to contract for plumbing work in the jurisdiction of the
City shall be a licensed master plumber. Licensed journeyman plumbers
in the employ of a licensed master plumber shall be allowed to work
unattended on jobs and may supervise, not to exceed three apprentices.
§ 225-8.11. License term; licenses not assignable.
Master and journeyman plumbing licenses under the provisions of this Part
1 shall be effective and valid through December 31 of each calendar year
and shall not be assignable.
§ 225-8.12. License renewal; fee.127
Before the expiration of any license issued from or by the Building and
Inspection Department, the holder may, upon payment of a renewal fee
in an amount set from time to time by the City Council for a master
plumber, journeyman plumber or apprentice plumber, make application to
the Building and Inspection Department for renewal of his/her license.
Failure to make application and pay the renewal fee for renewal of a license
before the expiration date thereof subjects the applicant to pay the renewal
fee plus an additional late fee in an amount set from time to time by the
City Council, up to and including 90 days from such expiration date. If the
application is filed and the fees are paid in accordance with the above, the
Building Official shall issue a renewal of such license without examination
unless there are revocation or suspension proceedings in progress against
such individual. If the holder of a license fails to make application for
renewal of his/her license within 90 days from the expiration date, he or she
(1) Payment of the required fees applicable to the renewal of the
master's license.
(2) The filing of a certificate of insurance under the provisions of this
article.
127. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-8.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-8.12
1:279
shall lose all rights of his/her license and proceed in the same manner as if
he or she had never held a license.
§ 225-8.13. Revocation or suspension of license for noncompliance.
In addition to any penalty imposed for a violation of this article, the Building
Official may, at any time, revoke or suspend the license of any plumber who
neglects to carry out the provisions of this article or refuses to be governed
by such provisions in the prosecution of his/her work.
§ 225-8.14. Revocation of license upon court conviction.
The Building Official shall have the power to revoke, with just cause, any
license issued under this article. A license shall be revoked immediately by
the Building Official upon the conviction of the holder thereof in a court of
competent jurisdiction for the violation of any laws of the state, this code
or ordinances of the City relative to the installation, repair, cleaning, or
alteration in or to any plumbing system.
§ 225-8.15. Grounds for revocation.
A license issued pursuant to this article shall be revoked by the Building
Official when he/she finds that the holder is guilty of one or more of the
following:
§ 225-8.16. Procedure for violation notification.
In cases involving violations of the provisions of this article or any other law
or ordinance of the City of Seward relating to contractor licensing or permit
requirements, the following notification procedure shall be implemented by
the Building Official prior to actual revocation of a license:
A. Fraudulent use of his/her license;
B. Fraud or misrepresentation in securing the licenses granted pursuant
to the building codes of the City;128
C. Refusal to perform his/her work to the requirements of the law;
D. Such other breaches of duty by the holder of the license as the Building
Official may find which cause an unsafe or unsanitary condition,
contrary to the intent and purpose of this article.
A. For the first violation of this article, a written notification shall be sent
by certified mail to the licensee informing him/her of the violation and
future recourse by the City.
B. The second violation of this article shall cause the Building Official to
suspend the license for a period of one month and notify the licensee, by
certified mail, of the City procedures.
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-8.12 SEWARD CODE § 225-8.16
1:280
§ 225-8.17. Notice of revocation or suspension; hearing.
In all cases involving revocation or suspension of a license under this
article, at least 15 days' notice of the contemplated revocation or
suspension shall be served upon the licensee, and such notice shall indicate
the time and place of the hearing, the general grounds of the contemplated
action, and shall advise the holder of his/her right to appear at the hearing
in person or by counsel for the purpose of presenting his/her defense. In
each case, the licensee shall not continue to perform the duties associated
with the privilege of the license until the termination of the proceedings.
This provision shall be waived only if a court of competent jurisdiction
issues a temporary injunction against the City in such proceedings.
§ 225-8.18. Conduct and record of hearing.
The Building Official shall make a complete record of the case involving any
revocation or suspension of a license under this article and shall keep a
written record of the testimony produced at the hearing held pursuant to
§ 225-8.17. He/She may request legal advice from the City Law Department
and adopt such procedure for the decorum and the dispatch of business of
such hearings as he/she may regard advisable.
§ 225-8.19. Action of Building Official; appeals.
The decision of the Building Official, at a hearing on the revocation or
suspension of a license under this article, shall be final. In the case of
a suspension of a license, the licensee's time in grade for the particular
license shall be suspended for the period of suspension, and shall begin
accruing again at the end of the suspension. An adverse decision by the
Building Official may be appealed to the City Council by filing with the Clerk
within 15 days from such decision a written notice of the intention to appeal
and request a hearing before the City Council. The City Council, within 30
days of the filing of such written notice, shall grant a hearing to the party
appealing. The revocation or suspension of a license shall not entitle the
holder to a refund of any part of the fee which he/she may have paid.
C. The third violation of this article shall cause the Building Official to
revoke the license for a period of not less than six months and not to
exceed one year. The Building Official shall present his/her case file to
the City Council at the next regularly scheduled meeting for enactment
of temporary revocation proceedings.
D. The fourth violation of this article shall cause the Building Official to
permanently revoke the license. The Building Official shall present his/
her case file to the City Council at the next regularly scheduled meeting
for permanent revocation.
§ 225-8.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-8.20
1:281
§ 225-8.20. Special license for one job only.129
Whenever the Building Official deems it advisable, he/she may, at his/
her discretion, issue a special master plumbing license to any plumbing
contractor who is not otherwise licensed by the City to do plumbing work,
but who can provide proof of competency as a licensed master contractor
in another city's jurisdiction. The special license, so issued, shall allow the
licensee to do plumbing work on the building for which it is issued and no
other. The fee for such special license shall set from time to time by the City
Council, and such fees shall be paid to the City Building Official before the
special license is issued. A certificate of insurance which provides combined
coverage for bodily injury and property damage in a minimum amount of
$300,000 shall be provided to the Building and Inspection Department prior
to the issuance of a special license. Upon the completion of the work for
which the special license was issued, such license shall expire and become
null and void.
§ 225-8.21. Possession of license; master plumber to make
application.
No person licensed under this chapter shall do any plumbing work within
the City and the two-mile zoning jurisdiction without having in his/her
possession a plumbing permit issued by the City pursuant to this article
containing the name of the master plumber or firm authorized to do the
work. Permits associated with this article shall be applied for by the master
plumber. When such permit has been approved, it shall be signed and paid
for by the master plumber associated with the business, firm, or corporation
which has been approved through other provisions of this Part 1.
§ 225-8.22. Work done by person in his/her own residence.
No license required under this article shall be required of any individual
doing installation or repair of the plumbing systems in the residence in
which he/she lives; provided that such installation is done in conformity
with this code and any other ordinances of the City. In all cases, the rules
and regulations of this article shall be complied with and such individual
shall notify the City of such work proposed, request inspection thereof
and pay a permit fee to cover the cost of the inspection. Furthermore,
this section shall only apply to those installations required for remodeling,
additions and repairs. No individual shall be allowed to perform any
plumbing work on new construction without first having passed the
required examination and having provided the necessary insurance
required by this article, and having been issued a license to do such work.
§ 225-8.23. Effect on firms or corporations.
A master's license issued to an individual shall authorize a company or
corporation to engage in such business or occupation during the period
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-8.20 SEWARD CODE § 225-8.23
1:282
of time that the licensee maintains his connection with such company or
corporation. A license applied under the requirements of this article shall be
valid and in effect for one company, firm, or corporation as an active license,
and shall not be assignable to any other company, firm, or corporation.
§ 225-8.23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-8.23
1:283

PART 2
Permits
§ 225-8.24. Applicability.
The provisions of this Part 2 shall not apply to any federal, state, county or
municipal government or any subdivision thereof.
§ 225-8.25. Issued to holders of license.
No permit for any work covered by the provisions of this article shall be
issued to other than the holder of a master plumbing license, except for the
provisions contained in § 225-8.9 or 225-8.20.
§ 225-8.26. Permit for connection to public water/sanitary sewer.
Before any water, sewer or fire connection is made to the public main, a
permit shall be applied for and approved by the Building Official or his/her
designee.
§ 225-8.27. Connection fees.
Before any permit may be issued allowing connection to be made to the
City's water or sanitary sewer system or allowing excavation to be made in
streets, alleys, or public grounds for the purpose of water, fire or sanitary
sewer connection in the City, or in the unincorporated area two miles
beyond and adjacent to the corporate boundaries, the contractor or owner
so to be connected or excavated, or his/her agent, shall pay to the City the
appropriate connection fee.
§ 225-8.28. Approval of private building sewer.130
A. When no public sewer, intended to serve any lot or premises, is
available in any thoroughfare or right-of-way abutting such lot or
premises, drainage piping from any building or work shall be in
connection to an approved private sewer disposal system as approved
by Seward County and installed according to the rules and regulations
of the State of Nebraska Department of Health. Permits for the
installation of a private sewage disposal system shall be obtained from
the office of the Seward County Zoning Authority located at the Seward
County Courthouse.
B. The public sewer may be considered as not being available when such
public sewer is located more than 100 feet (30.5 meters) from the
property line.
130. Editor's Note: See also, Ch. 325, Sewers.
§ 225-8.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-8.28
1:285

PART 3
Plumbing Inspector
§ 225-8.29. Office created; scope of authority.
There is hereby created and established the Office of the Plumbing
Inspector. He shall act under the direction of the Plumbing Board and
shall have supervision of all plumbing and drainlaying in the City and shall
perform such duties as are hereinafter prescribed. The Plumbing Inspector
shall have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any building in the
City for performance of his duties. The Plumbing Inspector shall review the
suitability of alternate materials for use and types of installation to the code
and may grant a variance form the strict application to the code if in his
determination an unnecessary hardship exists and the public health, safety
and welfare of the City of Seward are maintained. The Plumbing Inspector
shall have such assistants as the Council may provide; and when appointed
by the Council, such assistants shall have the same powers and duties as
the Plumbing Inspector. The Plumbing Inspector shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. The Water/Wastewater
Superintendent may be appointed Plumbing Inspector at the discretion of
the Mayor and Council. When the Water/Wastewater Superintendent serves
as Plumbing Inspector, he shall not receive any additional compensation for
his services as such Plumbing Inspector.
§ 225-8.30. Duties.
A. It shall be the duty of the Plumbing Inspector to investigate all cases
reported to or referred to him of the use of imperfect material or
workmanship on any job of plumbing work or the violation of the
provisions of this article by a plumber, builder, or owner; to stop such
work; to order same removed and replaced in a proper and
workmanlike manner to conform to the spirit and intent of this article;
and he may further request the Attorney to file complaint against any
person for violation of any of the provisions of this article, and it shall be
the duty of the Attorney to prosecute the same without unnecessary
delay.
B. The Plumbing Inspector shall make inspection of old plumbing work at
the request of the agent, owner, or occupant of any building or premises
where said plumbing work is located. In order to ascertain whether or
not the plumbing in said building or premises is in a sanitary condition,
the Plumbing Inspector shall have the right and authority to enter any
building or upon any premises at all reasonable hours to ascertain if the
provisions of this article or any ordinance relating to plumbing have
been or are being violated or being complied with. Where he has reason
to believe that defective or unsanitary plumbing exists, and whenever
defective or unsanitary plumbing is found, it shall be the duty of the
Plumbing Inspector to notify the agent or owner of the premises on
which the same is found to forthwith cause such plumbing to be
changed and to conform with the terms and requirements of the
§ 225-8.29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-8.30
1:287
§ 225-8.31. Private business prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the Plumbing Inspector to engage in the business of
plumbing or to perform any work as a plumber in the City during the term
of office as Plumbing Inspector.
Municipal Code, or to be changed and made sanitary in such other
manner as said Plumbing Inspector may authorize and direct. Such
owner or agent is hereby required, within 10 days after receiving such
notification, to comply therewith; or failing or neglecting to do so, he
shall be considered as maintaining unsanitary plumbing and violating
the requirement hereof; and it shall be the duty of said Plumbing
Inspector to make complaint against such owner or agent and cause
him to be prosecuted.
§ 225-8.30 SEWARD CODE § 225-8.31
1:288
PART 4
Adoption of International Code
§ 225-8.32. Plumbing Code adopted.131
The International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, published by the
International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted by reference and made
part of this article as though set out in full herein; provided that whenever
any provisions of the International Plumbing Code shall conflict with the
provisions of the City Code or any other City ordinance, the provisions of the
City Code or such City ordinance shall govern. One copy of the Plumbing
Code shall be on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk and available for
public inspection at any reasonable time. The provisions of the Plumbing
Code shall be controlling throughout the municipality and throughout its
zoning jurisdiction.
§ 225-8.33. Plumbing Code amendments.
The International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, is amended and changed in
the following respects:
A. Chapter 1, Scope and Administration.
(1) Section 101, General; 101.1, Title. Insert: "City of Seward,
Nebraska."
(2) Section 106, Permits.
(a) 106.6.2, Fee Schedule. Fees for the following shall be set from
time to time by the City Council.132
Base permit
Residential package (includes two baths, kitchen, laundry)
Additional bath unit
Drinking unit (RO)
Water conditioning unit
Water heater (replacement)
Hot water heat system
Garbage disposal
Water closet
Sinks - kitchen, laundry or bar
Lavatories
Tub or shower
Lawn sprinklers
131. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
132. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-8.32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-8.33
1:289
Commercial fees to remain:
$0 to $500
$500.01 to $5,000
$5,000.01 to $10,000
$10,000.01 to $50,000
$50,000.01 to $100,000
Over $100,000
(b) Section 106.6.3, Fee refunds:
[1] #2: Insert 80%.
[2] #3: Insert 80%.
(3) Section 107, Inspections and Testing. Add to Section 107.4:
Exceptions. In cases where it would be impractical to provide the
aforementioned water or air tests, or for minor installations and
repairs, the administrative authority, at its discretion, may make
such inspections as it deems advisable in order to assure itself that
the work has been performed in accordance with the intent of this
code. The administrative authority may waive the requirement for
any water or air test; however, it shall be contractor's responsibility
to assure that all systems installed are free from any leakage.
(4) Section 108, Violations.
(a) Section 108.4.
[1] Violations. Insert "misdemeanor" for specific offense.
[2] Penalties.
[a] Insert: $500 for amount.
[b] Insert: "six months" for number of days.
(b) Section 108.5, Stop work orders. Insert: $100 for "not less
than" amount; and $500 for "or more than" amount.
(5) Section 109, Means of Appeal, is repealed (see Article XIV).
B. Chapter 3, General Regulations; Section 305, Protection of Pipes and
Plumbing System Components; Section 305.4.1, Sewer depth: (See
Seward County requirements for private sewage disposal.)
C. Chapter 6, Water Supply and Distribution; Section 608, Protection of
Potable Water Supply; Section 608.6, Cross-connection control.
Replace: Cross-connection control shall be provided per Chapter 390,
Water, Article II, Backflow and Cross-Connections, of the Seward
Municipal Code.
§ 225-8.33 SEWARD CODE § 225-8.33
1:290
D. Chapter 7, Sanitary Drainage; Section 710, Drainage System Sizing.
Add:
Section 710.3 Size of drainage piping
The minimum size of the main horizontal drainage pipe shall be four
inches, and additional, in the case of vertical drainage pipes, in
accordance with their length.
E. Chapter 9, Vents; Section 903, Vent Terminals; Section 903.1, Roof
extension. Insert: 12 inches.
§ 225-8.33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-8.33
1:291

PART 5
Fuel Gas Code
§ 225-8.34. Fuel Gas Code adopted.133
The International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, published by the
International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted by reference and made
part of this article as though set out in full herein; provided that whenever
any provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code shall conflict with the
provisions of the City Code or any other City ordinance, the provisions of
the City Code or such City ordinance shall govern. One copy of the Fuel
Gas Code shall be on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk and available
for public inspection at any reasonable time. The provisions of the Fuel Gas
Code shall be controlling throughout the municipality and throughout its
zoning jurisdiction.
§ 225-8.35. Fuel Gas Code amendments.
The International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, is amended and changed in
the following respects:
CHAPTER 1
SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
A. Section 101, General; Section 101.1, Title. Insert: "City of Seward."
B. Section 106, Permits.
(1) Section 106.6.2, Fees. Insert: See Plumbing and Mechanical Fee
Schedules.
(2) Section 106.6.3, Fee refunds: Delete.
C. Section 108, Violations.
(1) Section 108.4, Violation penalties.
(a) Violations: Insert "misdemeanor" for specific offense.
(b) Penalties: insert $500 for amount; insert "six months" for
number of days.
(2) 108.5, Stop-work orders: Insert $100 for "not less than" amount;
and $500 for "or more than" amount.
D. Section 109, Means of Appeal, is repealed (see Article XIV).
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-8.34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-8.35
1:293

PART 6
Drainlayers
§ 225-8.36. License required.134
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of installing
water or sanitary sewer service leading to a building from the public water
main or public sewer without first having secured a license to do so from
the Building and Inspection Department.
§ 225-8.37. Application for license.135
Each applicant for a license required by § 225-8.36 shall make application
to the Building and Inspection Department on blank forms prepared and
furnished by such department and indicating thereon that the application is
for a drainlayer's license.
§ 225-8.38. Examination required.
§ 225-8.39. License fee.138
When an applicant for a sewer layer's license passes the examination and
tests required to the satisfaction of the City, he/she shall pay a license fee in
an amount set from time to time by the City Council.
A. As a member of the International Code Council, Inc., all examination
and testing examinations will no longer be administered by this
jurisdiction. Each applicant for a license required by the Building and
Inspection Department shall provide proof of an associated passed
exam given through the procedures set forth by the International Code
Council, Inc. All exam and testing information can be located on the
internet at iccsafe.org, under the contractor's testing section.136
B. After completion of the exam, each applicant for a license required by
the Building and Inspection Department shall appear before the
Building and Inspection Department, upon notice, and submit proof of
passing examination and testing of his/her education and competency
as may be required by such department.137
C. Metropolitan licensee. The holder of a valid drainlayer's license issued
by a metropolitan city in the State of Nebraska will be accepted in the
City of Seward's jurisdiction without the examination requirements
listed previously in this section.
134. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
135. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
136. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
137. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
138. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-8.36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-8.40
1:295
§ 225-8.40. Certificate of insurance required.
Prior to receiving a license under the preceding section, an applicant who
has successfully passed the sewer layer's examination shall provide a
certificate of insurance which provides combined coverage for bodily injury
and property damage in a minimum amount of $300,000, and shall strictly
comply with this code and any other ordinances of the City relating to
the installation, alteration or repair of any water or sanitary sewer service
system leading to a building from the public water main or public sewer
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City.
§ 225-8.41. License issuance; term.139
At the time of approval by the Building Official and the payment of a license
fee as set from time to time by the City Council, the Building Official shall
issue a license to do sewer laying work in the City, which shall be effective
and valid through December 31 of each calendar year.
§ 225-8.42. License renewal; fee.140
Before the expiration of any license issued from or by the Building and
Inspection Department, the holder may, upon payment of a renewal fee in
an amount set from time to time by the City Council, make application to the
Building and Inspection Department for renewal of his/her license. Failure
to make application and pay the renewal fee for renewal of a license before
the expiration date thereof subjects the applicant to pay the renewal fee
plus an additional late fee in an amount set from time to time by the City
Council for each month or partial month since the expiration date of the
license, up to and including three months from such expiration date. If the
application is filed and the fees are paid in accordance with the above, the
Building Official shall issue a renewal of such license without examination
unless there are revocations or suspension proceedings in progress against
such individual. If the holder of a license fails to make application for
renewal of his/her license within 90 days from the expiration date, he or
she shall lose all rights of his/her license and proceed in the same manner
as if he or she had never held a license. If the Building Official has reason
to believe that the licensee has violated the provisions of this code, he/
she shall have the power to impose any revocation or suspension clause
contained within the context of this article.
139. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
140. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-8.40 SEWARD CODE § 225-8.42
1:296
ARTICLE IX
Water Conditioning And Lawn Irrigation
§ 225-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-8.42
1:297

PART 1
Water Conditioning Systems141
§ 225-9.1. Installers.
A. License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of installing water conditioning apparatus without first having
secured a license to do so from the Building and Inspection
Department.
B. Application. The application for a license required by this article shall
be made in writing to the Building and Inspection Department on blank
forms prepared and furnished by such department, and shall give the
full name under which such business is to be conducted.
C. Examination.
(1) As a member of the International Code Council, Inc., all
examination and testing examinations will no longer be
administered by this jurisdiction. Each applicant for a license
required by the Building and Inspection Department shall provide
proof of an associated passed exam given through the procedures
set forth by the International Code Council, Inc. All exam and
testing information can be located on the internet at iccsafe.org,
under the contractor's testing section.142
(2) After completion of the exam, each applicant for a license required
by the Building and Inspection Department shall appear before the
Building and Inspection Department, upon notice, and submit proof
of passing examination and testing of his/her education and
competency as may be required by such department.
(3) Metropolitan licensee. The holder of a valid drainlayer license
issued by a metropolitan city in the State of Nebraska will be
accepted in the City of Seward's jurisdiction without the
examination requirements listed previously in this section.
D. License fee. When an applicant for a water conditioning contractor's/
installer's license passes the examination and tests required to the
satisfaction of the City, he/she shall pay a license fee as set from time to
time by the City Council.
E. Certificate of insurance required. Prior to receiving a license under the
preceding subsection, an applicant who has successfully passed the
water conditioning contractor's/installer's examination shall provide a
certificate of insurance which provides combined coverage for bodily
injury and property damage in a minimum amount of $300,000 and
shall strictly comply with this code and any other ordinances of the City
relating to the installation, alteration or repair of any water
141. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
142. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-9.1
1:299
§ 225-9.2. Permits required.
conditioning apparatus within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
City.
F. Issuance of license; term. At the time of approval by the Building
Official and the payment of a license fee as set from time to time by the
City Council, the Building Official shall issue a license to do water
conditioning contracting work in the City, which shall be effective and
valid through December 31 of each calendar year.
G. Renewal of license; fee. Before the expiration of any license issued from
or by the Building and Inspection Department, the holder may, upon
payment of a renewal fee in an amount set from time to time by the City
Council, make application to the Building and Inspection Department
for renewal of his/her license. Failure to make application and pay the
renewal fee for renewal of a license before the expiration date thereof
subjects the applicant to pay the renewal fee plus an additional late fee
in an amount set from time to time by the City Council for each month
or partial month since the expiration date of the license, up to and
including three months from such expiration date. If the application is
filed and the fees are paid in accordance with the above, the Building
Official shall issue a renewal of such license without examination unless
there are revocations or suspension proceedings in progress against
such individual. If the holder of a license fails to make application for
renewal of his/her license within 90 days from the expiration date, he or
she shall lose all rights of his/her license and proceed in the same
manner as if he or she had never held a license. If the Building Official
has reason to believe that the licensee has violated the provisions of this
code, he/she shall have the power to impose any revocation or
suspension clause contained within the context of this article.143
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to install, alter, remove, or repair any
water conditioning appliance, or cause the same to be done, without
first obtaining a permit therefor from the Building and Inspection
Department. No permit shall be required for minor repair work. "Minor
repair work" is defined as repairing leaks in pipes, cleaning out supply
or waste lines, or repairing a water conditioning appliance.
B. A permit to install a water conditioning appliance may be issued only to
a duly registered water conditioning contractor or registered master
plumber. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
cause or permit any water conditioning installation to be done on any
property owned, managed, or controlled by such person, firm or
corporation unless such work is done by said duly registered water
conditioning contractor/installer or registered plumber.
143. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-9.1 SEWARD CODE § 225-9.2
1:300
§ 225-9.3. Work done by person in his/her own residence.
No license required under this article shall be required of any individual
doing installation or repair of the water conditioning appliance in the
residence in which he/she lives; provided that such installation is done
in conformity with this code and any other ordinances of the City. In all
cases, the rules and regulations of this article shall be complied with
and such individual shall notify the City of such work proposed, request
inspection thereof and pay a permit fee to cover the cost of the inspection.
Furthermore, this section shall only apply to those installations required
for remodeling, additions and repairs. No individual shall be allowed to
perform any plumbing work on new construction without first having passed
the required examination and having provided the necessary insurance
required by this article, and having been issued a license to do such work.
§ 225-9.4. Fees.
A base fee and fee for each water conditioning apparatus as set from time
to time by the City Council shall be paid to the Building and Inspection
Department.
§ 225-9.5. Installation and inspection.
C. Application for a permit may be made in writing to the Building and
Inspection Department on a form furnished by the Building and
Inspection Department for that purpose.
A. The water piping to any water conditioning appliance shall be of
materials and methods of installation approved for water distribution in
this code. Piping from any water conditioning appliance to the City
sewer system shall be of any material approved by the Building and
Inspection Department.
B. All water conditioning installations shall be inspected by the Building
and Inspection Department to ensure compliance with all the
requirements of this code. It shall be the duty of the person doing the
work authorized by the permit to notify the Building and Inspection
Department orally or in writing that said work is ready for inspection,
and for said person doing the work to provide access and means for
proper inspection. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work to
call for inspection of the water conditioning installation not later than
three days after completion of the installation.
§ 225-9.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-9.5
1:301

PART 2
Lawn Sprinkler Systems
§ 225-9.6. Compliance required.
The installing, replacing, or relocating of any lawn sprinkler system shall be
made in conformance with the provisions of this Part 2.
§ 225-9.7. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Part 2, the following words or phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
LAWN SPRINKLER CONTRACTOR — Any person who is engaged in the
business of installing, altering, replacing, repairing or relocating any lawn
sprinkler system, or parts thereof, or who sets himself out as willing to
perform such work himself or through his employees.
LAWN SPRINKLER INSTALLER — An individual who installs, alters, or
assembles lawn sprinkler systems, and who is in the employ of a lawn
sprinkler contractor.
§ 225-9.8. Installers.
A. License required.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
installing lawn sprinkler systems without first having secured a
license to do so from the Building and Inspection Department.144
(2) A master or journeyman plumber licensed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter may perform lawn system work without
having to secure the license required under this section.
B. Application. The application for a license required by this Part 2 shall be
made in writing to the Building and Inspection Department on blank
forms prepared and furnished by such department and shall give the
full name under which such business is to be conducted.145
C. Examination.
(1) As a member of the International Code Council, Inc., all
examination and testing examinations will no longer be
administered by this jurisdiction. Each applicant for a license
required by the Building and Inspection Department shall provide
proof of an associated passed exam given through the procedures
set forth by the International Code Council, Inc. All exam and
testing information can be located on the internet at iccsafe.org,
under the contractor's testing section.146
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
146. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-9.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-9.8
1:303
(2) After completion of the exam, each applicant for a license required
by the Building and Inspection Department shall appear before the
Building and Inspection Department, upon notice, and submit proof
of passing examination and testing of his/her education and
competency as may be required by such department.147
(3) Metropolitan licensee. The holder of a valid drainlayer's license
issued by a metropolitan city in the State of Nebraska will be
accepted in the City of Seward's jurisdiction without the
examination requirements listed previously in this section.
D. License fee. When an applicant for a lawn sprinkler installer's license
passes the examination and tests required to the satisfaction of the City,
he/she shall pay a license fee as set from time to time by the City
Council.148
E. Certificate of insurance required. Prior to receiving a license under the
preceding subsection, an applicant who has successfully passed the
lawn sprinkler installer's examination shall provide a certificate of
insurance which provides combined coverage for bodily injury and
property damage in a minimum amount of $300,000 and shall strictly
comply with this code and any other ordinances of the City relating to
the installation, alteration or repair of any water conditioning
apparatus within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City.
F. Issuance of license; term. At the time of approval by the Building
Official and the payment of a license fee as set from time to time by the
City Council, the Building Official shall issue a license to do lawn
sprinkler contracting work in the City, which shall be effective and valid
through December 31 of each calendar year.149
G. Renewal; fee. Before the expiration of any license issued from or by the
Building and Inspection Department, the holder may, upon payment of a
renewal fee in an amount set from time to time by the City Council,
make application to the Building and Inspection Department for
renewal of his/her license. Failure to make application and pay the
renewal fee for renewal of a license before the expiration date thereof
subjects the applicant to pay the renewal fee plus an additional late fee
in an amount set from time to time by the City Council for each month
or partial month since the expiration date of the license, up to and
including three months from such expiration date. If the application is
filed and the fees are paid in accordance with the above, the Building
Official shall issue a renewal of such license without examination unless
there are revocations or suspension proceedings in progress against
such individual. If the holder of a license fails to make application for
renewal of his/her license within 90 days from the expiration date, he or
she shall lose all rights of his/her license and proceed in the same
147. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
148. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
149. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-9.8 SEWARD CODE § 225-9.8
1:304
§ 225-9.9. Permits required.151
§ 225-9.10. Work done by person in his/her own residence.
No license required under this article shall be required of any individual
doing installation or repair of the lawn sprinkler systems in the residence
in which he/she lives; provided that such installation is done in conformity
with this code and any other ordinances of the City. In all cases, the rules
and regulations of this Part 2 shall be complied with and such individual
shall notify the City of such work proposed, request inspection thereof
and pay a permit fee to cover the cost of the inspection. Furthermore,
this section shall only apply to those installations required for remodeling,
additions and repairs. No individual shall be allowed to perform any
plumbing work on new construction without first having passed the
required examination and having provided the necessary insurance
required by this article, and having been issued a license to do such work.
§ 225-9.11. Fees.152
A base permit fee and a lawn sprinkler system fee as set from time to time
by the City Council shall be paid to the Building and Inspection Department.
§ 225-9.12. Installation and inspection.
manner as if he or she had never held a license. If the Building Official
has reason to believe that the licensee has violated the provisions of
this code, he/she shall have the power to impose any revocation or
suspension clause contained within the context of this article.150
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to install, alter, remove, or repair any
lawn sprinkler apparatus, or cause the same to be done, without first
obtaining a permit therefor from the Building and Inspection
Department. No permit shall be required for minor repair work. "Minor
repair work" is defined as repairing leaks in pipes, cleaning out supply
or waste lines, or repairing a lawn sprinkler apparatus.
B. A permit to install a lawn sprinkler apparatus may be issued only to a
duly registered lawn sprinkler contractor or registered master plumber.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cause or
permit any water conditioning installation to be done on any property
owned, managed, or controlled by such person, firm or corporation
unless such work is done by said duly registered lawn sprinkler installer
or registered plumber.
C. Application for a permit may be made in writing to the Building and
Inspection Department on a form furnished by the Building and
Inspection Department for that purpose.
150. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
151. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
152. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-9.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-9.12
1:305
A. The water piping to any lawn sprinkler apparatus shall be of materials
and methods of installation approved for water distribution in this code.
B. All lawn sprinkler system installations shall be inspected by the
Building and Inspection Department to ensure compliance with all the
requirements of this code. It shall be the duty of the person doing the
work authorized by the permit to notify the Building and Inspection
Department orally or in writing that said work is ready for inspection,
and for said person doing the work to provide access and means for
proper inspection. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work to
call for inspection of the lawn sprinkler system installation not later
than three days after completion of the installation.153
153. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-9.12 SEWARD CODE § 225-9.12
1:306
ARTICLE X
Electrical Code
§ 225-10.1. Code adopted by reference.
Except as hereinafter provided by specific changes, the latest Edition of
National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition, National Fire Protection Publication
Number 70, as adopted in whole or amended in part from time to time
by the State Electrical Board, is hereby adopted. One printed copy of this
document is filed in the office of the Building Inspector and City Clerk's
office of the City of Seward for use of and examination by the public. (Neb.
RS 18, 132, 19, 922)
§ 225-10.2. Citation of code; word usage.
This article shall be known as the "Seward Electrical Code" and may be
cited as such and will be referred to herein as "this code." The word "shall"
as used in this article indicates a mandatory rule.
§ 225-10.3. Enforcement.
The Building Inspector, or an authorized representative of the Building
Inspector, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this
code.
§ 225-10.4. Defective or improperly operating electrical equipment;
notice to owner; discontinuance of electrical service.
A. The Building Inspector shall examine or cause to be examined any
electrical equipment within or on any building or premises reported to
be defective or in improper operating condition. If such equipment is
found to be defective or in improper operating condition so as to
constitute a danger to persons or property, the Building Inspector shall
give to the owner of such building or premises written notice stating the
deficiencies found to exist. This notice may require the owner or person
having charge or control of such building or premises, within 48 hours,
to commence work to correct such deficiencies, and all such work shall
be completed within 10 days from the date of notice, unless otherwise
stipulated by the Building Inspector. Note: As used in this article,
"constitute a danger to persons or property" shall mean that, in the
opinion of the Building Inspector or authorized representative of the
Building Inspector, there are code violations or wiring deficiencies
which comprise a fire hazard or shock hazard.
B. Proper service of such notice shall be by personal service upon the
owner of record or by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt
requested, to said owner's last known address. The designated period
within which said owner or person having charge or control is required
to comply with the order of the Building Inspector shall begin as of the
date said owner receives such notice. In cases where the owner cannot
§ 225-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-10.4
1:307
§ 225-10.5. Building Inspector's right of entry.
be reached or refuses to reply after the provisions of Subsection B
have been implemented, the provisions of Subsection C shall take
precedence.
C. The Building Inspector or an authorized representative is hereby vested
with the authority to order the discontinuance of electrical service to
any building or premises where such deficiencies in electrical
equipment have not been corrected within the time specified by such
notice. In the case of emergency, the Building Inspector or any
authorized representative is hereby vested with the authority to
immediately order the discontinuance of electrical service to any
building or premises where the same is necessary for the protection of
persons or property. Existing installation shall not be deemed a
deficiency, provided the wiring when originally completed was installed
in accordance with the provisions of the electrical code then in force
and has been maintained in that condition.
D. Electrical installation: temporary use of current.
(1) The Building Inspector may permit, at his discretion, the temporary
use of electrical wiring before final approval thereof, whenever any
unnecessary hardship would otherwise result, and inspection can
effectively be made after the commencement of the temporary use.
A meter, when installed in the regular meter socket, if left
unsealed, shall be considered as temporary use of electrical energy
under this provision.
(2) The Building Inspector shall place those restrictions upon
temporary use as necessary to ensure safety, to secure compliance
with all other provisions of this article, and to facilitate inspection.
(3) No temporary use of electrical energy shall be permitted in any
case where a hazard to life or property would be created.
(4) The temporary use of electrical energy may be ordered
discontinued and the supply discontinued upon notice to the user.
A. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the
provisions of or perform any duty imposed by this code, or whenever
the Building Inspector or an authorized representative of the Building
Inspector has reasonable cause to believe there exists within or on any
building or premises dangerous, hazardous, or unsafe conditions for
any reason specified in this code, or that work is being done without a
permit or work is being done by an unlicensed person or persons, then
the Building Inspector or authorized representative is hereby
authorized to enter within or on such building or premises at any
reasonable time to inspect the same and perform any duty imposed
upon the Building Inspector by this code; provided that 1) if such
building or premises are occupied, the Building Inspector or an
§ 225-10.4 SEWARD CODE § 225-10.5
1:308
§ 225-10.6. Building Inspector liability.
The Building Inspector or an authorized representative charged with
enforcement of this code, when acting in good faith and without malice, is
hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue
to any person or property as a result of any act required by this code, or
by reason of any act or omission of the Building Inspector or an authorized
representative in the discharge of the duties hereunder. Any suit brought
against the Building Inspector or authorized representative, because of any
such act or omission in the enforcement of this code, shall be defended by
the City Law Department until final determination of such proceedings.
§ 225-10.7. Bypassing meters.
§ 225-10.8. Violations and penalties.
authorized representative shall first present proper credentials to the
occupant and request entry, explaining the reasons therefor, and 2) if
such building or premises are unoccupied, the Building Inspector or an
authorized representative shall first make a reasonable effort to locate
the owner or other person having charge or control of such building
or premises and request entry, explaining the reasons therefor. If such
entry is refused or cannot be obtained because the owner or other
person having charge or control of such building or premises cannot
be found after due diligence, the Building Inspector or authorized
representative of the Building Inspector shall have recourse to every
remedy provided by law to secure lawful entry and inspect such
building or premises.
B. "Authorized representative" shall mean Department of Building
Inspector personnel possessing the requisite knowledge to perform the
duties and discharge the responsibilities of an Electrical Inspector.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who or which bypasses the electric
meter shall be deemed in violation of this code. Proper metering and
overcurrent protection shall be installed immediately or the service
entrance conductors shall be disconnected.
B. It shall be unlawful for any seller of electric current to continue to sell
electric current to any person, firm or corporation described in
Subsection A above, unless the required service equipment and meter
are installed as provided herein.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation upon whom or
which a duty is placed by the provisions of this code to fail or to neglect
to comply with the provisions of this code.
B. Any person upon whom a duty is placed by the provisions of this article
who shall fail, neglect or refuse to perform such duty or who shall
violate any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by
§ 225-10.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-10.8
1:309
§ 225-10.9. Electrical Advisory and Appeals Board.
imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not to exceed six months,
or by a fine not to exceed $500, recoverable with costs, or both. Each
day a violation of any provision of this code continues to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
A. Creation.
(1) There is hereby created an Electrical Advisory and Appeals Board
which shall consist of four members and shall be referred to herein
as the "Electrical Board. "Membership on the Electrical Board shall
consist of the following:
(a) The Building Inspector, ex officio;
(b) The Electric Superintendent;
(c) One registered master electrician;
(d) One registered master electrician engaged in the electrical
contracting business.
(2) The members of said Board shall be appointed by the Mayor and
approved by the Council for a term of two years. Should any
member be sooner removed from office, or resign, or a vacancy
occur, a new member to fill such vacancy shall be appointed by the
Mayor and Council for the unexpired term. The Building Inspector
shall be Secretary of the Board and shall keep a record of all
meetings.
B. Authority and duties. The Electrical Board shall:
(1) Advise the Mayor regarding the determination of the suitability of
alternate materials and methods of installation, and the reasonable
interpretations of the provisions of this code. The Board shall make
recommendations to the Mayor at the Mayor's request. The Board
shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its
investigations and shall render all recommendations in writing to
the Mayor.
(2) Have power and authority to adopt necessary rules and regulations
consistent with the provisions of this code for the applicants for
registration and suspension or revocation of registration as
provided in this code. Any such rules and regulations or
amendments thereto shall be approved by the Mayor. The Electrical
Board shall determine the minimum qualifications for applicants
for registrations as part of the rules and regulations.
(3) Have power and authority to hear and determine appeals by any
person who is aggrieved by a decision, notice, or order of the
Building Inspector under this code.
§ 225-10.8 SEWARD CODE § 225-10.9
1:310
(4) Hold an annual meeting on the fourth Wednesday in April of each
year, at which meeting a Chairperson shall be elected for the
ensuing year.
(5) Hold special meetings upon the call of the Chairperson, or upon
written receipt signed by two of its members and filed with the
Secretary.
C. Appeals from decision, notice or order of Building Inspector.
(1) Any person who is aggrieved by a decision, notice, or order of the
Building Inspector under this code may appeal such decision to the
Electrical Board by filing such appeal within 30 days from the date
of such decision. Upon request, the Building Inspector shall furnish
such aggrieved person with an appeal form, which, upon
completion and filing within the prescribed time and payment of
the prescribed fee, shall be sufficient for the purpose of
commencing an appeal proceeding hereunder.
(2) Fees. Fees for review of a decision of the Building Inspector
interpreting a provision or provisions of this code and for review of
a decision of the Building Inspector concerning the suitability of
alternate materials or types of installation shall be set from time to
time by the City Council.154
(3) The Building Inspector shall refer all properly and timely filed
appeals to the Electrical Board for hearing. The Secretary of said
Board shall in each appeal notify the appellant in writing of the
date, time, and place of hearing before the Board, which date shall
be no later than 30 days from the filing of the appeal. Such notice
shall be served upon the appellant by personal service or
registered mail.
(4) Hearing on appeal need not be conducted according to technical
rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Oral evidence shall be
taken only on oath or affirmation. Any relevant evidence shall be
admitted if it is the type of evidence upon which responsible
persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs,
regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule
which may make improper the admission of such evidence over
objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this
state. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.
The appellant, the Board members, the Building Inspector, and any
other party to any appeal hereunder shall have these rights, among
others:
(a) To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the
issues of the hearing;
(b) To introduce documentary and physical evidence;
154. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-10.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-10.9
1:311
§ 225-10.10. Scope.
(c) To cross-examine opposing witness on any matter relevant to
the issues of the hearing; and
(d) To rebut evidence.
(5) The Electrical Board shall then, within 15 days' time after the
hearing, render a written decision which shall state its findings and
conclusions. Decisions of the Electrical Board may be appealed as
provided by law.
(6) Enforcement of any decision, notice, or order of the Building
Inspector issued under this code shall be stayed during the
pendency of any appeal therefrom which is properly and timely
filed, except in cases of emergency, where enforcement of the same
is necessary for the protection of persons or property.
A. The provisions of this code shall apply within the corporate limits of the
City of Seward and within two miles thereof according to the following
classes:
(1) All electric conductors and equipment installed within or on public
and private buildings, and other premises including yards, carnival
and parking lots, and industrial substations.
(2) All conductors that connect electrical installations to a supply of
electricity, and other outside conductors adjacent to a premises.
(3) All modular manufactured (mobile) homes and travel trailers.
Exception: the installation during original construction.
(4) All privately owned street or parking lot lighting.
(5) Alternate energy sources.
(6) Legally required fire alarms and emergency systems, regardless of
operating voltage.
(7) Floating buildings.
B. The provisions of this code shall not apply to the following:
(1) Installation in ships, watercraft, railway rolling stock, aircraft, or
automotive vehicles.
(2) Installations underground in mines.
(3) Installations of railways for generation, transformation,
transmission, or distribution of power used exclusively for
operation of rolling stock, or installations used exclusively for
signaling and communication purposes.
§ 225-10.9 SEWARD CODE § 225-10.10
1:312
§ 225-10.11. Permit required; exceptions.
(4) Installations of communication equipment under exclusive control
of communication utilities, located outdoors or in building spaces
used exclusively for such installations. Exception: The
requirements of the 2014 National Electric Code shall apply to such
wiring.155
(5) Installations under the exclusive control of electric utilities for the
purpose of communication, or metering, or for the generation,
control, transformation, transmission, and distribution of electric
energy located in buildings and used exclusively by utilities for
such purposes or located outdoors on property owned or leased by
the utility, or on public highways, streets, roads, or other public
ways, or outdoors established rights on private or public property.
(6) Electrical apparatus used for radio transmission in amateur
transmitting stations; however, the provisions of this code shall
apply to all electrical equipment used for power supply to such
radio transmitting apparatus.
A. No person, firm or corporation other than a registered master
electrician, journeyman, or apprentice of an electrical contracting
company, registered maintenance electricians or homeowners under
certain conditions set forth in § 225-10.13 shall install, alter or add to
any electrical equipment, and no such installation, alteration or
addition shall be made without first obtaining a permit therefor from
the Building Inspector. Permits may be issued only to registered master
electricians, registered maintenance electricians, and homeowners in
accordance with § 225-10.13 or general contractors listing the name of
their registered subcontractors.
B. No permit, license or registration shall be required to execute any of
the classes of electrical work as follows:
(1) Minor repair work such as, but not limiting the generality of the
term to, repairing flush and snap switches, replacing fuses,
changing lamp sockets and receptacles, taping joints, repairing
drop cords, and repairing appliances, motors and other devices
when not attached to permanent wiring; the wiring which is an
integral part of machinery, appliances, or vehicles; experimental
work of a temporary nature in testing laboratories of electrical
shops, educational institutions and the like; wiring supplied with
current by approved bell-ringing transformers; and the attaching of
portable appliances to existing outlets.
(2) The installation, alteration or repair of electrical equipment for the
operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence by wire.
155. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-10.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-10.11
1:313
§ 225-10.12. Issuance of permit.
Exception: The requirements of the 2014 National Electric Code
shall apply to such wiring.156
(3) The installation, alteration or repair of electrical equipment
installed by or for an electricity supply agency for the use of such
agency in the generation, transmission, distribution, or metering of
electricity.
(4) Installation, alteration or repair made to electrical equipment,
where such equipment operates at a voltage not exceeding 50
volts, except emergency alarm systems and other installations
specifically referred to in this code. Regardless of operating
voltage, all conductors of any system shall comply with the
requirements of the 2014 National Electric Code. This shall not be
construed as preemption of National Electric Code requirements
for low-voltage systems such as those found in NEC Articles 411,
480 and Chapters 5, 6, 7 and 8.157
(5) Repairs made by and within the authority granted to the holders of
maintenance registrations as provided in this code.
(6) Any work involved in the manufacture, test, or repair of electrical
materials, devices, appliances or apparatus, but not including any
permanent wiring other than that required for testing purposes.
(7) Repair or replacement of motors on fixed, approved appliances of
the same type and rating in the same location.
(8) The adjustment, repair or maintenance of appliances designed to
consume natural or artificial gas, fuel oils or coal; provided this
exception shall not permit the replacement of an existing motor
with one of a different rating. The exceptions enumerated in this
subsection above shall not be construed to exempt any person, firm
or corporation from compliance with the standards prescribed by
this code for the installation of electrical equipment, or from
inspection as provided herein.
C. Electrical equipment installed and connected to a source of electrical
power by a nonregistered person or a registered person or homeowner
without a permit shall constitute a violation of this code and be subject
to the penalty of § 225-10.8.
A. Applications for permits to install, alter or add to electrical equipment
shall be on forms furnished for that purpose by the Building Inspector
and shall contain all information necessary to the lawful enforcement of
the provisions of this code. Each application shall be accompanied by
such plans and specifications as are required to determine that the
156. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
157. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-10.11 SEWARD CODE § 225-10.12
1:314
§ 225-10.13. Installation by homeowner.
work proposed conforms to the requirements of this code. The approval
of any plans and specifications shall not be construed to sanction any
violation of this code.
B. When the Building Inspector determines that the information on an
application is in conformance with this code, the Building Inspector
shall issue a permit upon receipt of the permit fees hereinafter
prescribed. No permittee shall deviate materially from any approved
plans or specifications or fail, neglect, or refuse to comply therewith,
unless permission to do so has been obtained from the Building
Inspector or an authorized representative.
C. The issuance of a permit based upon plans and specifications shall not
prevent the Building Inspector from hereafter requiring the correction
of errors in said plans and specifications or preventing the initiation or
continuance of work thereunder when in violation of this code or any
other ordinance.
A. Citizens may install electrical wiring only in a single-family residence
which they own and occupy or will occupy as their home. All electrical
wiring installed by homeowners shall be for themselves, without
compensation or pay from or to any other person for such labor or
installation. Such installation by a homeowner shall comply with the
requirements of this code, and the homeowner in exercising this
privilege shall not constitute or be considered as an electrical
contractor. The homeowner shall be required to file plans, demonstrate
knowledge of code requirements, apply for and secure a permit, pay the
required permit fees, and call for all inspections in the manner provided
by this code. Homeowner permits shall be valid for 18 months from date
of issuance.
B. The Building and Inspection Department may deny the issuance of
electrical permits to homeowners if any one of the following items is
questionable:158
(1) There is reason to believe the proposed electrical work will be done
by someone other than the owner;
(2) There is reason to believe the property is or will be sold on the
completion of the electrical work;
(3) Previous homeowner electrical permits have not been completed in
compliance with this code;
(4) The owner is temporarily residing in the home.
C. If the homeowner is found to have at any time violated or falsified any of
the above items, the homeowner shall immediately cease all electrical
158. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-10.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-10.13
1:315
§ 225-10.14. Inspections.
work, forfeit the homeowner's permit, and obtain a registered electrical
contractor to complete the electrical work in compliance with the code.
D. Appointments for required inspections shall not be made, with the
exception that inspection requests may be scheduled for a given day.
The inspection shall be performed on the day requested by the
homeowner. The homeowner, if unable to be present during the normal
working hours of a day, shall be required to supply a key or other means
of access for the inspection to be performed. Homeowners may be
granted one reinspection per permit without a reinspection fee charge.
Further reinspection will require payment of the reinspection fee
provided for in the electrical permit fee schedule.
A. Conducted by Building Inspector. The Building Inspector or an
authorized representative is hereby authorized to make such
inspections and take such action provided by law as may be necessary
to enforce the provisions of this code.
B. Required. The installation, alteration of or addition to any electrical
equipment for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspections
by the Building Inspector or an authorized representative.
C. Request for. Inspections of the installation, alteration, repair or addition
to electrical equipment under the provisions of this code shall be
requested by the person, firm, corporation or authorized representative
holding the permit for such work. The Building Inspector may require
that every request for inspection be filed at least one working day
before the inspection is desired. Such request may be in writing or by
telephone, at the option of the Building Inspector. It shall be the duty of
the person requesting inspection of electrical equipment to provide
access to and a means for proper inspection of such equipment. The
person requesting final inspection shall determine that the electrical
equipment is operational before requesting such final inspection.
D. Procedures.
(1) No portion of any electrical equipment intended to be concealed by
any permanent portion of a building shall be concealed until
inspected and approved by the Building Inspector. When the
installation, alteration or addition to any electrical equipment is
complete, a final inspection shall be made. Failure of the contractor
to schedule and request such final inspection shall be reason for
withholding the issuance of further permits.
(2) When the Building Inspector finds an installation to not be in
compliance with this code, the Inspector shall issue a correction
order. The correction order shall be issued to the person, firm or
corporation holding the permit for the work. The order shall specify
a date, not less than seven days nor more than 15 calendar days
§ 225-10.13 SEWARD CODE § 225-10.14
1:316
§ 225-10.15. Registration of electrical contractors.
from the date of this order, when a final inspection shall be made.
If at the time of final inspection the installation has not been
brought into compliance, a disconnection order may be issued by
the Building Inspector.
(3) The requirements of this section shall not be considered to prohibit
the temporary use of electrical energy for electric wiring, before
final approval thereof, when so authorized by the Building
Inspector and with such restrictions upon such temporary use as
may be necessary to ensure safety, secure compliance with all other
provisions of this code, and facilitate inspection.
(a) A meter installed in the regular meter socket and left unsealed
shall be considered a temporary use of electrical energy under
this section.
(b) The temporary use of electrical energy may be ordered
discontinued and the supply disconnected upon notice to the
user by the Building Inspector. No temporary use of electrical
energy shall be permitted in any case where a hazard to
persons or property would be created.
(4) A final inspection certificate of approval may, upon notice, be
revoked by the Building Inspector if it is found that the electrical
equipment fails in any respect to comply with the requirements of
this code, or that the installation is unsafe to persons or property.
Corrections not made and approved by the Building Inspector in
the allotted time shall be grounds for withholding further permits
until correction are made and approved by the Building Inspector.
A. General requirements.
(1) Application for registration as a master electrician, journeyman
electrician, or electrician's apprentice shall be made to the
Building Inspector on a form furnished by the Building Inspector
for such purpose. Such form shall require the name and address of
the applicant, and such other relevant information as may be
required by the Building Inspector.
(2) No person, firm or corporation shall install, alter, or add to any
electrical equipment, except such installations as are described in
§ 225-10.13, within the corporate limits of the City of Seward and
two miles thereof without first being registered to do so as
hereinafter provided. Work done by employees of and for the
holders of maintenance registrations pursuant to and within the
scope of work permitted by such registration shall be deemed to be
in compliance with this section.
(3) Persons holding a State of Nebraska Class A electrical contractor
license, Class A master electrician license, Class A journeyman
§ 225-10.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-10.15
1:317
electrician license, or state apprentice license shall register their
state license and submit the insurance certificate herein required
annually with the Building Inspector before performing any
electrical work covered by this code. No electrical permits shall
be issued to any state license holder until such registration and
insurance certificates are approved. A registration fee shall
accompany all applications for registration. State electrical
licenses, except those four mentioned above, will not be recognized
by the City of Seward as being in compliance with this code.
(4) Automatic registration. Any master electrician State Class A
license holder, journeyman electrician, or electrician's apprentice
duly registered at the time of the adoption of this code shall be
automatically registered in the same classification under the
provisions of this code.
(5) A valid registration or license of one or more of the classifications
listed above shall be carried at all times while work is being
executed. Any person checked and found to not be in possession of
such license shall immediately cease work and obtain said license
prior to engaging in further electrical installation.
B. Registration fees. Each applicant for a new registration shall pay fees
as set from time to time by the City Council. Upon initial issuance or
subsequent annual renewal of a City registration certificate, a
registration fee shall be paid for the following:159
(1) Master electrician registration.
(2) Journeyman electrician registration.
(3) Electrician's apprentice registration.
C. Classification of City registrations. There shall be three classes of
registration as follows:
(1) Master electrician. "Master electricians" are hereby defined as
those persons holding a valid State of Nebraska Class A electrical
contractors or Class A master electrician license.
(2) Journeyman electrician. "Journeyman electrician" is hereby defined
as those persons holding a valid State of Nebraska Class A
journeyman license.
(3) Electrician's apprentice. "Electrician's apprentice" is hereby
defined as those persons holding a valid State of Nebraska
apprentice license.
D. Term of registration. All registrations provided by this code shall expire
on December 31 of each year.
159. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-10.15 SEWARD CODE § 225-10.15
1:318
§ 225-10.16. Certificates of insurance for master electrician.
Before any master electrician as defined herein may be issued a permit
to install, alter, or repair alarms, the master electrician shall deposit with
the Building Inspector a certificate of liability insurance coverage, which
insurance coverage shall be subject to the approval of the City Attorney,
providing liability insurance coverage for all claims arising out of all work
within the jurisdiction of the City of Seward done by or under such master
electrician's or fire alarm installer's supervision under the provisions of the
E. Registration to be used only by holder. No registered electrician of any
class herein provided shall allow his or her name to be used by another
person, firm, or corporation, directly or indirectly, either to obtain a
permit or to install, alter, or add to any electrical equipment.
F. Suspension or revocation of registration.
(1) The Electrical Board, upon the recommendation of the Building
Inspector and after conducting a hearing as herein provided, shall
have the power to suspend or revoke any registration of any class
of registered electrician hereunder if the same was obtained by
error or fraud, or if the holder thereof is shown to be no longer
qualified, or if such holder fails to comply with the provisions of this
code.
(2) Where the Building Inspector has recommended suspension or
revocation of a registered electrician's certificate of registration,
the Building Inspector shall cause written notice to be served upon
the registered electrician whose registration has been
recommended for suspension or revocation, setting forth the time
and place for a public hearing thereon. Such written notice shall be
served by certified mail or registered mail to the registrant's last
known business address. At such hearing, the Electrical Board shall
hear all parties concerned and afford them the following rights,
among others:
(a) To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the
issues of the hearing;
(b) To introduce documentary and physical evidence;
(c) To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to
the issues of the hearing; and
(d) To rebut the evidence against him or her.
(3) The Electrical Board shall then within a reasonable time after the
hearing render a written decision, setting forth its findings and
conclusions. If a certificate is revoked, the holder of the same shall
not apply for a new registration until one year after the date of such
revocation. Decisions of the Electrical Board are final unless
appealed as provided by law.
§ 225-10.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-10.16
1:319
Seward Municipal Code. Such insurance shall be in the minimum amounts
of $100,000 for the injury or death of any one person, $300,000 for the
injury or death of any number of persons, and $100,000 for property
damage arising out of any one accident or occurrence on any job for which
a permit is required under this code; and both such master electrician and
the City of Seward shall be named insured thereunder. Separate certificates
of insurance showing the master electrician to be covered under one policy
and the City to be covered under another policy may be deposited in lieu of
a single certificate at the option of the master electrician. All certificates of
insurance shall provide that in the event of expiration or cancellation of any
said minimum insurance requirements, the Building Inspector of the City of
Seward, Nebraska shall be given at least 30 days' advance written notice
thereof. Expiration or cancellation of any insurance coverage required by
this section shall constitute an automatic and immediate termination of the
master electrician's privilege to be issued permits under the provisions of
this code, unless other insurance meeting the requirements of this section
is provided and in force and effect at the time of such expiration or
cancellation.
§ 225-10.17. Code coordination.
The electrical contractor shall become familiar with the requirements of
other codes (such as the Building Code, Mechanical Code, Fire Code, and
their adoptive ordinances) enforced in this jurisdiction, the provisions of
which apply to electrical installations. Power for fire pumps shall be
supplied in accordance with NFPA 20.
ADVISORY NOTES: Smoke alarm installation: See current edition of
adopted Building Code (see Article VI of this chapter).
§ 225-10.18. Permit fees.
A. Before a permit to install, alter, or add to electrical equipment shall be
issued, a fee for such permit shall be paid to the Building Inspector as
set forth below. Said permit shall be valid for a period of six months
from the date of issuance.160
B. Where work for which a permit is required by this code is started prior
to obtaining a permit, the fees hereinafter specified shall be doubled;
however, the payment of such double fees shall not relieve any person,
firm or corporation from fully complying with requirements of this code.
C. There shall be no refunds or credits given on unused permits which
have expired. Permit holders returning an unused permit prior to the
expiration date of the permit shall be limited to a maximum refund
amounting to 2/3 of the original fee, with the remaining 1/3 to be used
to pay in part the cost of processing the permit.
D. Fee amounts shall be set from time to time by the City Council.161
160. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-10.16 SEWARD CODE § 225-10.18
1:320
161. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-10.18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-10.18
1:321

ARTICLE XI
Mechanical
§ 225-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-10.18
1:323

PART 1
Mechanical Code
§ 225-11.1. International Mechanical Code adopted by reference.162
The International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, published by the
International Code Council, Inc. is hereby adopted by reference and made
part of this Part 1 as though set out in full herein; provided that whenever
any provisions of the International Mechanical Code shall conflict with the
provisions of the City Code or any other City ordinance, the provisions of the
City Code or such City ordinance shall govern. One copy of the Mechanical
Code shall be on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk and available for
public inspection at any reasonable time. The provisions of the Mechanical
Code shall be controlling throughout the municipality and throughout its
zoning jurisdiction.
§ 225-11.2. Mechanical Code amendments.
The International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, is amended and changed
in the following respects:
CHAPTER 1
SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
A. Section 101, General; Section 101.1, Title. Insert: "City of Seward,
Nebraska."
B. Section 106, Permits.
(1) 106.5.2, Fee Schedule. Insert: Fees for the following shall be set
from time to time by the City Council.163
Base permit residential
(Includes furnace, AC, kitchen exhaust, bath exhaust, dryer)
New or replacement:
Air conditioning unit
Furnace
Heat pump
Wall or floor heater
Decorative fireplace
Wood burning system
Humidifier
Kitchen or bath exhaust
Ventilation fan
162. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
163. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-11.2
1:325
§ 225-11.3. License required; examination.
Clothes dryer
Alterations to existing system
Commercial fees (based on valuation)
$0 to $500
$500.01 to $5,000
$5,000.01 to $10,000
$10,000.01 to $50,000
$50,000.01 to $100,000
Over $100,000
(2) Section 106.5.3, Fee refunds.
(a) #2. Insert: 80%.
(b) #3. Insert: 80%.
C. Section 108, Violations.
(1) 108.4, Violation penalties.
(a) Insert: "misdemeanor" for specific offense.
(b) Penalties.
[1] Insert: $500 for amount.
[2] Insert: "six months" for number of days.
(2) 108.5, Stop work orders. Insert: $100 for "not less than" amount;
$500 for "or more than" amount.
D. Section 109, Means of Appeal, is repealed (see Article XIV).
A. License requirement; scope. It shall be unlawful for any person to
engage in the mechanical business as a mechanical master in the City
and the two-mile zoning jurisdiction without having first secured a
license to do so from the Building and Inspection Department. For the
purposes of this chapter, the areas within the City and within the twomile
jurisdiction of the City shall be collectively referred to as the
"jurisdiction of the City."164
B. Application. Each applicant for a license required by Subsection A shall
make application to the Building and Inspection Department on blank
forms prepared and furnished by such department and indicating
thereon whether the application is for a master mechanical or a
journeyman mechanical license.165
164. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-11.2 SEWARD CODE § 225-11.3
1:326
C. Examination.
(1) As a member of the International Code Council, Inc., all
examination and testing examinations will no longer be
administered by this jurisdiction. Each applicant for a license
required by the Building and Inspection Department shall provide
proof of an associated passed exam given through the procedures
set forth by the International Code Council, Inc. All exam and
testing information can be located on the internet at iccsafe.org,
under the contractor's testing section.166
(2) After completion of the exam, each applicant for a license required
by the Building and Inspection Department shall appear before the
Building and Inspection Department, upon notice and submit proof
of passing examination and testing of his/her education and
competency as may be required by such department.167
(3) Metropolitan licensee. The holder of a valid drainlayer's license
issued by a metropolitan city in the State of Nebraska will be
accepted in the City of Seward's jurisdiction without the
examination requirements listed previously in this section.
D. Certificate of insurance required. Prior to receiving a license under the
preceding subsection, an applicant who has successfully passed the
master's examination shall provide a certificate of insurance which
provides combined coverage for bodily injury and property damage in a
minimum amount of $300,000 and shall strictly comply with this code
and any other ordinances of the City relating to the installation,
alteration or repair of any plumbing system within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the City.
E. Issuance of license; term. At the time of approval by the Building
Official and the payment of a license fee as set from time to time for a
master or journeyman, the Building Official shall issue a license to do
mechanical work in the City which shall be effective and valid through
December 31 of each calendar year.168
F. Retired master's license.
(1) A licensed mechanical master who wishes to fully retire from the
mechanical trade may apply to the Building Official for a retired
mechanical master's license. Upon such application and payment of
renewal fees ordinarily applicable to a mechanical master's license,
the Building Official may grant such person a retired mechanical
master's license. The holder of a retired mechanical master's
license shall not engage in any mechanical activities for which a
master's license is required under this code. Nothing shall prevent
165. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
166. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
167. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
168. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-11.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-11.3
1:327
the holder of a retired mechanical master's license from acting in
the capacity of a journeyman under the requirements of this article.
(2) The insurance requirements of Subsection D above shall not be
required as prerequisite for the issuance, maintenance, or renewal
of the retired master mechanical license.169
(3) The holder of a retired mechanical master's license may make
application to the Building Official for a reactivation of his/her
status as a mechanical master. The Building Official may issue such
master's license upon compliance with the following:170
(a) Payment of the required fees applicable to the renewal of the
master's license.
(b) The filing of a certificate of insurance under the provisions of
this article.
G. Temporary license. In the case of the death of the holder of a valid
master's license, the Building Official may issue a temporary master
license to the company or corporation at which such mechanical master
was employed, if such company or corporation has in its employ an
individual with a valid Seward journeyman's license. Such license shall
be valid for a period of not more than six months and shall not be
extended to another member of the firm or corporation during such
grace period. Such temporary license shall be void if the company or
corporation to which the license is assigned fails to keep in its employ
an individual with a valid Seward journeyman's license.
169. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
170. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-11.3 SEWARD CODE § 225-11.3
1:328
PART 2
Mechanical Contractors
§ 225-11.4. Mechanical master required for contract mechanical
work.
Only a licensed mechanical master shall be allowed to contract for
mechanical work in the jurisdiction of the City. At least one person of
the firm or corporation wishing to contract for mechanical work in the
jurisdiction of the City shall be a licensed mechanical master. Licensed
mechanical journeymen in the employ of a licensed mechanical master shall
be allowed to work unattended on jobs and may supervise, not to exceed
three apprentices.
§ 225-11.5. Term of license; license not assignable.
Master and journeyman mechanical licenses under the provisions of this
Part 2 shall be effective and valid through December 31 of each calendar
year and shall not be assignable.
§ 225-11.6. License renewal; fee.171
Before the expiration of any license issued from or by the Building and
Inspection Department, the holder may, upon payment of a renewal fee
in an amount set from time to time by the City Council for a master or
journeyman, make application to the Building and Inspection Department
for renewal of his/her license. Failure to make application and pay the
renewal fee for renewal of a license before the expiration date thereof
subjects the applicant to pay the renewal fee plus an additional late fee in
an amount set from time to time by the City Council, up to and including
90 days from such expiration date. If the application is filed and the fees
are paid in accordance with the above, the Building Official shall issue a
renewal of such license without examination unless there are revocations
or suspension proceedings in progress against such individual. If the holder
of a license fails to make application for renewal of his/her license within
90 days from the expiration date, he or she shall lose all rights of his/her
license and proceed in the same manner as if he or she had never held a
license. If the Building Official has reason to believe that the licensee has
violated the provisions of this code, he/she shall have the power to impose
any revocation or suspension clause contained within the context of this
article.
§ 225-11.7. Revocation or suspension of license for noncompliance.
In addition to any penalty imposed for a violation of this article, the Building
Official may, at any time, revoke or suspend the license of any mechanical
master who neglects to carry out the provisions of this article or refuses to
be governed by such provisions in the prosecution of his/her work.
171. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-11.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-11.8
1:329
§ 225-11.8. Revocation of license upon court conviction.
The Building Official shall have the power to revoke, with just cause, any
license issued under this article. A license shall be revoked immediately by
the Building Official upon the conviction of the holder thereof in a court of
competent jurisdiction, for the violation of any laws of the state, this code
or ordinances of the City, relative to the installation, repair, cleaning, or
alteration in or to any mechanical system.
§ 225-11.9. Grounds for revocation.
A license issued pursuant to this article shall be revoked by the Building
Official when he/she finds that the holder is guilty of one or more of the
following:
§ 225-11.10. Procedure for violation notification.173
In cases involving violations of the provisions of this article or any other law
or ordinance of the City of Seward relating to contractor licensing or permit
requirements, the following notification procedure shall be implemented by
the Building Official prior to actual revocation of a license:
A. Fraudulent use of his/her license;
B. Incompetency in the exercise of the privilege of the license;
C. Fraud or misrepresentation in securing the licenses granted pursuant
to the building codes of the City;172
D. Refusal to perform his/her work to the requirements of the law;
E. Such other breaches of duty by the holder of the license as the Building
Official may find which cause an unsafe or unsanitary condition,
contrary to the intent and purpose of this article.
A. For the first violation of this article, a written notification shall be sent
by certified mail to the licensee informing him/her of the violation and
future recourse by the City.
B. The second violation of this article shall cause the Building Official to
suspend the license for a period of one month and notify the licensee,
again by certified mail, of the City procedures.
C. The third violation of this article shall cause the Building Official to
revoke the license for a period of not less than six months and not to
exceed one year. The Building Official shall present his/her case file to
the City Council at the next regularly scheduled meeting for enactment
of temporary revocation proceedings.
172. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
173. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-11.8 SEWARD CODE § 225-11.10
1:330
§ 225-11.11. Notice of revocation or suspension; hearing.
In all cases involving revocation or suspension of a license under this
article, at least 15 days' notice of the contemplated revocation or
suspension shall be served upon the licensee, and such notice shall indicate
the time and place of the hearing, the general grounds of the contemplated
action, and shall advise the holder of his/her right to appear at the hearing
in person or by counsel for the purpose of presenting his/her defense. In
each case, the licensee shall not continue to perform the duties associated
with the privilege of the license until the termination of the proceedings.
This provision shall be waived only if a court of competent jurisdiction
issues a temporary injunction against the City in such proceedings.
§ 225-11.12. Conduct and record of hearing.
The Building Official shall make a complete record of the case involving
any revocation or suspension of a license under this article and shall keep
a written record of the testimony produced at the hearing held pursuant
to § 225-11.11. He/She may request legal advice from the City Law
Department and adopt such procedure for the decorum and the dispatch of
business of such hearings as he/she may regard advisable.
§ 225-11.13. Action of Building Official; appeals.
The decision of the Building Official, at a hearing on the revocation or
suspension of a license under this article, shall be final. In the case of
a suspension of a license, the licensee's time in grade for the particular
license shall be suspended for the period of suspension and shall begin
accruing again at the end of the suspension. An adverse decision by the
Building Official may be appealed to the City Council by filing with the Clerk
within 15 days from such decision a written notice of the intention to appeal
and request for a hearing before the City Council. The City Council, within
30 days of the filing of such written notice, shall grant a hearing to the party
appealing. The revocation or suspension of a license shall not entitle the
holder to a refund of any part of the fee which he/she may have paid.
§ 225-11.14. Special license for one job only.174
Whenever the Building Official deems it advisable, he/she may, at his/her
discretion, issue a special mechanical master's license to any mechanical
contractor who is not otherwise licensed by the City to do mechanical work,
but who can provide proof of competency as a licensed mechanical master
in another city's jurisdiction. The special license, so issued, shall allow the
D. The fourth violation of this article shall cause the Building Official to
permanently revoke the license. The Building Official shall present his/
her case file to the City Council at the next regularly scheduled meeting
for permanent revocation.
174. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-11.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-11.14
1:331
licensee to do mechanical work on the building for which it is issued and no
other. The fee for such special license shall be set from time to time by the
City Council, and such fees shall be paid to the City Building Official before
the special license is issued. A certificate of insurance which provides
combined coverage for bodily injury and property damage in a minimum
amount of $300,000 shall be provided to the Building and Inspection
Department prior to the issuance of a special license. Upon the completion
of the work for which the special license was issued, such license shall
expire and become null and void.
§ 225-11.15. Possession of license required; party responsible for
application, fees and signature.
No person licensed under this chapter shall do any mechanical work within
the City and the two-mile zoning jurisdiction without having in his/her
possession a mechanical permit issued by the City pursuant to this article
containing the name of the mechanical master or firm authorized to do
the work. Permits associated with this article shall be applied for by the
mechanical master. When such permit has been approved, it shall be signed
and paid for by the mechanical master associated with the business, firm, or
corporation which has been approved through other provisions of this Part
2.
§ 225-11.16. Work done by person in his/her own residence.
No license required under this article shall be required of any individual
doing installation or repair of the mechanical systems in the residence in
which he/she lives; provided that such installation is done in conformity
with this code and any other ordinances of the City. In all cases, the rules
and regulations of this article shall be complied with and such individual
shall notify the City of such work proposed, request inspection thereof
and pay a permit fee to cover the cost of the inspection. Furthermore,
this section shall only apply to those installations required for remodeling,
additions and repairs. No individual shall be allowed to perform any
mechanical work on new construction without first having passed the
required examination and having provided the necessary insurance
required by this article, and having been issued a license to do such work.
§ 225-11.17. Effect on firms or corporations.
A master's license issued to an individual shall authorize a company or
corporation to engage in such business or occupation during the period
of time that the licensee maintains his connection with such company or
corporation. A license applied under the requirements of this article shall be
valid and in effect for one company, firm, or corporation as an active license,
and shall not be assignable to any other company, firm, or corporation.
§ 225-11.14 SEWARD CODE § 225-11.18
1:332
§ 225-11.18. Applicability of permit to installation of gas
appliances.
Any holder of a master's license under this article shall be allowed to install
gas appliances, regulated under the current edition of the mechanical code,
upon the issuance of a permit by the City.
§ 225-11.19. Electrical work.
All electrical work, to be done in conjunction with the work under this
article, shall be done in accordance with all electrical regulations of the City
by a holder of a master electrician's license under this code.
§ 225-11.18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-11.19
1:333

PART 3
Permits
§ 225-11.20. Exceptions.
The provisions of this Part 3 shall not apply to any federal, state, county or
municipal government or any subdivision thereof.
§ 225-11.21. Issuance to holders of license.
No permit for any work covered by the provisions of this article shall be
issued to other than the holder of a master mechanical license, except for
the provisions contained in § 225-11.10.
§ 225-11.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-11.21
1:335

PART 4
Mechanical Inspector
§ 225-11.22. Office established; appointment; scope of authority.
There is hereby created and established the Office of the Mechanical
Inspector. The Mechanical Inspector shall act under the direction of the
Plumbing Board and shall have supervision of all mechanical work in the
City and shall perform such duties as are hereinafter prescribed. The
Mechanical Inspector shall have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter
any building in the City for performance of his duties. The Mechanical
Inspector shall review the suitability of alternate materials for use and
types of installation to the Code and may grant a variance form the strict
application to the Code if it his determination that an unnecessary hardship
exists and the public health, safety and welfare of the City of Seward are
maintained. The Mechanical Inspector shall have such assistants as the
Council may provide; and when appointed by the Council, such assistants
shall have the same powers and duties as the Mechanical Inspector. The
Mechanical Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council.
§ 225-11.23. Duties.
A. It shall be the duty of the Mechanical Inspector to investigate all cases
reported to or referred to him of the use of imperfect material or
workmanship on any job of mechanical work or the violation of the
provisions of this article by a plumber, builder, or owner; to stop such
work; to order same removed and replaced in a proper and
workmanlike manner to conform to the spirit and intent of this article,
and he may further request the Attorney to file complaint against any
person for violation of any of the provisions of this article and it shall be
the duty of the Attorney to prosecute the same without unnecessary
delay.
B. The Mechanical Inspector shall make inspection of old mechanical work
at the request of the agent, owner, or occupant of any building or
premises where said mechanical work is located. In order to ascertain
whether or not the mechanical apparatus in said building or premises is
in a safe condition, the Mechanical Inspector shall have the right and
authority to enter any building or upon any premises at all reasonable
hours to ascertain if the provisions of this article or any ordinance
relating to mechanical work has been or is being violated or being
complied with; also where he has reason to believe that defective or
unsafe mechanical work exists. Whenever defective or unsafe
mechanical work is found, it shall be the duty of the Mechanical
Inspector to notify the agent or owner of the premises on which the
same is found to forthwith cause such mechanical work to be changed
and to conform with the terms and requirements of the Municipal Code,
or to be changed and made safe in such other manner as said
Mechanical Inspector may authorize and direct. Such owner or agent is
§ 225-11.22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-11.23
1:337
§ 225-11.24. Private business prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the Mechanical Inspector to engage in the business
of plumbing or to perform any work as a plumber in the City during the term
of office as Mechanical Inspector.
hereby required, within 10 days after receiving such notification, to
comply therewith, or failing or neglecting to do so he shall be
considered as maintaining unsafe mechanical work and violating the
requirement hereof. It shall be the duty of said Mechanical Inspector
to make complaint against such owner or agent and cause him to be
prosecuted.
§ 225-11.23 SEWARD CODE § 225-11.24
1:338
ARTICLE XII
Energy Conservation
§ 225-12.1. International Energy Conservation Code adopted by
reference.175
The International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 Edition, published by
the International Code Council, Inc. is hereby adopted by reference and
made part of this article as though set out in full herein; provided that
whenever any provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code
shall conflict with the provisions of the City Code or any other City
ordinance, the provisions of the City Code or such City ordinance shall
govern. One copy of the Energy Conservation Code shall be on file at the
office of the Municipal Clerk and available for public inspection at any
reasonable time. The provisions of the Energy Conservation Code shall
be controlling throughout the municipality and throughout its zoning
jurisdiction.
§ 225-12.2. Energy Conservation Code amendments.
The International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 Edition, is amended and
changed in the following respects:
A. IECC - Commercial Provisions.
(1) Chapter 1 [CE], Scope and Administration; Section C101, Scope
and General Requirements; C101.1, Title. Insert: "City of Seward,
Nebraska."
B. IECC - Residential Provisions.
(1) Chapter 1 [RE], Scope and Administration.
(a) Section R101, Scope and General Requirements; Section
R101.1, Title. Insert: "City of Seward, Nebraska."
(2) Chapter 4, Residential Energy Efficiency.
(a) Section R401.3. Delete: Requirement for posting res-check
near electrical panel.
(b) Section R402.2.4. Delete: Requirement of weatherstripping
around the lid of the attic access.
(c) Section R402.4.1.2. Delete: Requirement for blower door
testing.
(d) Section R403.2.2. Delete: Exception procedures for ductleakage
test.
175. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-12.2
1:339
(e) Section R403.2.3. Delete: Requirement to seal cold-air returns
in stud cavity.
(f) Section R403.4.2. Delete: Item 3, requirement for insulation of
water pipe from water heater to kitchen.
C. Energy conservation standards.
(1) Minimum requirements are as follows:
(a) Ceiling: R-44 insulation.
(b) Frame walls: R-19 (combined R-value of wall elements).
(c) Slab edge (on-grade): R-10 insulation, 24 inches down from top
of slab.
(d) Floors (over unheated spaces): R-30 insulation.
(e) Finished basement walls: R-15 (combined R-value of wall
elements).
(f) Crawl spaces: R-10 insulation. Shall be a conditioned space.
Floor shall be covered with not less than three inches of
concrete.
(g) Windows: Minimum of double-glazed and maximum U-factor of
0.55.
(h) Doors:
[1] Sliding glass: double-glazed, maximum U-value of 0.52.
[2] Swinging: maximum U-value of 0.35 based on testing prior
to installation of glazing.
(i) Weatherstripping/Caulking: whatever is necessary to minimize
infiltration.
(j) HVAC equipment.
[1] Heat pumps - heating mode:
[a] COP = 2.5/1.5 (air source).
[b] COP = 2.5 (water source).
[2] Boilers and furnaces: combustion efficiency equals 80%.
[3] Air conditioners/heat pumps - cooling: SEER minimum
rating 10.0.
[4] Controls: Each system controlled by thermostat; heating
system capable of setback to 55° F.; cooling system
capable of setup to 85° F.
§ 225-12.2 SEWARD CODE § 225-12.2
1:340
[5] Ductwork: R-6 insulation when outside conditioned space;
all transverse joints sealed.
(k) Water heating:
[1] Stand-by loss of 15 BTU per hour, per square foot,
maximum; thermostat control and valve or switch to shut
off completely.
[2] Showerheads: three gallons per minute, maximum.
§ 225-12.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-12.2
1:341

ARTICLE XIII
Fence Regulations
§ 225-13.1. General requirements.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in other codes, ordinances or
resolutions, the following regulations shall apply to the construction and
placement of fences:
§ 225-13.2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FENCE — Any vertical structure, other than a building or plant material,
which is for the purpose of the obstruction of visual observation or for the
purpose of obstructing pedestrian, automotive or animal movement or for
the purpose of beautification, and which is attached to the ground or to a
building, but excluding retaining walls.
A. No fence shall be constructed which will constitute a traffic hazard.
B. No fence shall be constructed in such a manner to be of such design as
to be hazardous or dangerous to persons or animals; specifically, the
use of barbed wire and electrical fences in residential districts is
prohibited. Exception: Barbed wire may be used on the top of fences on
public grounds; barbed wire and electric fences may be used within the
Transitional Use District controlling the confinement of livestock.
C. No fence shall be constructed on a public right-of-way unless approved
by the City Council.
D. All fences constructed shall conform to the construction standards of
the 2012 International Building Code.
E. No fence shall be constructed or moved until a building permit shall
have been procured from the Building Inspector's office and the
appropriate fee paid. Exception: Fence permits are not required within
the Transitional Use District controlling the confinement of livestock.
F. It is recommended that the owner have a survey completed, locating
the property lines and any easements of record where the fence is to be
installed. It is the owner's responsibility to know where his/her property
lines are located.
G. Before digging or excavating, the owner or contractor shall contact
Diggers Hotline.
H. Access shall be allowed and provided for the maintenance of all existing
utility lines, poles, wires, transformers or manholes.
§ 225-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-13.3
1:343
§ 225-13.3. Location.
Please refer to the illustrated drawing at the end of this Article XIII,
incorporated herein by reference.
§ 225-13.4. Fences within easements.
§ 225-13.5. Construction requirements.
A. Residential districts.
(1) Front yard: a fence not more than 48 inches in height and not more
than 30 inches within the sight triangle on a corner lot or the sight
triangle adjacent to an alley.
(2) Corner lot second frontage (street side yard): a fence not more than
30 inches in height within the sight triangle on a corner lot or the
sight triangle adjacent to an alley.
B. Commercial/Industrial districts.
(1) Fences shall be located and constructed as per landscaping/
screening requirements for the district.
(2) Sidewalks/Alleys: A fence shall not be constructed within two feet
of any public sidewalk or within one foot of any alley.
A. Any fence, or part thereof, erected within that part of any lot, block or
other tract of land which is subject to an easement for the construction,
maintenance, operation or replacement of any water, sanitary or storm
sewer, gas line, electric line, cable television or telephone line or other
utility poles, wires or cables shall be constructed of such material and
so designed as to be readily removable, as determined by the Building
Inspector and appropriate departments or utilities. Such fences shall be
subject to removal by the City/utility or may be contracted by the City/
utility for removal whenever necessary for the construction,
maintenance or replacement of any utility line or apparatus. Fences
shall be removed or replaced at the expense of the owner of the
premises. Replacement shall be the responsibility of the owner of the
premises.
B. In the event that an existing fence violates the public right-or-way or an
easement and the City deems it necessary to remove the fence for
reasons of street or utility work, said fence shall be removed at the
property owner's expense. Replacement shall be the responsibility of
the owner of the premises.
A. All fences shall be constructed of wood, metal, plastic, fiberglass or
masonry materials, shall be structurally sound, shall have a neat and
finished appearance and shall be straight and true.
B. Fences shall be so constructed so as to have the finished side facing
adjacent properties and street frontages.
§ 225-13.3 SEWARD CODE § 225-13.5
1:344
§ 225-13.6. Permit fees.
Permit fees shall be paid upon application for a fence permit and shall be
assessed as per the fee schedule adopted under Article II, Building Permits,
of this chapter. The minimum fee shall be $25.
C. Fences shall not be constructed within two feet of any public sidewalk
or within one foot of any alley.
D. Fences must be maintained in good repair. The Building Inspector may
order any dilapidated, listing, dangerous, unsound or nonconforming
fence to be repaired or removed.
§ 225-13.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-13.6
1:345

ARTICLE XIV
Board Of Appeals
§ 225-14.1. Establishment; members; appointment; terms.
There is hereby created for the City of Seward a Board of Appeals. The
Board of Appeals shall consist of seven members, including a master
electrician, a master plumber, a mechanical contractor, a building
contractor, an engineer, a member of the Fire Department, and a layperson.
The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
the City Council. Members of the Board of Appeals shall serve a term of four
years, and said terms shall coincide with the term of the Mayor.
§ 225-14.2. Duties.
The duties of the Board of Appeals shall be as follows:
A. To adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its
investigations and hearings.
B. To review and decide appeals from determinations of the various code
officials as to the suitability of alternate materials and types of
installation.
C. To review and decide appeals from orders, decisions, or determinations
made by the various code officials relative to the application and
interpretation of the provisions of the International Building Code, the
International Residential Code, the International Plumbing Code, the
NEC Electrical Code, the International Mechanical Code, the
International Fuel Gas Code, the Housing Code, and the International
Property Maintenance Code.
§ 225-14.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-14.2
1:347

ARTICLE XV
Enforcement176
§ 225-15.1. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who violates the
prohibitions or provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an amount not to exceed
$500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of said
payment the offender shall stand committed to the County Jail until such
fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on which a
violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
176. Editor's Note: Added At Time Of Adoption Of Code (See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-15.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-15.1
1:349
Chapter 237
ELECTRICAL SYSTEM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 225.
Occupation tax — See Ch. 350, Art. II.
Trees — See Ch. 364.
Utilities — See Ch. 370.
Zoning and subdivision — See Ch. 410.
§ 225-15.1 SEWARD CODE § 225-15.1
1:350
ARTICLE I
Administration
§ 237-1.1. Ownership; tax; Light Commissioner; rates and charges.
The municipality owns and operates the municipal electrical system through
the Light Commissioner. The governing body, for the purpose of defraying
the cost of the care, management, and maintenance of the municipal
electrical system, may each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum
limit prescribed by state law, on the actual valuation of all real estate and
personal property within the corporate limits that is subject to taxation. The
revenue from the said tax shall be known as the Electrical Fund and shall
remain in the custody of the Municipal Treasurer. The Light Commissioner
shall have the direct management and control of the municipal electrical
system and shall faithfully carry out the duties of his office. He shall have
the authority to adopt rules and regulations for the safe and efficient
management of the electrical system, subject to the supervision and review
of the governing body. The governing body shall by ordinance set the rates
to be charged for services rendered and shall file the same in the office of
the Municipal Clerk for public inspection at any reasonable time. (Neb. RS
16-675, 16-679, 16-682, 19-1404)
§ 237-1.2. Application for service; terms; discontinuance and
restoration of service. [Amended 2-15-1983 by Ord. No. 5-83;
4-19-1988 by Ord. No. 5-88; 8-3-1999 by Ord. No. 28-99]
A. Every person or persons desiring electrical service must make
application therefor at the Utility Office located in City Hall. The
application must state truly and fully all uses to which said electric
current is to be applied and no additional use will be allowed.
B. For new consumers, blanks will be furnished for that purpose by the
Utility Office. All landlords shall make an application with the City to
receive electric service for their rental properties. This application shall
be signed one time only and shall place the responsibility for payment
of all usage on the landlord when any of his rental properties are not
rented. It shall be the duty of the landlord to notify the Utility Office of
any changes of electric usage by tenants on his properties. If the
landlord wishes to assume the responsibility for payment of electric
service on any of his rented or leased properties when they are rented,
he must so notify the Utility Office in writing upon blanks furnished for
that purpose. Upon receiving such notification, all bills will be mailed
directly to the landlord and he will be held responsible for their
payment. Otherwise, all requirements for service deposits must be met.
C. Applications for electrical service are not transferable. Any person
wishing to change from one location to another shall make a new
application. If any consumer shall sell, dispose, or remove from the
premises where service is furnished in his name, or if the premises is
destroyed by fire or other casualty, he shall at once inform the Utility
§ 237-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-1.2
1:351
§ 237-1.3. Promotion of electric heat. [Amended 5-16-1989 by Ord.
No. 13-89]
The City may, by resolution of its Mayor and Council, and shall have the
power and authority to contract with its suppliers of electricity or with other
persons, associations and corporations for the promotion of electric heat,
and provide for incentive payments to its customers, or their installation
or conversion suppliers, for such installation or conversion upon the terms
and conditions provided for in such resolution, when in the judgment of the
Mayor and Council it is beneficial to do so.
Office, which shall cause the electrical service to be shut off from the
premises. If the consumer should fail to give such notice, he shall be
charged for all electricity used on the premises until the Utility Office
is otherwise advised of such circumstances.
D. The municipality, through its Electric Department, shall furnish electric
current for light and power purposes to persons whose premises abut
on any supply wire of the distribution system. The rules, regulations,
and rates for electric service, hereinafter named in this chapter, shall
be considered a part of every contract between every consumer now
served by the Electric Department. Without further formality, the
making of an application on the part of any applicant or the use or
consumption of electric energy by present consumers and the
furnishing of electric service to said applicant or consumer shall
constitute a contract between applicant and the municipality, to which
both parties are bound. If a consumer should violate any of the
provisions of said contract or any reasonable rules and regulations that
the Council may hereafter adopt, the Utility Office shall cause the
service to be disconnected from the building or place of such violation
and no further connection of electric service for such building or place
shall again be made except by order of the Utility Office.
E. Electric service will be discontinued upon the request of the consumer
at no cost. If the same consumer at some future time requests
restoration of the same electric service, a charge as set from time to
time by the City Council, payable in advance, will apply.177
177. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Original §§ 3-303, Consumer's Application, and 3-304, Electrical Service Contracts, of the
1976 Code, which immediately followed this section, were repealed 2-15-1983 by Ord. No.
5-83.
§ 237-1.2 SEWARD CODE § 237-1.3
1:352
ARTICLE II
Installation
§ 237-2.1. Licensed electrician required.
Under no circumstances shall connections be made between the wires of
the electrical distribution system of this municipality and the meter of
the consumer, except by an employee of the municipality or a licensed
electrician authorized to do so by the Light Commissioner. The consumer
may have wiring done by any competent licensed electrician from the
meter to the points of distribution. All wiring, equipment, and apparatus
shall be installed according to the electrical code duly adopted by the
municipality.178 All installation shall be done under the supervision and
strictly in accordance with the rules, regulations, and specifications for such
installation prescribed by the Light Commissioner; provided that such rules,
regulations, and specifications have been reviewed and approved by the
governing body.
§ 237-2.2. Installation procedure.
§ 237-2.3. Utility deposits. [Amended 9-2-1980 by Ord. No. 2080;
12-20-1983 by Ord. No. 40-83; 11-29-1984 by Ord. No. 39-84;
5-16-1989 by Ord. No. 14-89; 4-17-1990 by Ord. No. 14-90; 9-5-1995
by Ord. No. 34-95; 8-17-1999 by Ord. No. 38-99; 4-19-2005 by Ord.
No. 23-05; 5-18-2010 by Ord. No. 10-10]
A. Upon approval of the consumer's application, the City will run, or cause
to be run, supply wire or wires to the building or buildings of the
consumer, if said buildings are located on premises abutting the
distribution system of the City.
B. No person, except those authorized by the Light Commissioner, shall
connect or make any changes in the switches, motors, meters, wires, or
wiring, or any electrical apparatus of any description where said light
or power is used or in any way interfere with or injure the same, or any
connection, when the same are connected with the supply wires of the
electric distribution system of the City.
C. All poles, overhead wires, transformers, and other aerial construction
equipment or apparatus shall be erected in a substantial manner and
shall be placed in the alleys of the City insofar as it is practical to do so.
All wires shall be erected and maintained at such height as shall
interfere as little as possible with other wires or business interests, and
all such wires shall be placed so as not to interfere with the common,
ordinary, public travel upon said streets and alleys.
A. All electric service customers of the City to whom electric service is
supplied, whether tenants, occupants or owners of the premises, shall
deposit at the Utility Office/City Hall a utility deposit in such amount as
178. Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Art. X, Electrical Code.
§ 237-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-2.3
1:353
§ 237-2.4. Meters. [Amended 4-19-1988 by Ord. No. 6-88]
may be fixed from time to time by resolution of the Council. All such
funds shall be retained by the City as a guarantee of payment of all
charges and service fees incurred by the depositor. For deposits over
$500, interest will be payable for a one-year time period based on the
average rate of interest earned by the City on investments over the
immediate past 12 months preceding the return of the deposit. There
will be no charge made for electrical activation services.179
B. Utility deposits are in the nature of trust funds and shall be refunded to
consumers after two years of service and no delinquencies, audited and
allowed by the City Clerk-Treasurer and ordered paid out of the Electric
Fund with proper deductions made for arrearages or delinquencies due
the City, if any. Said utility deposit funds shall be refunded only to the
original depositor, or his/her estate, and are not transferable unless
approved by the City Clerk-Treasurer. The City shall have the authority
to increase or decrease commercial electric service deposits, based on
the usage, if it is determined necessary by order of the City Clerk-
Treasurer. If a commercial deposit is increased and the commercial
consumer neglects or refuses to pay the increase within 30 days,
service shall be discontinued by the procedure provided for in Chapter
370, Utilities, § 370-1.2.
C. All utility deposits heretofore or hereafter deposited with the City that
are not demanded by the depositor within four years after the
discontinuance of such electric service shall be deemed forfeited and
shall be transferred to the Electric Fund of the City.
A. The City will designate a point on the consumer's premises where
service will be delivered. All meters for electric service shall be
furnished, shall be set in place, and shall remain the property of the
City. All such supply wires shall be considered property of the City. It
shall be unlawful for any person to employ any scheme, device or
contrivance for the purpose of evading the proper service and
registration of any meter or to employ any scheme or device whereby
he may obtain current which does not pass through the meter furnished
him by the Electric Superintendent. Finding apparatus attached to the
power meter or any device in or near any meter which causes the same
to register incorrectly shall be prima facie evidence of the intent of the
occupier of said premises, or of said consumer, to convert electric
current to his own use, which is hereby declared unlawful, and the
person convicted of violation of the same shall be punished as
hereinafter provided; and if it shall appear to the Electric
Superintendent that any light or power meter shall have been tapped or
tampered with, he is hereby empowered to install or cause to be
installed, at the consumer's expense, a special meter as specified by the
Electric Superintendent and accessible only to the Electric
179. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 237-2.3 SEWARD CODE § 237-2.4
1:354
§ 237-2.5. Furnishing of meters by City; testing. [Amended
12-2-1980 by Ord. No. 42-80; 8-3-1999 by Ord. No. 26-99181]
All electric current furnished hereafter to consumers by the electric
distribution system of the City shall be measured by meters, which are the
property of, furnished and set by the City. No person except an authorized
agent of the City shall be allowed to set meters or make connections to the
electric service of the distribution system of this City. The City will hereafter
furnish all necessary meters to consumers and will keep all meters clean
and in repair at the expense of the City. The owner of the premises where
a meter is located shall provide ready and convenient access to the meter
so that it may easily be examined and read by authorized agents of the City.
Any consumer of current from the electric distribution system of the City
may request the Light Commissioner to test any current meter or meters in
use which the consumer may have reason to believe are not registering the
correct amount of current. Such request shall be made at the Utility Office/
City Hall and such consumer shall deposit with said office the sum of $50
per meter to be tested by a firm qualified to test meters. If, upon test, the
meter is determined to be defective and does not register the amount of
current 2% or less, the meter shall be repaired at City expense and such
$50 so paid shall be refunded to the consumer. If, however, upon such test,
the meter is determined to perform and register the electric current with
an accuracy of 2% or less, then such $50 shall be retained by the City Light
Department as payment for the expense incurred by the test requested by
such consumer.
§ 237-2.6. Charges when meter is out of repair. [Amended
9-16-1980 by Ord. No. 24-80; 10-18-2005 by Ord. No. 50-05]
When for any reason an electric meter is not registering accurately the
amount of kilowatt hours, the consumer shall be charged for the electric
current during the time such meter is out of repair in a sum equal to the
charge for the amount during the corresponding period of the preceding
year; provided that if no basis for such comparison exists, or in the opinion
of the Electric Superintendent such basis is unfair, the consumer shall pay
such reasonable sum for the electricity during such period as the Electric
Superintendent or his agents. The consumer shall safeguard and
provide adequate protection of the property of the City, including
metering equipment located on the consumer's premises, and maintain
clear and safe access thereto at all reasonable times.180
B. Master metering shall be prohibited in new multifamily residential
buildings. Provisions for individual-tenant metering will be installed at
the time of construction so that if the use of the building changes from
the above criteria, the living units can be easily converted to individual
metering and billing in accordance with City standards.
180. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
181. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 237-2.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-2.6
1:355
Superintendent shall fix. In no event shall either the City be able make a
claim for underpayment by the consumer or the consumer be able to make
a claim for overpayment to the City, for any period of time dating back more
than one year from the date of discovery of a meter out of repair or for any
other reason causing a billing to the consumer to be inaccurate.
§ 237-2.7. Reading meters; issuance and payment of bills.
[Amended 12-2-1975 by Ord. No. 1038; 9-21-1982 by Ord. No.
21-82; 3-20-1984 by Ord. No. 7-84; 10-5-1999 by Ord. No. 48-99;
8-17-2010 by Ord. No. 21-10]
§ 237-2.8. User classifications. [Amended 4-19-1988 by Ord. No.
7-88; 8-17-2010 by Ord. No. 20-10]
A. The Electric Superintendent shall monthly examine and read, or have
examined and read under his supervision, all meters of consumers of
electric service from the electric distribution system of the City. The
employees of the Utility Office shall prepare and cause to be made bills
for collection from each consumer for the amounts of current consumed
since the last reading or examination of his meter or meters. The bills,
so prepared, shall be mailed to the customers on or about the first day
of the next month. For record-keeping purposes, bills shall be
considered delinquent if they are received by the Utility Office after the
close of business on the 15th day of the month.
B. If the consumer shall neglect or refuse to pay his bill on or before the
delinquent date, the amount due will be increased by a ten-percent late
payment charge, not to exceed $50. Sales-tax-exempt consumers will be
exempt from the late payment charge. In addition, discontinuance of
service procedures will commence in accordance with City codes.
A. The term "user" as used in this article shall mean all users of the
municipal electric system and the owners and tenants of real estate and
buildings connected with such electric system and as hereinafter
classified.
B. User rates shall be classified as either "residential," "commercial
service," "general service demand," "rural residential," "large power" or
"municipal." The following are definitions of each user:182
(1) A "residential user" shall be defined as the owner or tenant of a
dwelling used primarily for residential purposes and which is
located inside the City limits: provided that any property located in
a residential zone of the City which conducts a small business
inside the home and which is in conformity with the zoning
ordinances of the City183 shall be considered residential for the
purpose of electric classification; unless the business occupies 50%
182. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
183. Editor's Note: See Ch. 410, Zoning and Subdivision.
§ 237-2.6 SEWARD CODE § 237-2.8
1:356
or more of the residence, and then it shall be classified as a
"commercial service" user.
(2) A "commercial service user" shall be defined as any owner or
tenant who uses electricity primarily for business purposes
(including all churches and schools), whether or not this consumer
is inside or outside the City limits.
(3) A "general service demand user" shall be defined as any owner or
tenant who uses electricity primarily for business purposes,
whether or not this consumer is inside or outside of the City limits,
with a demand of 50 kilowatts or more for four consecutive months.
(4) A "rural residential user" shall be defined as a owner or tenant of a
dwelling used primarily for residential purposes which is located
outside of the City limits.
(5) A "large power user" shall be defined as customers with demands
of 500 kilowatts or more for four consecutive months.
(6) A "municipal user" shall be defined as any customer meeting City
criteria for service in which the City has the sole investment and
interest.
§ 237-2.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-2.8
1:357

ARTICLE III
Rates and Billing
[Amended 12-1-1975 by Ord. No. 1038; 9-20-1977 by Ord. No. 1098;
12-6-1977 by Ord. No. 1106; 11-6-1979 by Ord. No. 1199; 2-15-1983
by Ord. No. 8-83; 1-3-1984 by Ord. No. 1-84; 1-19-1988 by Ord. No.
1-88; 3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 4-91; 8-5-1997 by Ord. No. 38-97;
8-3-1999 by Ord. No. 25-99; 9-17-2002 by Ord. No. 32-02; 6-16-2004
by Ord. No. 13-04; 8-7-2007 by Ord. No. 17-07; 6-3-2008 by Ord. No.
9-08; 8-17-2010 by Ord. No. 19-10; 9-20-2011 by Ord. No. 22-11;
12-4-2012 by Ord. No. 34-12; 5-6-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-13;
10-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-24; 4-3-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-10;
12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-23; 5-21-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-15]
§ 237-3.1. Determination of rates.
A. As a tariff of rates based on monthly consumption by each consumer of
current from the Electric Distribution System of the City, the following
schedule based on meter readings is established.
B. One meter shall be installed to service one user. If additional buildings
are required for a given user, they shall be interconnected by the
customer to obtain one meter. If additional meters and services are
requested by the customer, each shall be treated as a separate
customer. It will be at the City's sole discretion to determine what
installation of service is most appropriate and beneficial to the system
as a whole, which decision will be based on, but not limited to,
proximity, continuity, similarity and compatibility of service. This
requirement shall take effect with the kilowatt hour usage from the first
day of October, 2002. Any services metered differently prior to this date
will be grandfathered in.
C. Effective date: June 2019 billing.
D. Rates:
(1) Summer rate: The summer rate shall apply to the customer's use
from June billing through September billing.
(2) Winter rate: The winter rates shall apply to the customer's use from
October billing through May billing.
E. Terms and conditions:
(1) Usage may be fractionalized on the actual days of service for
application of a change in rate.
(2) Service will be furnished under the City's general terms and
conditions.
(3) Extensions made for service under this schedule are subject to the
provisions of the City's rules governing extension of service and
facilities.
§ 237-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-3.1
1:359
§ 237-3.2. Residential light, heat and power (RE).
§ 237-3.3. Commercial service (CE).
(4) The rates set forth herein may be increased by the amount of any
new or increased governmental tax imposed and levied on
transmission, distribution, production, or the sale of electrical
power.
A. Summer period:
(1) Customer charge, per month: $20.
(2) Plus energy charge of: all kWh, per kWh: $0.0990.
B. Winter period:
(1) Customer charge, per month: $20.
(2) Plus energy charge of:
(a) First 700 kWh, per kWh: $0.0990.
(b) Over 700 kWh, per kWh: $0.0690.
C. Available: within established City limits.
D. Applicable: to single-family residences and individually metered
apartments for all domestic purposes when all service is supplied
through a single meter, provided ratings of individual single-phase
motors do not exceed five horsepower.
E. Character of service: AC, 60 cycles, 120/240 volt, three-wire, singlephase.
F. Small business in Residential District: any property located in a
residential zone of the City which conducts a small business inside the
home which is legal under the Zoning Ordinance of the City184 shall be
considered residential for the purposes of this section, in accordance
with the definition in § 237-2.8B(1).
A. Summer period:
(1) Customer charge, per month: $36.
(2) Plus energy charge of: all kWh, per kWh: $0.0970.
B. Winter period:
(1) Customer charge, per month: $36.
(2) Plus energy charge of:
184. Editor's Note: See Ch. 410, Zoning and Subdivision.
§ 237-3.1 SEWARD CODE § 237-3.3
1:360
§ 237-3.4. General service demand (GD).
(a) First 1,600 kWh, per kWh: $0.0970.
(b) Over 1,600 kWh, per kWh: $0.0670.
C. Available: within established City rate areas.
D. Applicable: to any customer for lighting, heating, and power purposes
where all service is taken through a single meter at one location, and
where the customer's demand does not exceed 49 kW for four
consecutive months. Rating of individual single-phase motors and other
single-phase power and heating units served under this schedule shall
not exceed 10 horsepower except by special permission.
E. Character of service: AC, 60 cycles, 120/240 volts, single-phase; 240
volts, three-phase, three-wire; 120/240, 120/208, volts, or 277/480
volts, three-phase, four-wire; or at any of the City's standard
distribution voltages, as available. Customers requiring service at
secondary voltages other than that already established by the City shall
be required to provide suitable space for location of the City's
transformation, metering and associated equipment. Secondary voltage
other than that already established shall be provided by special
permission only.
A. Summer period:
(1) Customer charge, per month: $107.
(2) Demand charge: per kW per month of billing demand: $18.85.
(3) Plus energy charge of: for all usage, per kWh: $0.061.
B. Winter period:
(1) Customer charge, per month: $107.
(2) Demand charge: per kW per month of billing demand: $13.50.
(3) Plus energy charge of: for all usage, per kWh: $0.0583.
C. Determination of billing demand: the billing demand shall be the
greater of Subsection C(1) or (2) below.
(1) The highest measured demand (corrected for power factor if
required) during any thirty-minute period occurring in the current
billing period.
(2) Sixty-five percent of the highest measured demand (corrected for
power factor if required) during any thirty-minute period occurring
in June, July, August or September billings.
D. Available: within established City rate areas.
§ 237-3.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-3.4
1:361
§ 237-3.5. General service demand - low load factor (GD-LLF).
§ 237-3.6. Large power (LP).
E. Applicable: to existing customers, or to new customers with demands of
50 kilowatts, but not more than 500 kilowatts, for four consecutive
months whose entire requirements are taken through one meter, under
a contract of standard form. Customers who reach this limit for four
consecutive months will be billed this rate on the fifth month. (Not
applicable to resale, stand-by or auxiliary service.)
F. Character of service: AC, 60 cycles, single- or three-phase, at any of the
City's standard voltages (35,000 volts or less) where the service may be
supplied by a single power transformation.
A. Summer period:
(1) Customer charge, per month: $107.
(2) Demand charge: per kW per month of billing demand: $0.
(3) Plus energy charge of: for all usage, per kWh: $0.1900.
B. Winter period:
(1) Customer charge, per month: $107.
(2) Demand charge: per kW per month of billing demand: $0.
(3) Plus energy charge of: for all usage, per kWh: $0.1900.
C. Available: within established City rate areas.
D. Applicable: an alternate to the GD rate to existing customers, or to new
customers with demands of 50 kilowatts, but not more than 500
kilowatts, for four consecutive months whose entire requirements are
taken through one meter, under a contract of standard form. Customers
who reach this limit for four consecutive months may request to be
billed under this rate on the fifth month. (Not applicable to resale,
stand-by or auxiliary service.)
E. Removal from GD-LLF: when a customer requests to be billed on the
GD-LLF rate, the customer will be billed on GD-LLF for a minimum of
12 months. After 12 months, the customer can request to be billed on
the GD rate and must remain on the GD rate for 12 months before
eligible to request to be billed again on the GD-LLF.
F. Character of service: AC, 60 cycles, single- or three-phase, at any of the
City's standard voltages (35,000 volts or less) where the service may be
supplied by a single power transformation.
A. Summer period:
(1) Customer charge, per month: $155.
§ 237-3.4 SEWARD CODE § 237-3.6
1:362
(2) Demand charge: per kW per month of billing demand: $18.50.
(3) Plus energy charge of: for all usage, per kWh: $0.04590.
B. Winter period:
(1) Customer charge, per month: $155.
(2) Demand charge: per kW per month of billing demand: $13.
(3) Plus energy charge of: for all usage, per kWh: $0.04290.
C. Determination of billing demand: the billing demand shall be the
greater of Subsection C(1) or (2) below.
(1) The highest measured demand (corrected for power factor if
required) during any thirty-minute period occurring in the current
billing period.
(2) Sixty-five percent of the highest measured demand (corrected for
power factor if required) during any thirty-minute period occurring
in June, July, August or September billings of the preceding 11
months.
D. Available: in the general area served by the City from lines of 35,000
volts or less.
E. Applicable: to existing customers, or to new customers with demands of
500 kilowatts or more for four consecutive months whose entire
requirements are taken through one meter, under a contract of
standard form. Customers who reach this limit for four consecutive
months will be billed this rate on the fifth month.
F. Character of service: AC, 60 cycles, single- or three-phase, at any of the
City's standard voltages (35,000 volts or less) where the service may be
supplied by a single power transformation.
G. Power factor adjustment:
(1) For loads of 500 kW or more, or at the option of the City, power
factor adjustments will be made in the billing demand, when the
power factor, as determined by test, at the time of the customer's
maximum use is less than 90%. If the power factor, as measured by
the electric department, is lower than 90%, the monthly demand
charge will be multiplied by the ratio 90% bears to the measured
power factor, or at the City's option, the power factor may be
corrected at the customer's expense.
(2) In the general course of maintenance and replacement of
equipment, the City may replace existing demand meters with
power factor-capable demand meters, at its option, at which point
the customer will be subject to power factor adjustments as defined
above.
§ 237-3.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-3.6
1:363
§ 237-3.7. Rural residential light, heat and power (NE).
H. Economic development rate. Available to any large power customer
that meets all of the following conditions:
(1) Provides new or additional load of 1,000 kW or greater on a
monthly basis;
(2) Has a monthly load factor, calculated by dividing the energy usage
by the product of the peak demand and the number of hours in the
month, of 60% or greater;
(3) The customer has entered into a written service agreement with
the City of Seward and the Nebraska Public Power District (NPPD)
pursuant to NPPD Rate Schedule SPP No. 6, Economic
Development Rate Schedule;
(4) The customer has entered into an agreement with either the State
of Nebraska or other political subdivision to provide an economic
development project under state or local law; and
(5) The customer has met all other requirements of the Economic
Development Rate Schedule.
(6) Rate:
(a) NPPD customer charge, per month: $500.
(b) NPPD energy charge of: all kWh, per kWh: $0.025.
(c) City of Seward customer charge, per month: $155.
(d) City of Seward energy charge: all kWh, per kWh: $0.015.
(7) The above rate shall apply to both summer and winter periods.
(8) The economic development rate is subject to change based upon
the written service agreement with the City of Seward and NPPD
as well as NPPD Rate Schedule SPP No. 6, Economic Development
Rate Schedule.
A. Summer period:
(1) Customer charge, per month: $28.
(2) Plus energy charge of: all kWh, per kWh: $0.0990.
B. Winter period:
(1) Customer charge, per month: $28.
(2) Plus energy charge of:
(a) First 900 kWh, per kWh: $0.0990.
§ 237-3.6 SEWARD CODE § 237-3.7
1:364
§ 237-3.8. Power cost adjustment (PCA).
(b) Over 900 kWh, per kWh: $0.0690.
C. Available: in the territory serviced by the City outside of the corporate
limits.
D. Applicable: to rural residences for domestic and other farm uses which
may be served from existing distribution lines and where the total
required kVA does not exceed that which may be supplied from a 50
kVA distribution transformer. Rating of individual single-phase motors
and other single-phase power and heating units served under this
schedule shall not exceed 10 horsepower except by special permission.
E. Character of service: AC, 60 cycles, 120/240 volts, single-phase, threewire.
A. Applicability:
(1) All electric rates are subject to application of a production cost
adjustment. The PCA may be determined from time to time and
when approved shall be applied monthly for a period of not more
than 12 months. The PCA calculations will be based on the FY
projected and actual 12 months includable expenses and the
current budget actual and projected sales subject to the PCA. The
City may invoke the PCA when unexpected increases in the cost of
power or other emergencies are estimated to be greater than a
deviation of 10% in FY power costs budgeted.
(2) At the end of any PCA application period, any under or over
collected revenues may be added to the next FY estimate of power
costs to determine if another PCA is necessary for the next 12
months or shorter period.
B. Formula for calculating the PCA factor:
(1) The following formula is used to determine the power cost
adjustment charge when it is invoked. The PCA will be calculated to
the nearest one-tenth of a $1.00/MWh or $0.10/KWh.
(2) When unexpected increases in the cost of power or other
emergencies are estimated to be greater than a deviation of 10% in
FY power costs budgeted the PCA formula is:
PCA = (Total Estimated Cost Difference from Budget for
Application Period) divided by (Estimated kWh Sales for
Application Period)
§ 237-3.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-3.8
1:365
§ 237-3.9. Delinquent bills; notice.
All bills are delinquent on the 15th day of the month. Thereafter, upon
notice to consumer as provided by this article and by law, and nonpayment
pursuant to said notice, service shall be discontinued.
§ 237-3.10. Rates effective.
The rates provided herein shall become effective with the billing of June 1,
2019, as determined after review of the annual electric budget.
§ 237-3.11. Discrimination prohibited.
No electric current shall be furnished to any consumer under any other rate
than as provided in this article, and there shall be no discrimination in rates
between consumers using equal amounts of current for the same purpose
under the same conditions.
§ 237-3.12. Service beyond corporate limits.
The City, by resolution of its Mayor and Council, shall have the power and
authority to contract with any person, persons, association or corporation,
to sell electric current for light, heat and power purposes beyond its
corporate limits when, in the judgment of the Mayor and Council, it is
beneficial to the City to do so.
§ 237-3.13. Special circumstances.
No electricity shall be billed to any consumer under any other rate not
provided for by this article provided; except that if, in the opinion of the
Electric Superintendent and the City Clerk-Treasurer, and after review with
the City Administrator, there is a change in the nature of electricity being
used, an adjustment to the billings can be made to apply the correct the
rate classification(s), or in cases of erroneous or missing load meter data an
adjustment to similar usage as the year before, or an average usage may be
used, if supporting information is available to make such estimates.
Where:
Total Estimated
Cost Difference
= Revise after Budget the Fuel and
Purchased Power + Transmission
Expense - Budgeted Fuel and
Purchased Power + Transmission
Expense
Application Period = the number of months (1 to 12) that
the PCA will be in force
Estimated KWH
sales
= Projected kWH retail sales during the
Application Period
§ 237-3.8 SEWARD CODE § 237-3.13
1:366
ARTICLE IV
Use and Maintenance
§ 237-4.1. Restrictions on municipal liability. [Amended 9-4-1979 by
Ord. No. 1180; 5-3-1988 by Ord. No. 9-88185]
The municipal electrical system will endeavor to supply but will not
guarantee uninterrupted service or constant voltage level. The consumer
waives claim by its application for or its receipt of such supply, and hereby
releases and discharges the City from claims for, and shall indemnify and
save harmless the City from, any and all loss and damage arising from
interruption of service, or on account of injury to persons (including death),
or damage to property on the premises of a consumer or under a consumer's
control, unless such loss, damage, or injury is the natural, probable and
reasonably foreseeable consequence of the City negligence, and such
negligence is the sole and approximate cause thereof. The Electric
Superintendent shall have the power and authority to disconnect or
discontinue for repairs to the system and for emergency purposes as may
be necessary for the operation and maintenance of the municipal electric
system and where hazardous conditions are found to exist. The municipality
shall use due care and reasonable diligence to provide and supply
uninterrupted service to consumers, but shall not be liable for damages
resulting from interruption of service due to cause over which the
municipality expressly reserves the right to discontinue or disconnect
services for the purposes heretofore set forth.
§ 237-4.2. Posting signs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, tack, or fasten to the poles,
structures, fixtures, or equipment of the municipal electrical system any
sign, poster, advertisement, or banner without written permission from the
Light Commissioner.
§ 237-4.3. Trimming trees. [Amended 5-3-1988 by Ord. No. 10-88186]
Any person desiring to cut or remove trees or branches thereof in close
proximity to the lines of the municipal electrical system shall, before doing
said work, give reasonable written notice to the Light Commissioner and
shall follow any and all rules and regulations which he may prescribe for
doing such work. It shall be unlawful for any person felling or removing
such trees or branches to disrupt or damage the lines without first giving
proper notice and receiving permission in writing to do so. The consumer
shall permit the City and the City shall have the right to trim trees, including
the removal of limbs, to the extent that such trimming shall be necessary
(generally removal of all limbs and branches within five feet of any overhead
wire or structure) to prevent interference with the City's lines. Work must
185. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
186. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 237-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-4.3
1:367
be done in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 364, Trees, of the
City of Seward Municipal Code.
§ 237-4.4. Overhanging branches.187
Whenever it becomes necessary to protect the lines or property of the
electric distribution system of this City, the Mayor and Council shall have
the right to remove and cut away overhanging branches or limbs of trees
so that its lines will be free and open, and such right, privilege, and
authority shall be exercised by the City whenever its Mayor and Council
at any regular, stated, or special meeting passes a resolution stating its
intention so to cut or remove such obstructions to the lines and service of
its electric distribution system. Work must be done in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 364, Trees, of the City of Seward Municipal Code.
§ 237-4.5. Right of entry for inspection.
The Light Commissioner or his duly authorized agents shall have free
access at any reasonable time to each premises and building to or in which
electricity is supplied; provided that in the event of an emergency, such
inspections may take place at any time.
§ 237-4.6. Destruction of property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break, injure,
or deface any building, machinery, apparatus, fixture, attachment, or
appurtenance of the municipal electrical system. (Neb. RS 28-512)
§ 237-4.7. Electrical interference prohibited.
Consumers shall not use, nor permit to be used, the service of the electric
distribution system of this City for the operation of radio, wireless, or other
equipment that will affect said service without complying with the rules of
this City governing such equipment. Any person operating or causing to be
operated any oil burner, motor, sign, or other electrical apparatus within the
corporate limits of the City or connected with any light and power system
in said City or any suburban or farm lines, which shall cause unnecessary
electrical interference with radio reception, shall equip such apparatus with
proper filtering attachments to eliminate the interference; provided that
the foregoing shall not apply to the use of necessary medical or health
equipment or apparatus where said interference cannot be reasonably
eliminated.
187. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 237-4.3 SEWARD CODE § 237-4.7
1:368
ARTICLE V
Co-Generation/Net Metering
§ 237-5.1. Purpose.
In order to comply with Sections 201 and 210 of the Public Utility
Regulatory Policies Act of 1978188 and with the rules and regulations of the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission pertaining thereto, the following
policies relating to interconnections of the electric system of the
municipality with co-generation/net metering and small power production
facilities, rates for sales of electric energy to such facilities, and rates for
purchases of electric energy from such facilities are hereby established.
§ 237-5.2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AVOIDED COSTS — The incremental costs to an electric utility of electric
energy or capacity, or both, which, but for the purchase from qualifying
facilities, such utility would generate itself or purchase from another
source.
CO-GENERATION/NET METERING FACILITY — A facility which produces
electric energy and steam or other forms of useful energy (such as heat)
which are used for industrial, commercial, heating, or cooling purposes.
INTERCONNECTION COSTS — The reasonable costs of connection,
switching, metering, transmission, distribution, safety provisions, and
administrative costs incurred by the electric utility directly related to the
installation and maintenance of the physical facilities necessary to permit
interconnected operations with a qualifying facility, to the extent such costs
are in excess of the corresponding cost which the electric utility would have
incurred if it had not engaged in interconnected operations, but instead
generated an equivalent amount of electric energy itself or purchased
an equivalent amount of electric energy or capacity from other sources.
(Interconnection costs do not include any costs involved in the calculation
of avoided costs.)
QUALIFYING CO-GENERATION/NET METERING FACILITY — A cogeneration/
net metering facility that meets the requirements of the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission regarding ownership, fuel use, and fuel
operating and efficiency standards.
QUALIFYING SMALL POWER PRODUCTION FACILITY — A small power
production facility that meets the requirements of the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission regarding ownership fuel use, fuel efficiency, and
reliability.
SMALL POWER PRODUCTION FACILITY — A facility which produces
electric energy solely by the use, as a primary energy source, of biomass,
188. Editor's Note: See 16 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq.
§ 237-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-5.2
1:369
waste, renewable resources, or any combination thereof totaling not
greater than 80 megawatts at one site.
§ 237-5.3. Interconnection with qualifying facilities.
§ 237-5.4. Rates for sale of energy to qualifying facilities.
Rates for sales of electric energy to qualifying facilities shall be those
current standard rates adopted from time to time by resolution of the Mayor
and City Council which apply to other customers of the utility in the same
classification(s) of electric service.
§ 237-5.5. Small power production purchase rates. [Amended
3-17-1981 by Ord. No. 6-81; 2-18-2014 by Ord. No. 03-14]
A. Qualifying facilities desiring to interconnect with the electric system of
the municipality shall make application to the Electric Department for
such interconnection. Applicants shall use such forms as are prescribed
by the municipality and shall furnish all information requested.189
B. The municipality shall establish reasonable standards to be met by
qualifying facilities to ensure system safety and reliability of
interconnected operations. Such standards may include but shall not be
limited to the following areas: power factor; voltage regulations; fault,
over-current, and over-under voltage protection; harmonics;
synchronization; and isolation.
C. Interconnection costs associated with the interconnection with a
qualifying facility shall be paid for by such qualifying facility. Qualifying
facilities shall be required to file the net metering application for
interconnection, and execute the net metering interconnection
agreement with the municipality, and obtain the net metering
certificate of completion before any interconnection is established.
A. Available: for purchase of the output of co-generation/net metering and
small power production facilities with capacity of 100 kW or less.
Facilities must meet the generation policies and procedures as outlined
by the City.
B. Character of service. Unless otherwise provided by contract, the
character of purchased power will be single- or three-phase alternating
electric current at 60 hertz. Voltage shall be determined by the voltage
of the City service lines in the area unless otherwise agreed.
C. Purchase price.
Non-firm energy - summer and
winter periods
6.01 c/kWh
189. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 237-5.2 SEWARD CODE § 237-5.5
1:370
D. Firm power and energy will be subject to test and written contract with
the City.190
190. Editor's Note: Original § 3-323 of the 1976 Code, Electric Department franchise fees,
which followed this section, as amended, was repealed 4-19-2005 by Ord. No. 26-05. See
now Ch. 350, Art. II, Occupation Tax, § 350-2.1.
§ 237-5.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-5.5
1:371

ARTICLE VI
Enforcement191
§ 237-6.1. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this chapter shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
191. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 237-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-6.1
1:373
Chapter 244
FAIR HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 225.
Trailer courts — See Ch. 360.
Zoning and subdivision — See Ch. 410.
§ 237-6.1 SEWARD CODE § 237-6.1
1:374
ARTICLE I
Prohibited Discriminatory Practices
(Neb. RS 20-301 through 20-322)
§ 244-1.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote the general welfare of the residents
of Seward, Nebraska, by endorsing the provisions of the Nebraska Fair
Housing Act (Neb. RS 20-301 through 20-344), to the effect that there shall
be no discrimination in the City of Seward, Nebraska, in the acquisition,
ownership, possession or enjoyment of housing in accordance with Article
1, Section 25, of the Constitution of the State of Nebraska. (Neb. RS 20-113)
§ 244-1.2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGGRIEVED PERSON — Includes any person who:192
COMMISSION — The Nebraska Equal Opportunity Commission.
DWELLING — Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied
as or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence for one or more
families and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion
thereof.
FAMILIAL STATUS — One or more minors being domiciled with:
HANDICAP — With respect to a person:
A. Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice; or
Believes that he or she will be injured by a discriminatory housing
practice that is about to occur.
B.
A. A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual; or
The designee of a parent or other person having legal custody, with
written permission of the parent of other person.
B.
A physical or mental impairment, excluding the current illegal use of or
addiction to a controlled substance as defined in Neb. RS 28-401, which
substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities;
A.
B. A record of having such an impairment; or
C. Being regarded as having such an impairment.
192. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 244-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-1.2
1:375
PERSON — Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
limited-liability companies, associations, labor organizations, legal
representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies; trusts,
unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers,
and fiduciaries.193
RENT — Includes lease, sublease, let, and otherwise grant for consideration
the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
RESTRICTIVE COVENANT — Any specification limiting the transfer, rental,
or lease of any housing because of race, creed, religion, color, national
origin, sex, handicap, familial status, or ancestry.
(Neb. RS 20-304 through 20-317)
§ 244-1.3. Unlawful acts.
A. Except as exempted by § 244-1.7, it shall be unlawful to:
(1) Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, refuse to
negotiate for the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable or
deny, refuse to show, or refuse to receive and transmit an offer for a
dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, national
origin, familial status, or sex;
(2) Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of
services or facilities in connection therewith because of race, color,
religion, national origin, familial status, or sex;
(3) Make, print, publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published any
notice, statement, or advertisement with respect to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, national origin,
handicap, familial status, or sex or an intention to make any such
preference, limitation, or discrimination;
(4) Represent to any person because of race, color, religion, national
origin, handicap, familial status, or sex that any dwelling is not
available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact
so available;
(5) Cause to be made any written or oral inquiry or record concerning
the race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status,
or sex of a person seeking to purchase, rent, or lease any housing;
(6) Include in any transfer, sale, rental, or lease of housing any
restrictive covenants or honor or exercise or attempt to honor or
exercise any restrictive covenant pertaining to housing;
193. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 244-1.2 SEWARD CODE § 244-1.3
1:376
§ 244-1.4. Handicapped persons; design and construction
standards.
(7) Discharge or demote an employee or agent or discriminate in the
compensation of such employee or agent because of such
employee's compliance with this article or the Nebraska Fair
Housing Act; or
(8) Induce or attempt to induce, for profit, any person to sell or rent
any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective
entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular
race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status, or
sex.
B. The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial
status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of
securing legal custody of any minor.
(Neb. RS 20-318)
A. Except as exempted by § 244-1.7, it shall be unlawful to:
(1) Discriminate in the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable
or deny a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap of:
(a) The buyer or renter;
(b) Any person associated with the buyer or renter; or
(c) A person residing in or intending to reside in the dwelling after
it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
(2) Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of
services or facilities in connection with a dwelling because of a
handicap of:
(a) Such person;
(b) Any person associated with such person; or
(c) A person residing in or intending to reside in the dwelling after
it is so sold, rented, or made available.
B. For purposes of this section, discrimination shall include:
(1) A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be
occupied by the person if the modifications may be necessary to
afford the person full enjoyment of the premises; except that in the
case of rental, the landlord may, when it is reasonable to do so,
condition permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to
restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed
before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted;
§ 244-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-1.4
1:377
§ 244-1.5. Transactions related to residential real estate.
(2) A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices, or services when such accommodations may be
necessary to afford the handicapped person equal opportunity to
use or enjoy a dwelling; and
(3) In connection with the design and construction of covered
multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after September 1, 1991,
a failure to design and construct the dwellings in such a manner
that:
(a) The public use and common use portions of the dwelling are
readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;
(b) All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises within the dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow
passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and
(c) All premises within the dwellings contain the following
features of adaptive design:
[1] An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
[2] Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other
environmental controls in accessible locations;
[3] Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later
installation of grab bars; and
[4] Kitchens and bathrooms such that a handicapped person
in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
C. Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American
National Standards Institute standard for buildings and facilities
providing accessibility and usability for physically handicapped people,
ANSI A117.1, shall satisfy the requirements of Subsection B(3)(c) of
this section.
D. For purposes of this section, "covered multifamily dwellings" shall
mean:
(1) Buildings consisting of four or more units if such buildings have
one or more elevators; and
(2) Ground-floor units in other buildings consisting of four or more
units.
E. Nothing in this section shall require that a dwelling be made available
to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the
health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in
substantial physical damage to the property of others.
(Neb. RS 20-319)
§ 244-1.4 SEWARD CODE § 244-1.5
1:378
§ 244-1.6. Multiple-listing services.
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers
organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against any
person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or
participation on account of race, color, religion, national origin, handicap,
familial status, or sex. (Neb. RS 20-321)
§ 244-1.7. Applicability to religious organizations, private homes,
private clubs or housing for older persons.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business
includes engaging in transactions related to residential real estate to
discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction
because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or
national origin.
B. For purposes of this section, "transaction related to residential real
estate" shall mean any of the following:
(1) The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance:
(a) For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or
maintaining a dwelling; or
(b) Secured by residential real estate; or
(2) The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential real property.
C. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person engaged in the business
of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into consideration
factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, handicap,
familial status, or sex.
(Neb. RS 20-320)
A. Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization,
association, or society or any nonprofit institution or organization
operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious
organization, association, or society from limiting the sale, rental, or
occupancy of a dwelling which it owns or operates for other than
commercial purposes to persons of the same religion or from giving
preferences to such persons unless membership in such religion is
restricted on account of race, color, national origin, handicap, familial
status, or sex.
B. Nothing in this article shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to
the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes
provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than commercial
§ 244-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-1.7
1:379
§ 244-1.8. Availability of information.
The Municipal Clerk, upon request, shall make available to an aggrieved
person, or any other person, information regarding the Nebraska Fair
Housing Act and the Nebraska Equal Opportunity Commission without cost
to such individual.
§ 244-1.9. Violations and penalties.194
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
purposes, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to its
members or from giving preference to its members.
C. Nothing in this article shall prohibit or limit the right of any person or
his or her authorized representative to refuse to rent a room or rooms
in his or her own home for any reason or for no reason or to change
tenants in his or her own home as often as desired, except that this
exception shall not apply to any person who makes available for rental
or occupancy more than four sleeping rooms to a person or family,
within his or her home.
D. Nothing in this article regarding familial status shall apply with respect
to housing for older persons. For purposes of this subsection, "housing
for older persons" shall mean housing:
(1) Provided under any state program that the Nebraska Equal
Opportunity Commission determines is specifically designed and
operated to assist elderly persons or defined in the program;
(2) Intended for and solely occupied by persons 62 years of age or
older; or
(3) Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55
years of age or older per unit.
(Neb. RS 20-322)
194. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 244-1.7 SEWARD CODE § 244-1.9
1:380
Chapter 248
FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 252. Streets, sidewalks and municipal
property — See Ch. 340.
§ 244-1.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-1.9
1:381

ARTICLE I
Firearms
[Adopted as Ch. 6, Art. 3, §§ 6-330.01 through 6-332, of the 1976
Code]
§ 248-1.1. Discharge restricted. [Amended 7-5-1978 by Ord. No.
1136]
No persons except an officer of the law in the discharge of his duties
may discharge any gun, pistol or firearm in the City; provided that gun
clubs, organizations, groups and persons approved by the Council upon
application to the Council may use, fire and discharge firearms for the
purpose of shooting blue rocks and practice and training targets or other
purposes associated with such activity between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and
11:30 p.m. of any day at such location approved by the Council, but are at
any other time of the day prohibited from firing and discharging any gun or
firearm or such apparatus for such purposes or activity, including members,
guests or persons of such club, organizations, groups or persons.
§ 248-1.2. Concealed weapons.195
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to carry about their person
any concealed weapon, such as a handgun, knife, billy club, slingshot, metal
knuckles, or other deadly weapon of any kind. Nothing herein shall be
construed to apply to the municipal police or to a person who is the holder
of a valid permit issued under the Concealed Handgun Permit Act (Neb.
RS 69-2427 et seq.) if the concealed weapon the defendant is carrying is a
handgun. (Neb. RS 28-1202)
§ 248-1.3. Slingshots, air guns and BB guns.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a slingshot, air gun, BB gun,
or the like loaded with rocks or other dangerous missiles at any time or
under any circumstances within the municipality. (Neb. RS 16-227)
§ 248-1.4. Violations and penalties.196
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
195. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
196. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 248-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-1.4
1:383

ARTICLE II
Fireworks
[Adopted as Ch. 6, Art. 3, §§ 6-333 through 6-336.3, of the 1976
Code]
§ 248-2.1. Definitions. [Amended 10-4-1988 by Ord. No. 22-88;
6-20-1989 by Ord. No. 21-89; 3-20-2012 by Ord. No. 16-12]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONSUMER FIREWORKS —
Any of the following devices that meet the requirements set forth in 16
CFR Parts 1500 and 1507, as such regulations existed on January 1,
2010, and are tested and approved by a nationally recognized testing
facility or by the State Fire Marshal:
Any small firework device designed to produce visible effects by
combustion and which is required to comply with the construction,
chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the United States
Consumer Product Safety Commission set forth in 16 CFR, as such
regulations existed on January 1, 2010;
(1)
Any small device designed to produce audible effects, such as a
whistling device;
(2)
Any ground device or firecracker containing 50 milligrams or less
of explosive composition; or
(3)
Any aerial device containing 130 milligrams or less of explosive
composition.
(4)
A.
Class C explosives as classified by the United States Department of
Transportation shall be considered consumer fireworks.
B.
"Consumer fireworks" does not include:
Rockets that are mounted on a stick or wire and project into the air
when ignited, with or without report;
(1)
Wire sparklers, except that silver and gold sparklers are deemed to
be consumer fireworks until January 1, 2014;
(2)
(3) Nighttime parachutes;
Fireworks that are shot into the air and after coming to the ground
cause automatic ignition due to sufficient temperature;
(4)
Firecrackers that contain more than 50 milligrams of explosive
composition; and
(5)
Fireworks that have been tested by the State Fire Marshal as a
response to complaints and have been deemed to be unsafe.
(6)
C.
§ 248-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-2.1
1:385
DISPLAY FIREWORKS — Those materials manufactured exclusively for use
in public exhibitions or displays of fireworks designed to produce visible
or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Display
fireworks are further defined in Neb. RS 28-1241.
FIREWORKS — Any composition or device designed for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or
detonation and which meets the definition of "consumer fireworks" or
"special fireworks" set forth by the United States Department of
Transportation in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
§ 248-2.2. Restrictions and exceptions. [Amended 10-4-1988 by Ord.
No. 22-88; 6-20-1989 by Ord. No. 21-89; 3-20-2012 by Ord. No.
16-12]
§ 248-2.3. Sky rockets and bottle rockets.
Sky rockets, bottle rockets or any other form of fireworks composed of a
case containing a combustible material, fastened to a guiding stick, which is
designed and manufactured to be projected through the air by the reaction
resulting from the rearward discharge of gases liberated by combustion
shall not be lawful fireworks within the City, notwithstanding any action
by the State Fire Marshal to the contrary, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to sell at retail or otherwise barter, exchange, or offer for sale at
retail, give away, or have in his or its possession, discharge, explode or use
or bring into the City any said fireworks.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B, it shall be unlawful for any person
to possess, sell, offer for sale, bring into this state, or discharge any
fireworks other than consumer fireworks. (Neb. RS 28-1244)
B. Subsection A shall not apply to:
(1) Any display fireworks purchased from a licensed distributor; or
(2) Any display fireworks purchased by the holder of a display permit
issued pursuant to Neb. RS 28-1239.01; or
(3) Any fireworks brought into this state for storage by a licensed
distributor and held for sale outside of this state; or
(4) Any fireworks furnished for agricultural purposes pursuant to
written authorization from the State Fire Marshal to any holder of a
distributor's license; or
(5) Toy cap pistols or toy caps, each of which does not contain more
than 0.25 of a grain of explosive material.
(Neb. RS 17-556, 28-1241, 28-1244, 28-1245, 28-1247, 1943,
28-1245)
§ 248-2.1 SEWARD CODE § 248-2.4
1:386
§ 248-2.4. Dates and hours of sale. [Amended 2-7-1989 by Ord. No.
4-89; 11-2-1999 by Ord. No. 51-99; 9-7-2004 by Ord. No. 21-04;
3-20-2012 by Ord. No. 17-12]
Conditioned upon payment of the occupation tax required to be paid by
Chapter 350, Article II, § 350-2.1, of the Seward Municipal Code, consumer
fireworks permitted within the municipality may be sold at retail between
June 28 and July 5 each year during the following times:
§ 248-2.5. Discharge restrictions. [Amended 11-2-1999 by Ord. No.
51-99; 4-3-2001 by Ord. No. 10-01; 9-7-2004 by Ord. No. 21-04]
A. June 28 through July 3: 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
B. July 4: 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight.
(Neb. RS 28-1249)
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, fire, launch or throw
any fireworks or any object which is lighted to explode or which
explodes upon contact with another object:
(1) From or onto any motor vehicle.
(2) Onto any street, highway or sidewalk.
(3) During any pyrotechnics display authorized by special permit
under the ordinances of the municipality and when the special
permit authorized the display to be held at the Seward City Park.
No lawfully permitted firework shall be exploded in the City Park
during the time of said pyrotechnics display except by personnel
authorized by said special permit.
(4) At or near any persons.
(5) Into or upon any building.
(6) Into or at any group of persons.
(7) In or upon the premises of another person.
(8) Within 200 feet of any fireworks stand.
B. The discharge or exploding of fireworks within the municipality shall be
permitted only on the following dates and during the following hours:
(1) June 28 through July 3: 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
(2) July 4: 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight.
C. The discharge and exploding of fireworks within the municipality on
any dates or at times other than set out in this section shall be unlawful.
§ 248-2.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-2.6
1:387
§ 248-2.6. Vendor regulations. [Added 3-20-2001 by Ord. No. 5-01;
amended 6-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18]
§ 248-2.7. Discharge during parades and public events. [Added
9-4-2001 by Ord. No. 22-01]
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, fire, launch or throw any
fireworks or any object which is lighted to explode or which explodes upon
contact with another object at the following times and places:
§ 248-2.8. Liability insurance required for vendors. [Added
9-15-2009 by Ord. No. 14-2009]
A. Each vendor of fireworks within the City of Seward, in addition to
obtaining the appropriate license from the State Fire Marshal, shall
secure a license from the City by filing an application with the City
Clerk upon forms supplied by the City. Upon the determination to grant
the license by the City Clerk, the City Clerk shall collect the appropriate
occupation tax and issue said license. Any license so issued may be
revoked at any time by the governing body upon proper notice and
hearing, if a hearing is requested by the licensee.
B. Each fireworks stand must meet the following requirements:
(1) No stand shall be placed within 75 feet of gasoline storage or
pumps.
(2) No stand shall be placed within 10 feet of another building.
(3) No stand shall be placed on a public right-of-way or on public
property.
(4) "No Smoking" signs shall be posted.
(5) Each stand shall have one of the following approved fire
extinguishers: five-pound dry powder, CO2 ABC Type, or 2 1/
2-pound water, either the pressure type or hand pump.
(6) Fireworks shall be sold in a separate stand that is not part of a
store building.
A. Within one block of the 4th of July parade route for the period of time
commencing one hour before the time for the start of the parade and
ending one-half hour after the time said parade is finished.
B. In or into any park or onto any public property within the municipality
for the period of time commencing two hours before and ending onehalf
hour after any public event such as, but not limited to, concerts and
public fireworks displays.
A. Persons or entities engaged in the seasonal sale of pyrotechnics
commonly known as "fireworks" shall be required to acquire and
maintain in full force and effect at all times while doing business in the
§ 248-2.6 SEWARD CODE § 248-2.8
1:388
§ 248-2.9. Violations and penalties. [Added 4-3-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-10]
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
City of Seward a policy of insurance, naming the City of Seward as an
additional insured thereon, in the following minimum amounts:
General Liability Insurance Limits
Each occurrence $1,000,000
Damage to rented premises (each
occurrence)
$100,000
Personal and advertising injury $1,000,000
General aggregate $1,000,000
Products and completed operations
aggregate
$1,000,000
Medical expense (any 1 person) $5,000
B. Prior to being issued a fireworks permit, the applicant shall provide the
City of Seward an "Acord Form 25" or similar insurance industry
certificate of insurance listing as an additional insured the:
City of Seward
P.O. Box 38
Seward, NE 68434
§ 248-2.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-2.9
1:389
Chapter 252
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 225. Solid waste — See Ch. 335.
§ 248-2.9 SEWARD CODE § 248-2.9
1:390
ARTICLE I
Fire Prevention
§ 252-1.1. Fire Code adopted by reference. [Amended 5-5-1981 by
Ord. No. 18-81; 6-6-1989 by Ord. No. 16-89197]
To provide for certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements
for the safeguarding to a reasonable degree of life and property from
the hazards of fire and explosion arising from storage, handling and use
of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions
hazardous to life or property in the use or occupancy of buildings or
premises, the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, published by the
International Code Council, and printed in book or pamphlet form is hereby
adopted, together with errata thereto, and is hereby incorporated by
reference in the City ordinances insofar as said code does not conflict with
the statutes of the State of Nebraska and the City ordinances. One copy of
the International Fire Code shall be on file in the office of the Municipal
Clerk and is available for public inspection at any reasonable time. The
provisions of said Fire Code shall be controlling throughout the municipality
and its zoning jurisdiction. Whenever any of the provisions of said Fire Code
come into conflict with any of the provisions of this article, the provisions
contained therein shall control. (Neb. RS 18-132, 19-902, 19-922, 81-502)
§ 252-1.2. Fire Code enforcement.
It shall be the duty of all municipal officials to enforce the incorporated
Fire Code provisions, and all infractions shall be immediately brought to the
attention of the Fire Chief.
§ 252-1.3. Right of entry.
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, or occupant of any building or
structure, except the interiors of private dwellings, to allow the Fire Chief
to inspect, or cause to be inspected, as often as necessary, the structure for
the purpose of ascertaining and enumerating all conditions therein that are
likely to cause fire, or any other violations of the provisions of the municipal
ordinances affecting the hazard of fire. (Neb. RS 81-512)
§ 252-1.4. Notice of violation; time frame for compliance.
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, or occupant of any building or
structure that was lawfully inspected as hereinbefore prescribed, and who
receives written or verbal notice of a violation of any of the provisions of the
municipal ordinances, to correct the condition that violates the ordinance
or ordinances within five days from the date of receipt of such notice.
§ 252-1.5. Fire limits.
197. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 252-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-1.5
1:391
(Neb. RS 16-222)
§ 252-1.6. Open burning.
A. The following described territory in the municipality shall be and
constitute the fire limits: Blocks 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 20, 21, and 22 all
in the Original Town of Seward, Nebraska.
B. Building materials within fire limits. Within the aforesaid fire limits, no
structure shall be built, altered, moved, or enlarged unless such
structure will be enclosed with walls constructed wholly of stone, wellburned
brick, terra cotta, concrete, or other such noncombustible
materials as will satisfy the Fire Chief that the structure will be
reasonably fireproof.
A. Prohibited open burning. It shall be unlawful for any person to set out a
fire on the pavement, or near any curb, now built or hereafter to be
built, within the municipality. (Neb. RS 17-556)
B. Open burning of garbage or refuse.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow the burning of
garbage or refuse within the City limits unless such burning takes
place in a multiple-chambered incinerator located within a building
or accessory thereto situated on the premises and vented into a
masonry or metal flue; provided that the emissions from such
multiple-chambered incinerator do not cause a nuisance.
(2) Open burning shall not be a violation of this section when it can be
shown that such open burning is the only feasible method of
disposal and that disposal by open burning is in the public interest.
Persons intending to engage in such open burning shall file a
request to do so with the Fire Chief, who may issue a permit subject
to special conditions. The application shall include the following:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the person
submitting the application.
(b) The type of business or activity involved.
(c) A description of the proposed equipment and operating
practice to be used to prevent an uncontrolled fire.
(d) The type, quantity and composition of the material to be
burned.
(e) The schedule of the burning operations.
(f) The exact location where the open burning will occur.
(g) Specific reasons why open burning is the only feasible method
of disposal and why open burning is in the public interest.
§ 252-1.5 SEWARD CODE § 252-1.6
1:392
§ 252-1.7. Prohibited fuels. [Amended 4-20-1982 by Ord. No. 7-82]
Commencing on May 1, 1982, it shall be unlawful to burn solid fuels, to
include, but not limited to, wood, wood products and coal for cooking,
heating or any other purpose within Blocks 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 20,
Seward Original Town, City of Seward, Nebraska.
§ 252-1.8. Sky lanterns prohibited. [Amended 8-21-2012 by Ord. No.
26-12]
Sky lanterns, or any other uninhabited free-floating device which includes
a flame or other heating device to heat air as a lifting mechanism, shall
be prohibited within the City, notwithstanding any action by the State Fire
Marshal to the contrary, and it shall be unlawful for any person to sell at
retail or otherwise barter, exchange, or offer for sale at retail, give away, or
have in his or its possession, discharge, light, release, use or bring into the
City any said sky lanterns.
§ 252-1.9. Violations and penalties.198
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
MULTIPLE-CHAMBER INCINERATOR — Any incinerator used to
dispose of combustible refuse by burning, consisting of three or more
refractory-lined combustion furnaces in series, physically separated by
refractory walls, interconnected by gas passage ports or ducts and
employing adequate design parameters necessary for maximum
combustion of the material to be burned, the refractories having a
Pyrometric Cone Equivalent of 31, tested according to the method
described in the American Society for Testing and Materials Method
C-24-56. Gas- or fuel-fired incinerators now in use may be used until the
same become unusable. Thereafter, multiple-chamber incinerators, as
defined herein, shall be used as permitted and provided by this article.
OPEN BURNING — The burning of any materials wherein air
contaminants resulting from combustion are emitted directly into the
ambient air without passing through a stack or chimney from an
enclosed chamber.
198. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 252-1.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-1.9
1:393

ARTICLE II
Poisonous and Flammable Gases
§ 252-2.1. Storage permit required.
Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to store or keep in the municipality
for any period of time any form of poisonous, flammable or anhydrous
ammonia gas or liquefied petroleum gas in excess of five gallons, or to
add to, enlarge, or replace any facility used for the storage of such gases,
must first get permission from the governing body. The governing body shall
require the name of the gas, the place of storage, and the amount of gas
stored. If permission is granted, the governing body shall prescribe such
rules, regulations, and precautionary actions as it may deem necessary. Any
such present use that is discontinued for a period of 60 days shall not be
revived without a permit. (Neb. RS 16-222)
§ 252-2.2. Violations and penalties.199
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
199. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 252-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-2.2
1:395

ARTICLE III
Explosives
§ 252-3.1. Storage permit required. [Amended 9-20-1994 by Ord.
No. 60-94200]
In addition to notifying the Municipal Fire Department pursuant to Neb.
RS 28-1233(3), any person desiring to store or keep for any period of time
explosive materials defined in Neb. RS 28-1213 over one pound in weight
shall file with the Municipal Clerk an application for an explosive material
storage permit 24 hours prior to such storage. Application for said permit
shall contain all the necessary information and documents required for the
protection of the residents of the municipality. The Municipal Clerk shall
issue a permit to the applicant upon approval of the application by the Police
Chief and Fire Chief and the payment of the permit fee set by resolution of
the governing body. The transfer of explosive materials to another person
within the municipality shall require the person receiving the explosive
materials to obtain a new permit. The transfer of explosive materials to a
new location by the owner shall require a new permit for the new location.
(Neb. RS 16-222, 16-227, 28-1229, 28-1233)
§ 252-3.2. Blasting permit required. [Amended 1-16-1990 by Ord.
No. 4-90; 9-20-1994 by Ord. No. 61-94201]
In addition to notifying the Municipal Fire Department pursuant to Neb. RS
28-1233(3), any person desiring explosive materials as defined in Neb. RS
28-1213 over one pound in weight within the municipality shall apply for
and secure a permit therefor from the Municipal Clerk 24 hours prior to
such discharge. The application for said permit shall contain all necessary
information and documents required for the protection of the residents of
the municipality. The Municipal Clerk shall issue a permit upon approval
of the application by the Police Chief and Fire Chief and payment of the
permit fee as set by resolution of the Mayor and City Council. Any person
securing said permit shall discharge such explosives in conformance with
the conditions specified in the permit. In no case shall any person perform
blasting operations unless in compliance with all state and local laws and
regulations and unless operating under the direct supervision of a person
in possession of a valid user's permit issued by the Nebraska State Patrol.
(Neb. RS 16-227, 28-1229, 28-1233)
§ 252-3.3. Transportation.
Any person wishing to transport high explosives in the municipality shall
first acquire a permit from the Municipal Police and shall take such
precautions and use such route as it may prescribe. Nothing herein shall
be construed to apply to the Municipal Police or any of the Armed Services
of the United States. No vehicle transporting explosives shall make an
200. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
201. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 252-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-3.3
1:397
unscheduled stop for longer than five minutes within the municipality and
in the event of mechanical failure. Immediate notice of such breakdown
shall be given to the Police Chief, who shall then prescribe such precautions
as may be necessary to protect the residents of the municipality and a
reasonable time for removal of the vehicle from the municipality. (Neb. RS
16-227, 28-1235)
§ 252-3.4. Violations and penalties.202
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
202. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 252-3.3 SEWARD CODE § 252-3.4
1:398
Chapter 256
FISHING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Offenses — See Ch. 290. Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 299.
§ 252-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-3.4
1:399

ARTICLE I
Fishing Regulations
§ 256-1.1. Applicability of state regulations.203
Regulations on Fish, published by the Nebraska Game and Parks
Commission, shall be effective on City-owned lakes, except as modified by
ordinance and resolution of the Mayor and Council of the City.
§ 256-1.2. Municipal regulations.
§ 256-1.3. Additional rules and regulations; enforcement. [Added
3-21-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-07]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to take more than 10 fish of all kinds
combined in any one day.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to use more than one pole or more
than two hooks per pole.
C. It shall be unlawful to snag any fish externally with a hook and line,
whether a game or non-game fish.
D. It shall be unlawful to use throw lines.
E. It shall be unlawful to seine for bait.
F. Any lake shall be closed to fishing for three days following the stocking
thereof. Such stocked lake shall be open to fishing at 6:00 p.m. on the
fourth day following the stocking.
G. Fishing is prohibited when there is ice on such lake, except at such
areas specifically designated by the City and posted for such purpose.
[Amended 3-21-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-07]
A. The Park/Recreation/Cemetery/Golf Director, or his designee, is hereby
authorized to create additional rules and regulations governing fishing
upon City-owned lakes as may be necessary, which further such rules
and regulations shall, before becoming effective, be approved by the
Mayor and City Council by ordinance and then filed with the City Clerk.
B. The Park/Recreation/Cemetery/Golf Director shall have control of all
fishing and shall enforce the provisions of this article, and all rules and
regulations adopted hereunder. The Park/Recreation/Cemetery/Golf
Director shall have and is hereby vested with authority to suspend or
revoke fishing privileges for violation of any of the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant to the provisions of this article, or for refusal of any
person to comply with the provisions hereof, or rules and regulations
adopted pursuant hereto.
203. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 256-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-1.4
1:401
§ 256-1.4. Violations and penalties.204
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
204. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 256-1.4 SEWARD CODE § 256-1.4
1:402
Chapter 260
FRANCHISES
§ 256-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-1.4
1:403

ARTICLE I
Natural Gas Franchise
[Adopted as Ch. 10, Art. 11, of the 1976 Code]
§ 260-1.1. Adoption of Natural Gas Regulation Act. [Amended
12-15-1987 by Ord. No. 33-87205]
The provisions of the State Natural Gas Regulation Act (Neb. RS 66-1801 et
seq.) and any amendments made thereto, except as otherwise provided for
in this article, are hereby adopted by this reference thereto and made a part
of this article as fully as if set forth at length herein, except as otherwise
provided in this article.206
§ 260-1.2. Rate changes. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 26-87]
A. In the event the franchisee desires to change its rates for natural gas
service within the City other than to reflect an adjustment for the cost
of purchased gas, the franchisee will present to the City copies of
present and proposed rate schedules and information supporting the
proposed rates to be charged for natural gas service within the City.
The rate schedule and information submitted with the rate schedules
shall be referred to as the "rate filing." Any such rate filing shall be
deemed filed upon receipt of the same and the filing fee by the City
Clerk. A filing fee as set from time to time by the City Council shall be
paid to the City with the rate filing. Such fee shall be considered as an
operating cost of the franchisee and shall not be separately itemized on
any customer bill.207
B. The governing body of the City shall have the right to select and engage
rate consultants, accountants, auditors, attorneys, engineers and other
experts as deemed necessary or desirable to advise and represent the
governing body in evaluating any proposed rate change. The franchisee
shall reimburse the City within 90 days of the presentation of a bill by
the City for the reasonable costs of those services only to the extent that
said costs exceed the filing fee for the rate filing.
C. If the proposed rates sought by the franchisee in its rate filing have not
been passed on final reading by the City Council within 90 days after it
was filed, or as such time may be extended by agreement between the
franchisee and City in order to supply additional information if
requested by the City, the proposed rates shall be put into effect as
interim rates and shall be collected subject to refund pursuant to Neb.
RS 66-1838, as the same may be amended from time to time. Such
interim rates shall remain in effect pending final determination by the
205. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
206. Editor's Note: Original §§ 10-1102, Rate Schedules and 10-1103, Refund, of the 1976
Code, which immediately followed this section, were repealed 12-15-1987 by Ord. No.
33-87.
207. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-1.2
1:405
§ 260-1.3. Violations and penalties.210
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
City, which determination shall be made within one year or, in the event
of litigation, final rate determination by the courts.208
D. The rates proposed to be charged for non-contract firm natural gas
service within the City shall be based upon the utility's cost of providing
service to the City or the representative costs in that part of the utility's
service area which includes the City. The period for which the cost of
service is to be recognized is to be a projected twelve-month period
commencing not later than the proposed effective date of the increase.
The cost of service shall be determined in a manner consistent with
regulated public utility practices and shall include 1) appropriate costs
as defined and set forth in the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
Uniform System of Accounts Prescribed for Natural Gas Companies
FERC Accounts, and 2) a reasonable return on the utility's rate base.
E. In determining a reasonable return, a rate (percentage) shall be
employed that is representative of the cost of debt, preferred stock, and
common equity capital. The rate base shall consist of the applicable net
investment in utility plant (as defined in the FERC Accounts), allowance
for working capital, and such other items as may reasonably be
included; less such investment as may, unless otherwise prevented by
law, be attributed to other than investor capital.
F. The franchisee's appropriate costs and items of rate base shall include
allocated or apportioned expenses and rate base items, when such
allocations or apportionments are reasonably representative of
assigned common costs and arise from the manner in which the
franchisee's operations are conducted or from an avoidance of
excessive and costly financial recordkeeping.
G. Rate filings, not including changes reflecting the cost of gas, shall be
limited to a maximum of one in any twelve-calendar-month period.209
208. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
209. Editor's Note: Original §§ 10-1105, Information to be provided; 10-1106, Notice of
Application; 10-1107, Providing of General Information, and 10-1108, Validity of
Franchise, of the 1976 Code, which immediately followed this section, were repealed
12-15-1987 by Ord. No. 33-87.
210. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-1.2 SEWARD CODE § 260-1.3
1:406
Chapter 271
JUNK AND JUNK DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 284.
Offenses — See Ch. 290.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 303.
Solid waste — See Ch. 335.
Abandoned and wrecked vehicles — See Ch.
377.
§ 260-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-1.3
1:407

ARTICLE I
Licensing and Regulation
§ 271-1.1. Terms defined; applicability.
Any person engaged in the business or occupation of exchanging, handling
or storing scrap paper, bottles, rags, iron or junk, the dismantling or taking
apart of automobiles, other than for repair, or the wrecking of automobiles,
the storage of automobiles unfit for operation, or automobiles or parts
thereof kept for storage, or the storage and accumulation of scrap from
automobiles, or other sources, shall be construed and considered the
storing of iron or junk, or the operation of a junk business, or junkyard
within the meaning of this article, and shall be subject to the provisions
thereof.
§ 271-1.2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, conduct or operate within this
City a junk business, or junkyard or to store iron and junk as defined in
this article, without first obtaining from the Mayor and Council a license
therefor in the manner hereinafter provided.
§ 271-1.3. Application for license; fee and bond; issuance; term;
revocation.
A. Any person desiring to obtain a license for the keeping, conducting and
operating within the City of a junk business or junkyard or the storage
of iron or junk shall make application in writing to the Mayor and
Council for such license. The application shall particularly describe the
location of the proposed business and shall set out the names of the
owners thereof. Said application shall be filed with the Clerk and action
shall be taken thereon either at a special meeting or at the next regular
meeting of the Council. The Mayor and Council may grant or reject said
application as the majority thereof shall decide.
B. The application shall be accompanied by a license fee as set from time
to time by the City Council, which shall be payable to the City. If the
license is granted, the Clerk shall issue the same under the Seal of the
City; and the license shall recite the name of the applicant, the date
issued, the character of business sought to be engaged in, the location
thereof, the owners thereof; and the same shall terminate at the end of
the fiscal year during which it is granted or issued and shall not be
assignable. As a condition precedent to the granting of said license, the
applicant shall execute and file with the City a bond in an amount set
from time to time by the City Council, with one or more sufficient
sureties, to be approved by the Clerk, conditioned for the faithful
performance and observance of this article and regulations of this City
respecting such business; provided, further, that if the holder of the
license shall violate the provisions of this article or the regulations
made by the City respecting such business, said bond shall be forfeited
§ 271-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-1.3
1:409
§ 271-1.4. Record of purchases.212
Every person engaged in the business of operating a junkyard, operating
a junk business, or the storing of iron or junk shall at all times keep a
record of purchases, and shall enter in a book the name of the person
from whom said junk was purchased, his or her signature, date of birth
and driver's license number or other means of identification, the date
of the purchase thereof, the amount paid, the address of the seller, the
identification and signature of the clerk or agent for the business who
handled the transaction, and a full and accurate description of the article
purchased, including any manufacturer's identifying insignia or serial
number. This record shall be legibly written in ink in the English language
and shall at all times be open to inspection to any police or other peace
officer. (Neb. RS 69-204)
§ 271-1.5. Storage restrictions.
It shall be unlawful in the operation of a junk business or junkyard or the
storing of iron or junk to use any lot or parcel of land for the purpose of
storing, piling or accumulating junk within the City unless the following
conditions are fully complied with by said licensee:
and the City shall be entitled to recover the amount of the bond, and the
license shall be revoked. Any license issued under this article may be
revoked by the Mayor and Council whenever the licensee shall violate
the provisions of this article. All licenses shall be taken out at the
beginning of each fiscal year and shall be good only until the end of the
fiscal year.211
A. No combustible or inflammable material shall be accumulated or
assembled in piles or otherwise unless completely enclosed by fireproof
sheds or buildings.
B. No accumulations, piles or heaps of iron, wood or other junk, as herein
defined, shall be permitted upon said lot or parcel of land unless the
same is within a building.
C. No junk emitting any offensive smells or odors shall be allowed or
permitted on said premises.
D. The lot and premises upon which said junkyard or junk shop is located
must at all times be kept in a neat, clean, sightly and sanitary condition
and all unsightly views kept from the public.
E. No automobile bodies, frames or chassis shall be kept on said premises
unless the same are stored in a building.
211. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
212. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 271-1.3 SEWARD CODE § 271-1.6
1:410
§ 271-1.6. Violations and penalties.213
In addition to any other provisions in this article, any person who violates
the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an amount not to exceed
$500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of said
payment the offender shall stand committed to the County Jail until such
fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on which a
violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
213. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 271-1.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-1.6
1:411
Chapter 278
LIBRARY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Library Board — See Ch. 12, Art. II.
§ 271-1.6 SEWARD CODE § 271-1.6
1:412
ARTICLE I
Operating and Usage Regulations
§ 278-1.1. Sale or disposal of materials.214
The Library Board may authorize the sale, exchange, or disposal of any
surplus, damaged, defective, obsolete, or duplicate books or other materials
in the Library. Records shall be kept of any such surplus, damaged,
defective, obsolete, or duplicate books or other materials so disposed of.
(Neb. RS 51-207)
§ 278-1.2. Rules and regulations; penalties.215
The Library Board shall establish rules and regulations for the governing
of the Municipal Library for the preservation and efficient management
thereof. The Board shall fix and impose by general rules penalties and
forfeitures for injury to the Library grounds, rooms, books, or other
property, or for failure to return a book or other materials. All fees,
penalties, and forfeitures may be collected in a civil action in the event of
failure, neglect, or refusal to pay the assessments. (Neb. RS 51-205, 51-214)
§ 278-1.3. Damaged and lost materials.216
Any person who injures or fails to return any book or other materials taken
from the Library shall forfeit and pay to the Library not less than the value
of the book or other material in addition to any replacement costs and
penalty which the Library Board may assess. (Neb. RS 51-211)
§ 278-1.4. Material removal.217
It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the regulations made
by the Library Board to take a book or other materials from the Library,
without the consent of the Librarian or an authorized employee of the
Library. Any person removing a book or other materials from the Library
without properly checking them out shall be deemed to be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Neb. RS 51-211)
§ 278-1.5. Cost of use.
The Municipal Library shall be free for the use of the inhabitants of the
municipality. The Librarian may exclude from the use of the Library and
reading rooms any person who shall willfully violate or refuse to comply
with the rules and regulations established for the government thereof. (Neb.
RS 51-201, 51-212)
214. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
215. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
216. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
217. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 278-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-1.6
1:413
§ 278-1.6. Disposition of money collected; report.
Any money collected by the Library shall be turned over monthly by the
Librarian to the Municipal Treasurer, along with a report of the sources of
the revenue. (Neb. RS 51-209)
§ 278-1.7. Circulating libraries.218
The Library Board shall have power to authorize any circulating library,
reading matter or work of art of any private person, association or
corporation to be deposited in the Public Library rooms to be used within
the Library Room in the same manner as the books and property of the
Library; but to be drawn upon and used outside of the rooms only on
payment of such fees or membership as the person, corporation or
association owning the same may require; provided that the books or other
reading matter so deposited in the rooms of such Public Library shall be
separately and distinctly marked, and kept upon shelves apart from the
books and other materials of the Public Library.
§ 278-1.8. Donations; release and renewal of mortgages.
Any person may make any donation of money, lands, or property for the
benefit of such Library, and the title to the property donated may be made
to and shall vest in the City for the Public Library, and such property shall
thereupon be exempt from taxation. The President shall have the power
to release, upon full payment, any mortgage constituting a credit to the
Library Fund outstanding in the name of such Library Board, and the
signature of the President on any such release shall be authenticated by
the Secretary of the Board. The President and Secretary in like manner,
upon resolution duly passed and adopted by the Board, may renew any such
mortgage.
§ 278-1.9. Amendment of rules.
Any bylaws, rules or regulations established by the Library Board may be
amended by the Mayor and Council.
§ 278-1.10. Collection and disposition of penalties.
Penalties imposed or accruing by any bylaw, rule or regulation of the
Library Board may be recovered in a civil action before any court having
jurisdiction; such action to be instituted in the name of the Public Library
Board. Moneys collected in such actions shall be forthwith placed in the
Treasury to the credit of the Library Fund.
218. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 278-1.6 SEWARD CODE § 278-1.10
1:414
Chapter 284
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 213.
Building construction — See Ch. 225.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 252.
Offenses — See Ch. 290.
Solid waste — See Ch. 335.
Trees — See Ch. 364.
Abandoned and wrecked vehicles — See Ch.
377.
Weeds and vegetation — See Ch. 394.
§ 278-1.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-1.10
1:415

ARTICLE I
Identification of Nuisances
§ 284-1.1. General definition.
A nuisance consists in doing any unlawful act, or omitting to perform a duty,
or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act,
omission, condition or thing either:
§ 284-1.2. Specific nuisances.
The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving, or permitting of any
of the following specific acts, omissions, places, conditions, and things is
hereby declared to be a nuisance:
A. Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, or safety of others;
B. Offends decency;
C. Is offensive to the senses;
D. Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, tends to obstruct or renders
dangerous for passage any stream, public park, parkway, square,
street, or highway in the municipality;
E. In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of property;
or
F. Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and
property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others.
(Neb. RS 16-240, 18-1720)
A. Any odorous, putrid, unsound or unwholesome grain, meat, hides,
skins, feathers, vegetable matter, or the whole or any part of any dead
animal, fish, or fowl.
B. Privies, vaults, cesspools, dumps, pits or like places which are not
securely protected from flies or rats, or which are foul or malodorous.
C. Filthy, littered or trash-covered cellars, house yards, barnyards, stable
yards, factory yards, mill yards, vacant areas in the rear of stores,
granaries, vacant lots, houses, buildings, or premises.
D. Animal manure in any quantity which is not securely protected from
flies and the elements, or which is kept or handled in violation of any
ordinance of the municipality.
E. Liquid household waste, human excreta, garbage, butcher's trimmings
and offal, parts of fish or any waste vegetable or animal matter in any
quantity; provided that nothing herein contained shall prevent the
temporary retention of waste in receptacles in a manner provided by
the health officer of the municipality, nor the dumping of nonputrefying
waste in a place and manner approved by the health officer.
§ 284-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-1.2
1:417
F. Tin cans, bottles, glass, cans, ashes, small pieces of scrap iron, wire
metal articles, bric-a-brac, broken stone or cement, broken crockery,
broken glass, broken plaster, and all trash or abandoned material,
unless the same is kept in covered bins or galvanized iron receptacles.
G. Trash, litter, rags, accumulations of barrels, boxes, crates, packing
crates, mattresses, bedding, excelsior, packing hay, straw or other
packing material, lumber not neatly piled, scrap iron, tin or other metal
not neatly piled, old automobiles or parts thereof, or any other waste
materials when any of said articles or materials create a condition in
which flies or rats may breed or multiply, or which may be a fire danger
or which are so unsightly as to depredate property values in the vicinity
thereof.
H. Any unsightly building, billboard, or other structure, or any old,
abandoned or partially destroyed building or structure or any building
or structure commenced and left unfinished, which buildings,
billboards or other structures are either a fire hazard, a menace to the
public health or safety, or are so unsightly as to depreciate the value of
property in the vicinity thereof.
I. All places used or maintained as junkyards, or dumping grounds, or for
the wrecking and dissembling of automobiles, trucks, tractors, or
machinery of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of worn-out,
wrecked or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of
any kind, or of any of the parts thereof, or for the storing or leaving of
any machinery or equipment used by contractors or builders or by other
persons, which places are kept or maintained so as to essentially
interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by others,
or which are so unsightly as to tend to depreciate property values in the
vicinity thereof.
J. Stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of ground.
K. Stockyards, granaries, mills, pig pens, cattle pens, chicken pens or any
other place, building or enclosure in which animals or fowl of any kind
are confined or on which are stored tankage or any other animal or
vegetable matter, or on which any animal or vegetable matter, including
grain, is being processed, when said places in which said animals are
confined, or said premises on which said vegetable or animal matter is
located, are maintained and kept in such a manner that foul and noxious
odors are permitted to emanate therefrom, to the annoyance of
inhabitants of the municipality, or are maintained and kept in such a
manner as to be injurious to the public health.
L. All other things specifically designated as nuisances elsewhere in this
code.219
219. Editor's Note: Original §§ 4-503, Abatement Procedure, and 4-504, Adjoining Land Owners;
Intervention Before Trial, of the 1976 Code, which followed this section, as amended, were
repealed 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 37-12.
§ 284-1.2 SEWARD CODE § 284-1.2
1:418
§ 284-1.3. Dead or diseased trees. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No.
18-95220]
See also Chapter 364, Trees, of the City of Seward Municipal Code.
§ 284-1.4. Violations and penalties.221
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Neb. RS 16-230, 18-1720)
A. It is hereby declared a nuisance for a property owner to permit, allow,
or maintain any dead or diseased trees within the right-of-way of streets
within the corporate limits of the municipality.
B. It is hereby declared a nuisance for a property owner to permit, allow,
or maintain any dead or diseased trees on private property within the
corporate limits of the municipality. For the purpose of carrying out the
provisions of this section, the Municipal Police shall have the authority
to enter upon private property to inspect the trees thereon.
C. Notice to abate and remove such nuisance and notice of the right to a
hearing and the manner in which it may be requested shall be given to
each owner or owner's duly authorized agent and to the occupant, if
any, by personal service or certified mail. Within 30 days after the
receipt of such notice, if the owner or occupant of the lot or piece of
ground does not request a hearing or fails to comply with the order to
abate and remove the nuisance, the municipality may have such work
done and may levy and assess all or any portion of the costs and
expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground so benefitted in
the same manner as other special taxes for improvements are levied or
assessed.
(Neb. RS 18-720, 28-1321)
220. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
221. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 284-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-1.4
1:419

ARTICLE II
Abatement of Nuisances
§ 284-2.1. Procedures.
A. Whenever a nuisance exists as defined in this chapter, the municipality
may proceed by a suit in equity to enjoin and abate the same, in the
manner provided by law.
B. Whenever, in any action, it is established that a nuisance exists, the
court may, together with the fine or penalty imposed, enter an order of
abatement as part of the judgment in the case. (Neb. RS 18-1720,
18-1722)
§ 284-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-2.1
1:421
Chapter 290
OFFENSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 225.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 252.
Nuisances — See Ch. 284.
Solid waste — See Ch. 335.
Streets, sidewalks and municipal
property — See Ch. 340.
Trees — See Ch. 364.
Zoning and subdivision — See Ch. 410.
§ 284-2.1 SEWARD CODE § 284-2.1
1:422
ARTICLE I
Miscellaneous Offenses
[Adopted as Ch. 6, Art. 3, §§ 6-325 through 6-329, 6-341 through
6-345, 6-358, 6-361 and 6-362, of the 1976 Code]
§ 290-1.1. Interference with posted advertisements.
It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully and maliciously tear,
deface, remove, or cover up the posted advertisement or bill of any person,
firm, or corporation when said bill or advertisement is rightfully and
lawfully posted, and the same remains of value.
§ 290-1.2. Posting of written material.
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paste, or paint any sign,
advertisement, or other writing of any nature upon a fence, pole, building,
or other property without the written permission of the owner of the
property.
§ 290-1.3. Interference with stakes and corner markers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to break, remove or destroy any stone
or stake marking any street, block, lot or public ground, except by state or
City authority.
§ 290-1.4. Billboards.222
No billboard upon which any advertising matter or legend is or may be
written shall be located nearer than 12 feet to any street or highway in this
City or so that it obstructs the view at a street or highway intersection;
provided that nothing herein shall be construed to mean the flat surface
of buildings, stores or offices. Any billboard violating this section is hereby
declared to be a nuisance.223
§ 290-1.5. Disturbing the peace.224
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to assemble or gather within
the municipality with the intent to do an unlawful or disorderly act or
acts, by force or violence against the municipality, or residents therein, or
to disturb the peace and quiet of any person or neighborhood. (Neb. RS
28-1322)
§ 290-1.6. Excessive noise.
222. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
223. Editor's Note: Original § 6-329 of the 1976 Code, Gasoline dispensers, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
224. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 290-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-1.6
1:423
§ 290-1.7. Disorderly conduct.
Any person who shall knowingly start a fight, fight, commit assault or
battery, make unnecessary noise, or otherwise conduct himself/herself in
such a way as to breach the peace shall be deemed to be guilty of a violation
of this section. (Neb. RS 16-227, 16-228)
§ 290-1.8. Malicious mischief.
§ 290-1.9. Disturbing assemblies.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to disturb, interrupt, or
interfere with any lawful assembly of people, whether religious or
otherwise, by loud and unnecessary noise, threatening behavior, or indecent
and shocking behavior.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person within the City to operate any radio,
sound system, or similar device which reproduces or amplifies radio
broadcasts or musical recordings, in or upon any street or alley or
public place in such a manner as to be audible to any person at any
point or place more than 50 feet from the source.225
B. The prohibition set forth herein shall not apply to such activity:
(1) When conducted in connection with an activity or event sponsored
by a school, church, or governmental entity;
(2) When conducted in connection with an activity open to the public
such as a carnival, circus, or athletic event; and
(3) If a permit for same has been issued by the Seward City Council, or
its designee, which permit may include such conditions as the City
Council, or its designee, shall deem necessary and appropriate;
provided, however, such conditions shall be reasonably related to
preserving the public peace, and shall not infringe upon the
applicant's right to free speech.
A. It shall be deemed a violation of this section for any person to willfully
destroy, mutilate, deface, injure, or remove any tomb, monument,
gravestone, structure, or thing of value which is located upon any
government property, cemetery, or property of historic value.
Conviction of such violation shall be punishable by a fine consistent
with Neb. RS 28-519.226
B. Any such offender shall also be liable, in an action for trespass in the
name of the beneficial holder of said property, for all damages which
arise from the commission of such unlawful act.
(Neb. RS 28-519)
225. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
226. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 290-1.6 SEWARD CODE § 290-1.10
1:424
§ 290-1.10. Unlawful assembly.
It shall be unlawful for three or more persons to assemble together upon
any sidewalk or street thereof, in front of or adjacent to any store, shop,
or other place of business, so as to obstruct the public right-of-way along
said street or sidewalk, or entrance to said place of business, or so as to
obstruct or injure the carrying on of any lawful business in any of the places
aforesaid within the limits of the municipality.
§ 290-1.11. Radio interference.
Any person operating or causing to be operated any motor, sign, or other
electrical apparatus that is connected with the light and power system
shall equip the apparatus with proper filtering attachments to eliminate
interference; provided that the provisions herein shall not apply to the use
of necessary medical equipment or apparatus where electrical interference
cannot be reasonably and safely eliminated. Any person who so operates
or causes to be operated any such electrical apparatus that interferes
habitually with radio and television reception shall be deemed to be guilty
of a violation of this section. (Neb. RS 18-1720)
§ 290-1.12. Unlawful use of railway equipment.
It shall be unlawful for any person to locate or place, use or occupy any
"box car," railway coach or other structure or building formerly used as
railway rolling stock or equipment upon any lot or plot of ground within
the corporate limits for any purpose; provided, however, that any railroad
company having and maintaining a right-of-way into and within the City may
place such "cars," structures or buildings upon its own right-of-way for use
in connection with its own business, but no such railroad company shall be
permitted to rent the same or permit any of the structures to be used by
others for any purpose not necessary to the furtherance of the business of
the railroad company.
§ 290-1.13. Curfew.
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 16 years to ride in or
operate any vehicle in or upon any street, alley, or other public place, or to
loiter, wander, stroll, loaf, or play in or upon any of the streets, alleys, or
other public places between the hours of 11:00 p.m. of any day and 6:00
a.m. of the following day unless accompanied by a parent, or the minor
is engaged in lawful employment or is on an emergency errand; provided,
when an activity of the kind normally attended by minors under 16 years
terminates after, or less than one hour prior to 11:00 p.m., the curfew shall
commence one hour after the termination of such activity.
§ 290-1.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-1.14
1:425
§ 290-1.14. Violations and penalties.227
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who violates the
prohibitions or provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an amount not to exceed
$500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of said
payment the offender shall stand committed to the County Jail until such
fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on which a
violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
227. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 290-1.14 SEWARD CODE § 290-1.14
1:426
ARTICLE II
Offenses Against the Person
[Adopted as Ch. 6, Art. 3, §§ 6-337 through 6-340, of the 1976 Code]
§ 290-2.1. Assaults.
It shall be unlawful for any person to assault or threaten any other person
or persons. (Neb. RS 28-308 through 28-310)
§ 290-2.2. Provoking assault.228
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons within the municipality to
intentionally provoke or attempt to provoke an assault upon himself or
another by the uttering of insulting words, cursing and swearing, or to use
slander against any other person. Conviction of a violation of this section
shall be punishable in a manner consistent with Neb. RS 28-310. (Neb. RS
28-106, 28-310)
§ 290-2.3. Menacing threats.
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of
this municipality to assault or threaten another in a menacing manner or
strike or injure another.
§ 290-2.4. Assault and battery.
It shall be unlawful for any person to assault, threaten, strike or injure any
other person or persons. (Neb. RS 28-310)
§ 290-2.5. Violations and penalties.229
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who violates the
prohibitions or provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an amount not to exceed
$500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of said
payment the offender shall stand committed to the County Jail until such
fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on which a
violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
228. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
229. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 290-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-2.5
1:427

ARTICLE III
Offenses Against Property
[Adopted as Ch. 6, Art. 3, §§ 6-305 through 6-311 and §§ 3-363 and
3-365, of the 1976 Code]
§ 290-3.1. Trespassing.
It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass upon any private grounds
within the municipality, or to break, cut, or injure any tree, shrub, plant,
flower, or grass growing thereon, or without the consent of the owner or
occupant to enter upon an improved lot or grounds occupied for residence
purposes and to loiter about the same. (Neb. RS 28-520, 28-521)
§ 290-3.2. Occupying business parking lot after hours.
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly occupy,
or be present in or upon, a business parking lot when the business
establishment served by said parking lot is not open to the public, and
when appropriate signs are posted in or upon said parking lot prohibiting
such occupancy or presence, and bearing, at a minimum, the words "NO
TRESPASSING."
§ 290-3.3. Destruction of property.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits to purposely
or willfully injure in any manner or destroy any real or personal property of
any description belonging to another.
§ 290-3.4. Damaging lights.
Any person breaking, mutilating or obstructing any lamps, electroliers, or
lights in the City shall be guilty of an offense.
§ 290-3.5. Theft.230
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits to steal any
money, goods, or chattels of any kind whatever. Any person who shall steal
property of any kind, whether the same be entirely in money or entirely
property of the value of less than $500, shall be deemed to be guilty of a
violation of this section.231 (Neb. RS 28-512, 28-514)
§ 290-3.6. Shoplifting. [Added 9-21-1982 by Ord. No. 24-82]
A. A person commits the crime of theft by shoplifting when he or she, with
the intent of appropriating goods or merchandise to his or her own use
without paying for the goods or merchandise or to deprive the owner of
230. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
231. Editor's Note: Original § 6-363 of the 1976 Code, Merchandise price tag change
prohibited, which immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 290-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-3.6
1:429
possession of such goods or merchandise or its retail value, in whole or
in part, does any of the following:232
(1) Conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any
store or retail establishment;
(2) Alters the price tag or other price marking on goods or
merchandise of any store or retail establishment;
(3) Transfers the goods or merchandise of any store or retail
establishment from one container to another;
(4) Interchanges the label or price tag from one item of merchandise
with a label or price tag from another item of merchandise;
(5) Causes the cash register or other sales recording device to reflect
less than the retail price of the goods or merchandise; or
(6) Alters, bypasses, disables, shields, or removes any security or
alarm device attached to or housing any goods or merchandise of
any store, including the use or possession of a security device
countermeasure as defined in Neb. RS 28-511.03, prior to purchase
of the goods or merchandise.
B. In any prosecution for theft by shoplifting, in order to allow the owner
or owners of shoplifted property the use of such property pending
criminal prosecutions, photographs of the shoplifted property may be
accepted as prima facie evidence as to the identity of the property. Such
photograph shall be accompanied by a written statement containing the
following:
(1) A description of the property;
(2) The name of the owner or owners of the property;
(3) The time, date, and location where the shoplifting occurred;
(4) The time and date the photograph was taken;
(5) The name of the photographer; and
(6) Verification by the arresting officer.
C. Prior to allowing the use of shoplifted property as provided in this
section, legal counsel for the alleged shoplifter shall have a reasonable
opportunity to inspect and appraise the property and may file a motion
for retention of the property, which motion shall be granted if there is
any reasonable basis for believing that the photographs and
accompanying affidavit may be misleading.
(Neb. RS 28-511.01, 28-514)
232. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 290-3.6 SEWARD CODE § 290-3.7
1:430
§ 290-3.7. Arson.233
Any person who willfully or maliciously sets on fire any property when the
injury or damage therefrom shall be of a less value than $500 shall be
deemed to be guilty of a violation of this section. (Neb. RS 28-504)
§ 290-3.8. Injury to trees.234 [Amended 1-17-1978 by Ord. No. 1120]
It shall be unlawful for any person to purposely or carelessly, and without
lawful authority, cut down, carry away, injure, break down, or destroy, any
fruit, ornamental, shade or other tree or trees standing or growing on any
land belonging to another person or persons or on any public land in the
corporate limits. Any public service company desiring to trim or cut down
any tree, except on property owned and controlled by it, shall make an
application to the governing body to do so, and the written permit of the
governing body in accordance with its decision to allow such an action shall
constitute the only lawful authority on the part of the company to do so.
(Neb. RS 28-519)
§ 290-3.9. Trash.235
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously, or negligently
place or throw upon the premises of another any filth, garbage, leaves,
papers, or other matter to the annoyance of the owner or occupant thereon.
(Neb. RS 28-523)
§ 290-3.10. Violations and penalties.236
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who violates the
prohibitions or provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an amount not to exceed
$500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of said
payment the offender shall stand committed to the County Jail until such
fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on which a
violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
233. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
234. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 364, Trees.
235. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 335, Solid Waste.
236. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 290-3.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-3.10
1:431

ARTICLE IV
Offenses Involving Fraud
[Adopted as Ch. 6, Art. 3, § 6-301, of the 1976 Code]
§ 290-4.1. Impersonating an officer.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than a Municipal or State Police
officer to wear an official badge or uniform, or to falsely and willfully
impersonate said officials. (Neb. RS 28-610)
§ 290-4.2. Violations and penalties.237
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
237. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 290-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-4.2
1:433

ARTICLE V
Offenses Relating to Morals
[Adopted as Ch. 6, Art. 3, §§ 6-322 through 6-324 and 6-346, of the
1976 Code]
§ 290-5.1. Conducting prostitution.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, sponsor, or otherwise carry
on for the purpose of profit any lewdness, assignation, or prostitution in any
house, room or structure. (Neb. RS 28-801, 28-804)
§ 290-5.2. Participation in prostitution.
It shall be unlawful for any person to become or remain an inmate, guest, or
employee in any bawdy house or house of prostitution, or to attend or visit
any such house for the purpose of illicit sexual activity. (Neb. RS 28-801,
28-804)
§ 290-5.3. Misdemeanor prostitution. [Amended 10-15-1985 by Ord.
No. 21-85]
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform, offer or agree to perform any
act of sexual penetration, as defined in Subdivision (6) of Neb. RS 28-318,
with any person not his or her spouse in exchange for money or other things
of value. (Neb. RS 28-801) (Class 5 - citation in lieu of arrest)
§ 290-5.4. Indecent behavior.238
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons over the age of 18 years
to commit any indecent or immoral act, or to appear in any public place
in improper clothing, or not decently garbed. It shall be unlawful for any
person or persons to sell or convey any indecent and obscene books,
pictures, or films, or to take part in any indecent, lascivious, or obscene
show, play, theatrical exhibition, or other form of entertainment that is
shocking to the public morals. (Neb. RS 28-806)
§ 290-5.5. Violations and penalties.239
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who violates the
prohibitions or provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an amount not to exceed
$500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of said
payment the offender shall stand committed to the County Jail until such
fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on which a
violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
238. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
239. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 290-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-5.5
1:435

ARTICLE VI
Offenses Involving Integrity and Effectiveness of Government
Operation
[Adopted as Ch. 6, Art. 3, §§ 6-302 through 6-304 and 6-364, of the
1976 Code]
§ 290-6.1. Refusing to assist officer.
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to assist a Municipal Police
officer when lawfully requested to do so by him. (Neb. RS 28-903)
§ 290-6.2. Resisting officer.
It shall be unlawful for any person to resist any Municipal Police officer
when such officer is in the lawful performance of his duties. (Neb. RS
28-904, 28-906)
§ 290-6.3. Assaulting officer.240
It shall be unlawful for any person to assault a police officer, emergency
responder, health-care professional or municipal official in the execution of
his office. (Neb. RS 28-929)
§ 290-6.4. False reporting. [Amended 9-21-1982 by Ord. No. 23-82]
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Furnish material information he or she knows to be false to any peace
officer or other official with the intent to instigate an investigation of an
alleged criminal matter or impede the investigation of an actual
criminal matter; or241
B. Furnish information he or she knows to be false alleging the existence
of the need for the assistance of an emergency medical service or outof-
hospital emergency care provider or an emergency in which human
life or property is in jeopardy to any hospital, emergency medical
service, or other person or governmental agency which deals with
emergencies involving danger to life or property; or242
C. Furnish any information, or cause such information to be furnished or
conveyed by electric, electronic, telephonic, or mechanical means,
knowing the same to be false concerning the need for assistance of a
Fire Department or any personnel or equipment of such department; or
D. Furnish to any person any information he or she knows to be false
concerning the location of any explosive in any building or other
property; or
240. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
241. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
242. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 290-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-6.4
1:437
§ 290-6.5. Violations and penalties.244
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
E. Furnish material information he or she knows to be false to any
governmental department or agency with the intent to instigate an
investigation or to impede an ongoing investigation and which actually
results in causing or impeding such investigation.243
(Neb. RS 28-907)
243. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
244. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 290-6.4 SEWARD CODE § 290-6.5
1:438
ARTICLE VII
Gambling
[Adopted as Ch. 6, Art. 3, §§ 6-317 through 6-321, of the 1976 Code]
§ 290-7.1. Gambling premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person to set up or keep a gambling house, table,
room, place, or gambling device at which a game of chance may be played
for money, property, or other valuable article representing money, property,
or other valuable thing. It shall be further unlawful for any person to suffer
or permit such gambling device to be set up, kept, or used for the purpose
of gambling in or upon any premises or tenement belonging to or under the
control of any such person.
§ 290-7.2. Gambling prohibited.
Any person who shall play at any game whatever, except a licensed game
of bingo, for any sum of money, or other property of value, or shall bet or
wager any money or property of value upon any gambling table or device,
or who shall be the keeper or operator of a punch board, gaming table, or
gambling machine for the purpose of determining any chance upon which
money is won or lost, shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 290-7.3. Lottery. [Amended 2-1-1983 by Ord. No. 4-83]
§ 290-7.4. Assisting in lottery.
It shall be unlawful for any person to aid or assist, either by printing,
writing, advertising, publishing or otherwise, in setting up, managing or
drawing any lottery or scheme, or in selling or disposing of any ticket,
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any lottery for the
disposal or distribution of property by chance among persons who have
paid or promised to pay any valuable consideration for the chance of
obtaining such property or portion of it, or for any share or interest in
such property upon any agreement, understanding or expectation that
it is to be distributed or disposed of by lot or chance, whether such
scheme be called "lottery," "raffle" or "gift enterprise," and no person
shall contrive, prepare, set up or establish any such lottery.
B. Traffic in lottery tickets. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give
or in any manner whatsoever furnish or transfer to or for any person
any ticket understood to be or to represent any ticket, chance, share or
interest in any property or thing involved in any enterprise mentioned
in the preceding subsection or depending upon the event of any such
scheme, lottery or enterprise.
C. This section and § 290-7.4 of this article shall not apply to persons or
organizations authorized to conduct contests, lotteries, raffles or gift
enterprise under Neb. RS 9-701, 9-510 and 9-625.
§ 290-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-7.4
1:439
chance or share therein, or for any person to let or permit to be used any
building or premises for any said purpose.
§ 290-7.5. Visiting gambling house.
It shall be unlawful for any person, to visit, frequent, or loaf about any
room or place where gambling or the playing of games of chance for money,
or articles representing money or property, is conducted or permitted,
knowing the same to be such a place.
§ 290-7.6. Violations and penalties.245
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who violates the
prohibitions or provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an amount not to exceed
$500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of said
payment the offender shall stand committed to the County Jail until such
fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on which a
violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
245. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 290-7.4 SEWARD CODE § 290-7.6
1:440
ARTICLE VIII
Obstructions
[Adopted as Ch. 6, Art. 3, §§ 6-347 through 6-355, of the 1976 Code]
§ 290-8.1. Littering. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 19-95]
§ 290-8.2. Prohibited fences.246
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, or cause to be erected, and
maintain any barbed wire or electric fence within the corporate limits,
where such fence abuts a public sidewalk, street or alley.
§ 290-8.3. Merchandise on sidewalks.247
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed for display
or sale purposes, or for storage, any goods, wares, merchandise or other
articles upon any sidewalk or in any street; provided that this shall not
be construed as preventing the sale from vehicles outside of the Central
Business District of farm or garden produce by the producer or grower
thereof or his employee by going from house to house.
A. Any person who deposits, throws, discards, or otherwise disposes of any
litter on any public or private property or in any waters commits the
offense of littering unless:
(1) Such property is an area designated by law for the disposal of such
material and such person is authorized by the proper public
authority to so use such property; or
(2) The litter is placed in a receptacle or container installed on such
property for such purpose.
B. The word "litter" as used in this section shall mean all waste material
susceptible of being dropped, deposited, discarded or otherwise
disposed of by any person upon any property in the state, but does not
include wastes of primary processes of farming or manufacturing.
"Waste material" as used in this section shall mean any material
appearing in a place or in a context not associated with that material's
function or origin.
C. Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any
motor vehicle or watercraft in violation of this section, the operator of
such motor vehicle or watercraft commits the offense of littering.
(Neb. RS 28-523)
246. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 225, Building Construction, Art. XIII; and Ch. 410, Zoning and
Subdivision, § 410-32.8.
247. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 290-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-8.4
1:441
§ 290-8.4. Obstructions on sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits to erect,
maintain or suffer to remain on any street or public sidewalk or on any
portion of the area between the lot line and the curbline of any street any
stand, wagon, display, or merchandise, or any other obstruction injurious
to, inconvenient, or inconsistent with the public use of the same; provided
that seats and benches may be allowed in front of stores and buildings in
the fire limits and shall not be construed as an obstruction in the sidewalk
space until such time as the Mayor and Council shall order their removal by
resolution.
§ 290-8.5. Appliances in yard.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a refrigerator, icebox, freezer,
or any other dangerous appliance to be in the open and accessible to
children, whether on private or public property, unless he shall first remove
all doors and make the same reasonably safe. (Neb. RS 18-1720)
§ 290-8.6. Obstruction of public ways.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, maintain, or suffer to remain on
any street or public sidewalk a stand, wagon, display, or other obstruction
inconvenient to or inconsistent with the public use of the same.
§ 290-8.7. Obstructing water flow.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or obstruct the passage of water
in a street gutter, culvert, water pipe, or hydrant.
§ 290-8.8. Water flowing upon streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any water to flow into or upon
any public thoroughfare.
§ 290-8.9. Removing dirt.
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to remove, disturb, or take
away from any street, alley, or public grounds any dirt, earth, stones, or
other materials forming a part of such street, alley, or public grounds
without first having obtained written permission to do so from the
governing body.
§ 290-8.10. Violations and penalties.248
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
248. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 290-8.4 SEWARD CODE § 290-8.10
1:442
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 290-8.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-8.10
1:443

ARTICLE IX
Conduct at Fires
[Adopted as Ch. 7, Art. 2, of the 1976 Code]
§ 290-9.1. Preservation of property.
The Fire Chief, or any officer in charge of the Fire Department, shall have
the authority and power to cause the removal of property whenever it
shall become necessary for the preservation of more valuable property, the
protection of human life, or to prevent the spreading of fire to adjoining
property. The Fire Chief may direct the Municipal Firemen to remove any
building, structure, or fence for the purpose of checking the progress of
any fire. The Fire Chief shall have the authority to blow up, or cause to be
blown up, with explosives any building or structure during the progress of a
fire for the purpose of checking the progress of the same. (Neb. RS 16-222,
16-246)
§ 290-9.2. Disorderly spectators.
It shall be unlawful for any person during the time of a fire and for a period
of 36 hours after its extinguishment to hinder, resist or refuse to obey the
Municipal Fire Chief, or to act in a noisy or disorderly manner. The Fire
Chief and Assistant Fire Chief shall have the power and authority during
such time to arrest or command any such person to assist them in the
performance of their official duties. (Neb. RS 28-908)
§ 290-9.3. Equipment.
It shall be unlawful for any person except the Fire Chief and the members
of the Municipal Fire Department to molest, destroy, handle or in any other
way to interfere with the use and storage of any of the fire trucks and other
apparatus belonging to the municipality. (Neb. RS 28-519)
§ 290-9.4. Interference with officials.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to hinder or obstruct the
Municipal Fire Chief or the members of the Fire Department in the
performance of their duty. (Neb. RS 28-908)
§ 290-9.5. Obstruction of hydrants.
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the use of a fire hydrant,
or have or place any material within 15 feet of the hydrant. Any vehicle or
material found as an obstruction may be immediately removed by the Fire
Chief or any member of the Fire Department, at the risk, cost, and expense
of the owner or claimant. (Neb. RS 60-6, 166)
§ 290-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-9.6
1:445
§ 290-9.6. Assistance to officials.
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, after the command of the Fire
Chief or Assistant Fire Chief, to aid in extinguishing a fire or to assist in the
removal and protection of property. (Neb. RS 28-908)
§ 290-9.7. Driving over hose.249
It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the Fire Chief or
Assistant Fire Chief, to drive any vehicle over unprotected hose of the Fire
Department when laid down on any highway or private road or driveway, in
use or to be used at any fire or alarm of fire. (Neb. RS 60-6, 184)
§ 290-9.8. Following fire apparatus.250
No vehicle, except by the specific direction of the Fire Chief or Assistant
Fire Chief, shall follow any fire vehicle closer than 500 feet or park such
vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a
fire alarm. Nothing herein shall be construed to apply to vehicles on official
business. (Neb. RS 60-6, 183)
§ 290-9.9. False alarms.
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally and without good and
reasonable cause raise any false alarm of fire. (Neb. RS 28-907, 35-520)
§ 290-9.10. Violations and penalties.251
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
249. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
250. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
251. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 290-9.6 SEWARD CODE § 290-9.10
1:446
Chapter 299
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 205. Tobacco products — See Ch. 355.
§ 290-9.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-9.10
1:447

ARTICLE I
Tobacco Use
[Adopted 5-17-2011 by Ord. No. 10-11 (Ch. 2, Art. 5, § 2-503, of the
1976 Code)]
§ 299-1.1. Plum Creek Sports Complex.
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in the Plum Creek Park Sports
Complex located within the City of Seward. For purposes of this article,
"smoking" shall mean inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted
cigarette, cigar, pipe, smoking paraphernalia, or tobacco. The prohibitions
contained herein shall not apply outside the Plum Creek Park Sports
Complex in Plum Creek Park.
§ 299-1.2. Violations and penalties.252
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
252. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 299-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-1.2
1:449
Chapter 303
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk and junk dealers — See Ch. 271.
Offenses — See Ch. 290.
Streets, sidewalks and municipal
property — See Ch. 340.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 382.
§ 299-1.2 SEWARD CODE § 299-1.2
1:450
ARTICLE I
Itinerant Sales
[Adopted as Ch. 10, Art. 2, of the 1976 Code]
§ 303-1.1. Permit required; fee; term; revocation. [Amended
9-7-1977 by Ord. No. 1095; 10-3-1995 by Ord. No. 39-95253]
To prevent the sale of fraudulent, dangerous, and unhealthy goods and
services, and to protect the public by maintaining records of the products
sold and the persons and companies responsible for such sales, all itinerant
sales personnel shall, before doing business within the municipality, make
application for and be issued a permit. Application for said permit shall be
made to the Police Department and shall contain the necessary information
required thereby and identification and documents required for the
protection of the residents of the municipality. Upon approval by the Police
Department, the Chief of Police shall then have authority to issue a sales
permit to said approved applicant. Each person granted a permit shall pay
a fee to the City in an amount set from time to time by the City Council, and
upon payment the Chief of Police may issue a sales permit to such approved
applicant. Such permit shall be valid for a period of seven days from and
after the date of issuance. The date of its expiration shall be clearly marked
on the permit. A sales permit shall be required for each person desiring
to do business within the municipality. Any person or persons granted
such permit shall be subject to any occupation taxes and other rules and
regulations which the governing body deems appropriate for the purposes
stated herein. Any permit so granted shall be subject to revocation for good
and sufficient cause by the Chief of Police. (Neb. RS 16-205, 16-246)
§ 303-1.2. Hours of solicitation; possession of permit.
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, salesman, or peddler to solicit any
individual between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., unless he/she has
a previous appointment with the resident, or residents, of the premises
solicited. It shall be unlawful at any hour for a solicitor, salesman, or peddler
to solicit without a proper permit on his person at all times.
§ 303-1.3. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not extend to individuals calling on retail
merchants in the corporate limits of the City for the purpose of taking
orders or selling of merchandise for resale by such merchants.
§ 303-1.4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TRANSIENT MERCHANT, ITINERANT MERCHANT or ITINERANT
VENDOR — Any person, firm, or corporation, whether as owner, agent,
253. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 303-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-1.4
1:451
consignee, or employee, and whether a resident of the municipality or not,
who or which engages temporarily within the municipality in the business
of selling and delivering goods, wares, or merchandise, or taking orders
for goods or merchandise to or at homes, apartments, or other residential
premises in the municipality.
§ 303-1.5. Violations and penalties.254
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
254. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 303-1.4 SEWARD CODE § 303-1.5
1:452
Chapter 308
PROPERTY, SEIZED AND ABANDONED
§ 303-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-1.5
1:453

ARTICLE I
Seized or Found Property
§ 308-1.1. Reports and records.
All property, including money, which shall be seized or found by any police
officer shall be reported and delivered immediately to the Police
Department. A written record containing the date of such seizing, and a
description of the same, shall be maintained by the Police Department.
§ 308-1.2. Release; liability for costs.
The Police Department shall have authority to release seized or found
property to the owners thereof upon satisfactory proof and evidence of such
ownership. The owner shall first pay any and all charges incurred in the
care and keeping of such property while the same is in the custody of the
Police Department.
§ 308-1.3. Disposition of unclaimed property.
In March and September of each year, on a date and time to be fixed by
the Police Department, all property which shall remain unclaimed, except
money, in the hands of the Police Department for more than 30 days shall be
sold at public auction at Police Headquarters, or at such place designated
by the Chief of Police, to the highest bidder. All sales shall be for cash. Such
sales shall be advertised for one week in a newspaper of general circulation
in Seward County. The date of sale of each item of property and the amount
received at such sale for each item of property shall likewise be recorded.
All expenses in connection with the care and keeping of any item of property
shall be paid from the proceeds of sale of such item of property by the
Police Department. In the event the proceeds of sale are insufficient to pay
the expenses of care, keeping, sale and disposal thereof, such expenses
shall be paid by the City. The balance of sale proceeds shall be paid over
and delivered to the Municipal Treasurer, which shall be kept by him in
a special fund, together with an accounting of such sales. A copy of such
accounting shall be filed with the Clerk. If the remaining proceeds of such
sale are not claimed within one year after such sale, said proceeds shall be
forfeited to the City and the Mayor and Council shall appropriate the same
for expenditure by the City in the next annual appropriation ordinance.
§ 308-1.4. Property remaining unsold.
All property remaining in the custody of the Police Department for want of
bidders upon such sale shall be disposed of as junk or be deposited in the
City dump on behalf of the City.
§ 308-1.5. Monies found or seized.
The Police Department shall make diligent and reasonable investigation
and inquiry to locate the owner of all monies found or seized and deliver
the same to the owner thereof upon satisfactory proof and evidence of
§ 308-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 308-1.5
1:455
ownership. All monies unclaimed after 60 days shall be turned over to the
City Treasurer for deposit by such Treasurer in said special fund, together
with an accounting of said monies. If such monies shall remain unclaimed
after deposit with the City Treasurer for more than one year, said monies
shall be forfeited to the City and the Mayor and Council may appropriate the
same for expenditure by the City in its next annual appropriation ordinance.
§ 308-1.6. Property seized as evidence.
No property seized as evidence for the prosecution of a violation of the
City Code or of the criminal statutes of the state shall be sold as herein
provided until after such property has been released as evidence by the
court having jurisdiction in the matter, for which such evidence was seized
or by the Prosecuting Attorney in such matter. After such property is
released as evidence as aforesaid, it may be sold and disposed of by the
Police Department as herein provided.
§ 308-1.7. Bill of sale.
Upon sale of any such article or motor vehicle, the Police Department is
authorized to execute and deliver a bill of sale without warranty on behalf
of the City to the purchaser thereof.
§ 308-1.5 SEWARD CODE § 308-1.7
1:456
Chapter 315
RAILROADS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets, sidewalks and municipal
property — See Ch. 340.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 382.
§ 308-1.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 308-1.7
1:457

ARTICLE I
Company Obligations and Restrictions
§ 315-1.1. Maintenance of crossings.
It shall be the duty of every railroad company doing business in, or traveling
through, the municipality to keep in a suitable and safe condition the
crossings and right-of-way in the municipality. If any such crossing shall at
any time fall into disrepair and become unsafe, or inconvenient for public
travel, the governing body may, by resolution, call upon the company to
make whatever repairs that it may deem necessary to correct the dangerous
condition. Notice of the resolution shall be served upon the local agent of
the company. In the event that the railroad shall fail or neglect to repair
and correct the condition as aforesaid within 30 days, neglect for each day
thereafter shall be deemed and is hereby made a separate and distinct
offense against the provisions herein. (Neb. RS 16-211, 16-212)
§ 315-1.2. Lighting and signal systems.
It shall be the duty of all railroad companies owning, operating, and
maintaining a railroad through the municipality to sufficiently light all
crossings and to install as many signal systems as the governing body shall
deem necessary at the expense of the company. Said lighting shall be of not
less than 600 candlepower, which said electric light shall be kept lighted at
all times between one hour after sunset in the evening until one hour before
sunrise the morning following. (Neb. RS 16-212)
§ 315-1.3. Obstructing traffic.
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, its employees, agents, or
servants operating a railroad through the municipality to obstruct traffic on
any public street, except in the event of an emergency, for a longer period
at one time than 10 minutes. (Neb. RS 16-212)
§ 315-1.4. Drainage.
A. It shall be the duty of any railroad company owning, maintaining, or
operating a railroad within or through the corporate limits of the City to
construct and keep in repair ditches, drains, and culverts along and
under its railroad tracks at all places within the limits of the City, where
the same may be necessary for the escape of water and the proper
draining of the territory on either side of said railroads.
B. When any such drains, ditches, or culverts may be necessary for the
escape of water and the proper drainage of the territory on either side
of any such railroad track, the Mayor and Council may, by resolution,
call upon the proper railroad company to construct or repair the drain,
ditch, or culvert and to place the same in a proper condition for the
escape of water for the proper drainage of the territory on either side of
said railroads. A copy of every such resolution shall be served upon the
local agent of the railroad company, whose duty it is to construct or
§ 315-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-1.4
1:459
§ 315-1.5. Flying switches.
No running or flying switches shall be made across any street opened and
in public use.
§ 315-1.6. Obstructing view at crossings prohibited. [Amended
10-15-1985 by Ord. No. 19-85]
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company to obstruct or obscure the
public's view by storing or parking any railroad car on a railroad track
within 50 feet of the crossing of any such railroad track and a public road
within the corporate limits of the municipality; provided, however, that in
no instance shall any person who is authorized to control the movement of
such railroad car or cars within such distance be prevented from reasonably
conducting his or her business. (Neb. RS 74-1323)
§ 315-1.7. Violations and penalties.255
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who violates the
prohibitions or provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an amount not to exceed
$500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of said
payment the offender shall stand committed to the County Jail until such
fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on which a
violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
keep in repair any such drain, ditch, or culvert; and for a failure or
refusal to comply with any such resolution within 14 days after the
service thereof as aforesaid, such railroad company shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor.
255. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 315-1.4 SEWARD CODE § 315-1.7
1:460
Chapter 325
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 225.
Nuisances — See Ch. 284.
Streets, sidewalks and municipal
property — See Ch. 340.
Utilities — See Ch. 370.
Water — See Ch. 390.
Zoning and subdivision — See Ch. 410.
§ 315-1.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-1.7
1:461

ARTICLE I
Administration
§ 325-1.1. Water/Wastewater Department and Superintendent;
operation and funding. [Amended 11-15-1977 by Ord. No. 1101;
11-7-1978 by Ord. No. 1144256]
The municipality owns and operates the municipal sewer system through
the Water/Wastewater Superintendent. The governing body, for the purpose
of defraying the cost of the construction of the municipal sewer system, may
each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state
law on the actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within
the corporate limits that is subject to taxation. The revenue from said tax
shall be known as the "Sewer Construction Fund." The Water/Wastewater
Superintendent shall have the direct management and control of the Water/
Wastewater Department and shall faithfully carry out the duties of his office.
He shall have the authority to adopt rules and regulations for the sanitary
and efficient management of the department, subject to the supervision and
review of the governing body. (Neb. RS 16-667 through 16-672, 16-249,
16-250)
§ 325-1.2. Consumer application for service; terms of use.
[Amended 11-15-1977 by Ord. No. 1101; 11-7-1978 by Ord. No.
1144; 2-15-1983 by Ord. No. 7-83]
A. Every person or persons desiring sewer service must make application
therefor at the Utility Office located in City Hall. The application must
state truly and fully all uses to which said sewer service is to be applied
and no additional use will be allowed.
B. For new consumers, blanks will be furnished for that purpose by the
Utility Office. All landlords shall make an application with the City to
receive sewer service for their rental properties. This application shall
be signed one time only and shall place the responsibility for payment
of all usage on the landlord when any of his rental properties are not
rented. It shall be the duty of the landlord to notify the Utility Office of
any changes of sewer usage by tenants on his properties. If the landlord
wishes to assume the responsibility for payment of sewer service on any
of his rented or leased properties when they are rented, he must so
notify the Utility Office in writing upon blanks furnished for that
purpose. Upon receiving such notification, all bills will be mailed
directly to the landlord and he will be held responsible for their
payment. Otherwise, all requirements for service deposits must be met.
C. Applications for sewer service are not transferable. Any person wishing
to change from one location to another shall make a new application. If
any consumer shall sell, dispose of, or remove from the premises where
service is furnished in his name, or if the premises are destroyed by fire
or other casualty, he shall at once inform the Utility Office, which shall
256. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 325-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-1.2
1:463
cause the sewer service to be shut off from the premises. If the
consumer should fail to give such notice, he shall be charged for all
sewer service used on the premises until the Utility Office is otherwise
advised of such circumstances.
D. The municipality, through the Water/Wastewater Department, shall
furnish sewer services to persons within its corporate limits whose
premises abut a street or alley in which a commercial main is now or
may hereafter be laid. The municipality may also furnish sewer service
to persons whose premises are situated outside the corporate limits of
the municipality, as and when, according to law, the governing body
may see fit to do so.257
E. The rules, regulations, and sewer use rates hereinafter named in this
chapter shall be considered a part of every application hereafter made
for sewer service and shall be considered a part of the contract between
every consumer now or hereafter served. Without further formality, the
making of the application on the part of any applicant or the use of
sewer service by present consumers thereof shall constitute a contract
between the consumer and the municipality, to which said contract both
parties are bound. If the consumer shall violate any of the provisions of
said contract or any reasonable rules and regulations that the
governing body may hereafter adopt, the Utility Office shall cause the
sewer service to be shut off from the premises. If the consumer should
fail to give such notice, she shall be charged for all sewer use on the
premises until the Utility Office is otherwise advised of such
circumstances.258
257. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
258. Editor's Note: Original § 3-203 of the 1976 Code, Sewer Contract Nontransferable,
Termination, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 2-15-1983 by Ord. No.
7-83.
§ 325-1.2 SEWARD CODE § 325-1.2
1:464
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 325-2.1. Terms defined. [Amended 11-15-1977 by Ord. No. 1101;
11-7-1978 by Ord. No. 1144; 12-15-1981 by Ord. No. 48-81]
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this chapter shall be as follows. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is
permissive.
BOD or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — Includes that part of the lowest horizontal piping of
a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, or other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building
wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade, or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or
other body of surface water or groundwater.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
or group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
stormwater, surface water and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together
with such groundwater, surface water, and stormwaters as may be present.
§ 325-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-2.1
1:465
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "STORM SEWER") — A sewer which
carries stormwater and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage
and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Water/Wastewater Superintendent of the City of
Seward, or his/her authorized deputy, agent, or representative.259
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
USER — All users of the municipal sewer system and the owners and
tenants of real estate and buildings connected with such sewer system
or served thereby, and all users of said system who in any way use the
same or discharge sanitary sewage, industrial waste, water or other liquid
either directly or indirectly into the municipal sewer system. Users shall be
classified as "residential," "industrial," or "commercial."
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
RESIDENTIAL USER — The owner or tenant of a dwelling used
exclusively for residential purposes and which is connected to said
sewer system and having a separate water meter; provided that any
property located in a Residential Zone of the City which conducts a
small business inside a home and which is in conformity with the
zoning ordinances of the City260 shall be considered "residential" for
the purpose of sewer user classification; and provided, further, that
all churches, St. John's Elementary School, Seward Public Schools,
including the Senior High, Junior High, and Elementary School
installation shall be considered residential users of the sewer system.
A.
COMMERCIAL USER — All other users of the municipal sewer system
are hereby defined to be commercial users.
B.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Users contributing industrial wastes shall be
classified as industrial users.
C.
259. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
260. Editor's Note: See Ch. 410, Zoning and Subdivision.
§ 325-2.1 SEWARD CODE § 325-2.1
1:466
ARTICLE III
Public Sewers Required; Prohibited Discharges
[Amended 11-15-1977 by Ord. No. 1101]
§ 325-3.1. Unlawful deposit of wastes.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
City of Seward, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said municipality,
any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
§ 325-3.2. Unlawful discharge of untreated sewage.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City of
Seward, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said municipality, any
wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
§ 325-3.3. Cesspools, privies and septic tanks prohibited.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or
used for the disposal of wastewater.
§ 325-3.4. Mandatory hook-up.
The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the municipality
and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now
located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer
of the municipality, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 90
days after date of official notice to do so; provided that said public sewer is
within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line.
§ 325-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-3.4
1:467

ARTICLE IV
Private Sewage Disposal
[Amended 11-15-1977 by Ord. No. 1101]
§ 325-4.1. When applicable.
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of § 325-3.4, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article.
§ 325-4.2. Permit required.261
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system,
the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Superintendent.
The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by
the municipality, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the
Superintendent.
§ 325-4.3. Effective date of permit; inspections. [Amended
11-7-1978 by Ord. No. 1144262]
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in
any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the Superintendent when
the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions
are covered. The inspection shall be made within 24 hours of the receipt of
notice (except Saturday, Sunday and holidays) by the Superintendent.
§ 325-4.4. Specifications.263
The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of Health
and Human Services of the State of Nebraska. No septic tank or cesspool
shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
§ 325-4.5. Mandatory connection to public sewer when available.
A. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made
to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic
tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be
abandoned and filled with suitable material.
B. When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to said sewer within 60 days and the private sewage disposal
261. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
262. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
263. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 325-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-4.5
1:469
§ 325-4.6. Maintenance.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities
in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the municipality.
§ 325-4.7. Additional requirements.
No statement contained in §§ 325-4.1 through 325-4.6 shall be construed
to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the
Health Officer.
system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel
or dirt.
§ 325-4.5 SEWARD CODE § 325-4.7
1:470
ARTICLE V
Installation
[Amended 11-15-1977 by Ord. No. 1101]
§ 325-5.1. Permit required.264
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent.
§ 325-5.2. Classes of permits; permit application; fees. [Amended
10-19-1982 by Ord. No. 31-82265]
There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: a) for residential
and commercial service, and b) for service to establishments producing
industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make
application at the Building Inspection Department. The City shall require
every applicant to pay a sewer connection fee; said fee to be set by
resolution of the City Council and on file in the City Building Inspection
Department. Said fee for connection to the sewer system shall be paid in
advance. If the drain is to be connected with the sewer built by private
parties or to pass through property not owned by the applicant, the written
consent of the owner must be procured and filed with the application.
The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications,
or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
Superintendent.
§ 325-5.3. Disposition of fees and revenue.
All moneys raised from the charge for connecting a private drain or sewer
to the main sewer of the City shall be credited to the sewer funds of the City
and used for the maintenance and operation of the existing system or to
create a reserve fund for the purpose of future maintenance or construction
of a new sewer system of the City. Revenues from such charge shall also
be used for abatement or reduction of ad valorem taxes being levied or to
be levied from the payment of bonds outstanding or to be issued for the
construction of, or additions to, the sewage system of the City.
§ 325-5.4. Licensed plumber or drainlayer required.266 [Amended
11-7-1978 by Ord. No. 1144]
A. No person shall engage in or conduct the business of sewer connection
and house drainage or excavate any trenches for sewer pipe, or open,
uncover or in any manner make connection with or lay any sewer drain,
or attach to, modify or repair any appurtenances to sewer connections
with the sewer in the streets or alleys or with any private sewer or drain
264. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
265. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
266. Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Art. VIII, Plumbing Code.
§ 325-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-5.4
1:471
§ 325-5.5. Licensed plumber or drainlayer responsible for
damages.268
The licensed plumber or drainlayer who connects the public sewers shall
be held responsible on his bond for any damages he may cause to the
sewers, public streets or alleys. He shall restore the streets or alleys to the
satisfaction of the Water/Wastewater Superintendent, and make good any
settlement of ground or pavement caused by the excavations made by said
plumber or drainlayer under or by virtue of any permit issued under the
provisions of this article. In the event of settling within one year after being
refilled, the Water/Wastewater Superintendent shall have the right and it
shall be his duty to demand and require the restoration by the party who
made such excavation.
§ 325-5.6. Installation procedures and requirements. [Amended
7-21-1987 by Ord. No. 13-87]
in the City without holding a proper license for such work, and without
complying with the provisions of this chapter and other provisions of
this Code relating thereto and with the provisions of any resolution
or order hereinafter passed by the Mayor and Council pertaining to
sewers; provided, however, this regulation shall not apply to persons
under special contract with the City for construction, extension or
repair of sewers.
B. No person shall receive such license who shall not have furnished
satisfactory evidence of responsibility and qualifications to apply his
trade in accord with the requirements of this chapter and the Council's
rules for the conduct of such work. The license fee of a drainlayer and/
or a plumber shall be set from time to time by the City Council, payable
in advance, and no license shall be granted for a greater period than
one year. No licensed drainlayer or plumber shall allow his name to be
used by any other person directly or indirectly, either to obtain a permit
or do any work under his or their license or bond. Such licenses shall
expire April 30 following their issuance.267
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to break into, or otherwise open, any
lateral or trunk sewer at any other place than where a "Y" has been
placed for the connection of service sewers, except upon written
permission of the Water/Wastewater Superintendent, and when an
opening is made in any sewer, at any place other than where a "Y" is left
for such purpose, it shall be so made by inserting in the place of a single
joint a like-size joint having a "Y" connection. No service sewer trench
shall be filled or sewer pipe covered until the service has first been
inspected by the Water/Wastewater Superintendent, and all persons
making such connections shall give a reasonable notice of the time
when such sewer shall be ready for inspection. All trenches left open
267. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
268. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 325-5.4 SEWARD CODE § 325-5.6
1:472
shall be properly guarded in the daylight hours and in the nighttime
shall be further guarded by the placing of lighted lanterns at the
excavation, which lanterns shall be kept lighted from one-half hour
after sundown until one-half hour before sunrise. All trenches in
unpaved streets and alleys shall be refilled in a careful and
workmanlike manner, shall be well and thoroughly done in uniform
layers of not exceeding four inches and tamped with a tamper of not
less than 40 pounds weight, or with puddled earth, so as to replace as
nearly as possible all excavated material and leave the surface in as
good a condition as before the commencement of the work. Excavations
in streets and alleys shall be made in such manner as to impede
travel as little as possible. The Water/Wastewater Superintendent may
determine and limit the time such excavation may remain open, and,
when unnecessarily delayed, he may direct that the number of workers
be increased to hasten the work to such an extent as he may deem
necessary.269
B. No drain or sewer pipe shall be less than four inches, internal diameter,
in that portion of the line extending from the street sewer to the
property line of the property connected, and the connection with the
public sewer must be made with an increaser. All sewers outside of
buildings must be laid in a trench with a uniform grade not less than 1/8
inch to the foot and greater if practical.
(1) Cylindrical vitrified salt-glazed pipes of standard weight, good
quality, free from flaws, and well glazed over the entire surface may
be used outside of buildings to a point not less than two feet from
the foundation of such building. All pipes must be well connected
with Portland cement mortar and the excess mortar wiped out after
laying. All changes of direction must be made with pipes of not
greater than 1/8 bend. No pipe shall be laid at a less depth than
four feet unless by special permit of the Water/Wastewater
Superintendent.
(2) All trenches and excavations deeper than five feet will be shored or
the sides shall be placed with the proper angle of repose or
otherwise supported by means of sufficient strength to protect the
employees working therein. For all excavations and trenches
deeper than five feet near large buildings, shoring shall be used.
(3) For all excavations or trenches in unstable ground deeper than four
feet, shoring shall be used or the sides shall be sloped with the
proper angle of repose. Unstable ground shall include soft, sandy,
or filled area or waterlogged areas, or areas wet from groundwater
or a water line leak or leaks.
(4) The angle of repose shall be as stated in OSHA Safety and Health
Standards (29 CFR 1926/1910) No. 2207, dated 1985. Such
standards and additional information contained in such standards
269. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 325-5.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-5.6
1:473
are made a part hereof by this reference and are on file with the
office of the City Clerk-Treasurer, City of Seward, Nebraska. Said
OSHA standards are made a part of this chapter by this reference
thereto and shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer,
City of Seward, Nebraska.
(5) The party excavating and his bondmen shall be liable for all
damages arising by reason of any neglect in regard to these
requirements and provisions.
(6) All alternative jointing methods and materials must be approved by
the Superintendent prior to installation.
C. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an
approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
D. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, interior and
exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface
runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in
turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
E. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the City,270 or the procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual
of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and
watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials
must be approved by the Superintendent before installation.271
F. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the Superintendent or his representative.272
G. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building.
H. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent, to
meet all requirements of this chapter.273
I. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the
270. Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Building Construction.
271. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
272. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
273. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 325-5.6 SEWARD CODE § 325-5.6
1:474
§ 325-5.7. Abandoned building sewers. [Added 6-19-1979 by Ord.
No. 1165277]
Any building sewer which is abandoned, for any reason, must be cut off from
the City sewer, and capped in a manner and at such place as the Water/
Wastewater Superintendent may approve, by the owner of the property
being served by such building sewer.
§ 325-5.8. Repairs and replacement. [Added 8-21-1984 by Ord. No.
21-84278]
requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable
rules and regulations of the City.274
J. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the City.275
K. All architects, owners, agents or contractors will see that a certificate of
inspection from the Water/Wastewater Superintendent is presented
before accepting any plumbing work of any description.276
A. The Municipal Water/Wastewater Department may require the owner of
any property which is within the municipality and connected to the
public sewers or drains to repair or replace any connection line which
serves the owner's property and is broken, clogged or otherwise in need
of repair or replacement. The property owner's duty to repair or replace
such a connection line shall include those portions upon the owner's
property and those portions upon public property or easements up to
and including the point of junction with the public main.
B. The Municipal Clerk shall give the property owner notice by registered
letter or certified mail, directed to the last-known address of such
owner or the agent of such owner, directing the repair or replacement
of such connection line. If within 30 days of mailing such notice the
property owner fails or neglects to cause such repairs or replacements
to be made, the Water/Wastewater Superintendent may cause such
work to be done and assess the cost upon the property served by such
connection.
(Neb. RS 18-1748)
274. Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Building Construction.
275. Editor's Note: See Ch. 340, Streets, Sidewalks and Municipal Property.
276. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
277. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
278. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 325-5.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-5.8
1:475

ARTICLE VI
Sewer Use
[Amended 11-15-1977 by Ord. No. 1101]
§ 325-6.1. Unlawful use; prohibited discharges.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, including
interior and exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling water,
or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
B. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm
sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged, on approval of the Superintendent, to a storm sewer,
combined sewer, or natural outlet.279
C. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
(1) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
(2) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage
treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of
two mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
(3) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
(4) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference
with the proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass,
rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood,
paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups,
milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(5) Any waters or wastes having a five-day BOD greater than 300 parts
per million by weight, or containing more than 350 parts per
million by weight of suspended solids, or having an average daily
flow greater than 2% of the average sewage flow of the City, shall
be subject to the review of the Superintendent. Where necessary, in
the opinion of the Superintendent, the owner shall provide, at his
279. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 325-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-6.1
1:477
expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to
reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million
by weight, or reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per million
by weight, or control the quantities and rates of discharge of
such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications, and other pertinent
information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities
shall be submitted for the approval of the Superintendent, and
no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said
approvals are obtained in writing.280
D. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely,
in the opinion of the Superintendent, that such wastes can harm either
the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse
effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb,
public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to
the acceptability of these wastes, the Superintendent will give
consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction
of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the
sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited
are:281
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 65° C.
(2) Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°
F. and 150° F. (0° C. and 65° C.).
(3) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor 3/4
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Superintendent.
(4) Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
(5) Any water or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting any
excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment
works exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent for
such materials.
(6) Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odorproducing
substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits
which may be established by the Superintendent as necessary, after
280. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
281. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 325-6.1 SEWARD CODE § 325-6.1
1:478
§ 325-6.2. Rejection or pretreatment of discharges.282
treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of
state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such
discharge to the receiving waters.
(7) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
(8) Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
(9) Materials which exert or cause:
(a) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues)
or dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride
or sodium sulfate).
(b) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions).
(c) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant
load on the sewage treatment works.
(d) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined herein.
(10)Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that
the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements
of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the
receiving waters.
A. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances
or possess the characteristics enumerated under § 325-6.1 of this
article, and which, in the judgment of the Superintendent, may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or
receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life to
constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent may:
(1) Reject the wastes;
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
282. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 325-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-6.2
1:479
§ 325-6.3. Grease, oil and sand interceptors.283
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes,
sand, or other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the Superintendent and shall be located so as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
§ 325-6.4. Maintenance of flow-equalizing facilities.
Where preliminary treatment of flow-equalizing facilities are provided for
any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
§ 325-6.5. Control manhole.284
When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in
the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of
the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The manhole will be installed by the owner at his expense,
and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 325-6.6. Testing and measurement standards.
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined
in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public
Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole
provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the
event no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall
be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer
to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall
be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of
constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of
(4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under
the provisions of § 325-6.7 of this article.
B. If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plant and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent, and subject
to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
283. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
284. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 325-6.2 SEWARD CODE § 325-6.6
1:480
hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved will
determine whether a twenty-four-hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be
taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are
obtained from twenty-four-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are
determined from periodic grab samples.)
§ 325-6.7. Special agreements.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may
be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the
industrial concern.
§ 325-6.8. Special conditions.
A. Where, in the judgment of the Council by reason of special conditions,
the application of the use charges hereinbefore set forth would be
inequitable or unfair to either the City or the user, or in the cases where
the character of the sewage from a consumer is such that an additional
burden is placed upon the sewerage system greater than that imposed
by the average sewage delivered to the sewage disposal plant, a special
rate may be established by contract or by resolution, duly passed and
approved by the Council. To assist the Council in determining whether
or not special conditions exist or additional burden is placed upon the
sewerage systems, the consumer shall, upon the request of the Council,
provide access to the owner's sewer lateral at a point where
representative samples may be taken. Strength from the character of
this waste shall be tested and it shall be determined to the satisfaction
of the Council, at the owner's expense, the strength of the waste and
any special characteristics the waste may have.
B. If any user can show to the satisfaction of the Council that any
substantial portion of the water consumed by the user as determined by
this section is used for such purpose that it does not contribute to the
sanitary sewerage, that water shall be disregarded for the purpose of
determining the sewer use charges to the user.
§ 325-6.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-6.8
1:481

ARTICLE VII
Enforcement
[Amended 11-15-1977 by Ord. No. 1101]
§ 325-7.1. Tampering prohibited.
No authorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the sewage works. Entrance
into a manhole for any purpose except by authorized persons is hereby
prohibited. It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any
receptacle connected with the sewer system any substance which is not
usual or natural waste carried by the sewer system.
§ 325-7.2. Inspection of private sewers.285
A. The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter. The Superintendent or his representatives shall have no
authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical,
chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that
point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the
sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
B. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
above, the Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the City
shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by
the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death
to the City employees and the City shall indemnify the company against
loss or damage to its property by City employees and against liability
claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted
against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling
operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the
company to maintain safe conditions as required by this article.
C. The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the City holds a duly
negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any
portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and
subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining
to the private property involved.
285. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 325-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-7.3
1:483
§ 325-7.3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-4-1979 by Ord. No.
1183]
A. Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except
§ 325-7.1, shall be served by the City with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
B. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof
shall be fined in the amount not exceeding $500 for each violation. Each
twenty-four-hour period in which any such violation shall continue may
be deemed a separate offense. [Amended 4-3-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-10]
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the City
by reason of such violation.
§ 325-7.3 SEWARD CODE § 325-7.3
1:484
ARTICLE VIII
Rates
[Amended 11-15-1977 by Ord. No. 1101; 11-7-1978 by Ord. No.
1144; 9-2-1980 by Ord. No. 22-80; 12-15-1981 by Ord. No. 47-81;
8-2-1983 by Ord. No. 19-83; 11-19-1985 by Ord. No. 26-85;
12-15-1987 by Ord. No. 32-87; 12-20-1988 by Ord. No. 22-88;
2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 2-93; 11-16-2004 by Ord. No. 36-04; 8-5-2008
by Ord. No. 13-08; 5-18-2010 by Ord. No. 7-10; 4-19-2011 by Ord.
No. 6-11; 5-6-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-14]
§ 325-8.1. Residential rates. [Amended 8-16-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-14; 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-25; 5-21-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-17]
§ 325-8.2. General service rates. [Amended 8-16-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-14; 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-25; 5-21-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-17]
General services rates (formerly commercial) are applied to nonresidential
accounts each month.
The charges are:
§ 325-8.3. Large general service rates. [Amended 8-16-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-14; 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-25; 5-21-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-17]
Large general services rates are as follows:
A. Residential usage for all domestic use only. The bills for the 12 months
beginning each April shall be based on an average of the water
consumption billed in January, February and March. The sewage
charges for a new residential user who has not established an average
for the months of January, February and March, or a user who only has
sewer and no water usage shall be charged the following usage:
(1) Single occupancy: 200 cubic feet per month, plus the minimum
sewer charge.
(2) Double or more occupancy: 600 cubic feet per month, plus the
minimum sewer charge.
(3) No water usage - metered: 600 cubic feet per month, plus the
minimum sewer charge.
B. The charges are:
(1) Effective June 2019 billing: customer charge of $20.85 per meter,
plus $0.03200 per cubic foot.
A. Effective June 2019 billing: customer charge of $41.75 per meter, plus
$0.03257 per cubic foot.
§ 325-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-8.3
1:485
§ 325-8.4. Rates based on metered water; unmetered water use
charge.
A. Users contributing above allowed limits of BOD, SS, TKN, or FOG as
defined below. The charges are:
(1) Effective June 2019 billing:
(a) Minimum charge of $250 per meter; and
(b) Per 100 cubic feet: $1.85; and
(c) Per pound of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) that is
measured to be greater than 200 mg/l: $0.40; and
(d) Per pound of suspended solids (SS) that measured to be
greater than 220 mg/l: $0.25.
(e) Per pound of total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) that measured to be
greater than 30 mg/l: $0.50.
(f) Per pound of fats, oils and grease (FOG) that measured to be
greater than 100 mg/l: $0.27.
B. The sewer charges in Subsection A(1)(c) through (f) above are based on
observed wastewater flow from the customer using a suitable
continuous recording device for measuring concentrations of
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), suspended solids (SS), total
Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) and fats, oils and grease (FOG).
C. If the additional cost associated with industrial general service wastes
are not recovered by the large general service rate charges or above
surcharges, the City shall have the option to review the effect any user
(all classifications) has on the wastewater system and establish
adequate charges, if necessary, for the excessive amounts of
biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids or other applicable
pollutants.
A. The use charge shall be applied separately to each individual user
having a separate water meter which measures water contributed to or
discharged into the sanitary sewerage system and shall be determined
by the water meter reading for water furnished by the Water
Department of the City or by privately owned water supply which may
contribute to or discharge into the sanitary sewerage system. In the
case of an unmetered water supply, the quantity of water used and
discharged into the sanitary sewerage system shall be determined to
the satisfaction of the Council and at the expense of the owner of the
unmetered water supply. If the quantity of unmetered water discharged
into the sanitary sewerage system is estimated by the Council to be
ordinarily in excess of the amount permitted to be used under the
minimum charge as applied to said user, the Council may require such
water supply to be metered at the expense of the owner or user.
§ 325-8.3 SEWARD CODE § 325-8.4
1:486
§ 325-8.5. Collection of sewer fees.
The use fees prescribed by this article shall be collected at the same time
and in the same manner and by the same officers as water charges are
collected by the City.286
§ 325-8.6. Use of fees collected.
All money raised from the sewer use fees shall be used for the maintenance
or operation of the existing system, to create a reserve fund for the purpose
of future maintenance or construction of a new sewer system or for the
payment of bonds outstanding or to be issued for the construction of or
additions to such sewerage system for the City.
§ 325-8.7. Liens.287
In addition to all other remedies, if a customer shall for any reason remain
indebted to the municipality for sewer service furnished, such amount due,
together with any rents and charges in arrears, shall be considered a
delinquent sewer rent which is hereby declared to be a lien upon the real
estate for which the same was furnished. Any delinquent sewer rentals
which remain unpaid for a period of three months after they become due
may be, by resolution of the Council, assessed against said real estate as
a special assessment, which special assessment shall be certified by the
Municipal Clerk to the County Clerk of Seward County, Nebraska. The
County Clerk shall thereupon place the same on the tax rolls for collection,
subject to the same penalties and to be collected in like manner as other
City taxes; provided that the City shall notify in writing nonoccupying
owners of premises or their agents whenever their tenants or lessees are
60 days' delinquent in the payment of sewer rent. Thereafter, if the owner
B. Should a water meter get out of order or fail to register properly, the
user shall be charged for the month or months in which the meter is
accurate, a sum equal to the charge for the amount of water used on
said premises during the corresponding period of the preceding year;
provided that if no basis for such comparison exists, or if the Water/
Wastewater Superintendent determines such basis is unfair to the
consumer, the consumer shall pay such reasonable sum for sewer use
during such period as the Water/Wastewater Superintendent shall
determine. In the event of any unusual circumstances causing a higher
water use than normal during the month in which residential rates are
set, the following 11 months' sewer use fee to the consumer may be
adjusted as determined to be fair by the Water/Wastewater
Superintendent. [Amended 4-3-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-10]
C. Any water meter out of order must be repaired and put into operation
as soon as practical.
286. Editor's Note: See Ch. 390, Water, Art. I.
287. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 325-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-8.7
1:487
of said real estate or his agent within such City shall notify the Council or
Superintendent in writing to discontinue sewer service to said real estate
or the occupants thereof, it shall be the duty of the officer in charge of the
Water/Wastewater Department promptly to discontinue said service; and
rentals for any sewer service furnished to the occupants of said real estate
in violation of said notice shall not be a lien thereon. (Neb. RS 16-694)
§ 325-8.7 SEWARD CODE § 325-8.7
1:488
ARTICLE IX
Septic Tank Wastes
[Added 8-1-1989 by Ord. No. 33-89]
§ 325-9.1. Discharge permitted.
The discharge of septic tank wastes to the City of Seward water/wastewater
treatment facilities and system are hereby permitted, subject to the
conditions and requirements set forth in this section.
§ 325-9.2. Discharge limitations.
All wastewater and septic tank discharge material shall be from domestic
septic tank systems which are located within the County of Seward,
Nebraska.
§ 325-9.3. Hauler licenses; bond required.
All commercial haulers of such wastewater and septic tank material shall
apply for and be issued a license to haul such material to the City of Seward
Water/Wastewater Treatment Facilities, which license shall be approved by
the Mayor and Council of the City of Seward, Nebraska, and a good and
sufficient bond shall be furnished by the hauler in the amount of $50,000 to
secure the City from any damages or expenses as may be incurred by the
City by the reception of such wastewater and septic tank material to the
City of Seward water/wastewater treatment facilities and which bond shall
be approved by the Mayor and Council.
§ 325-9.4. Permit to discharge; limit on amount of waste materials
accepted.
The hauler shall request a permit to discharge such materials, which permit
shall be issued by the Water/Wastewater Superintendent of the City. Such
permit shall be secured at least 24 hours prior to the discharge of such
materials. No more than 3,000 gallons of such waste materials shall be
accepted by the City of Seward water/wastewater treatment facilities within
any twenty-four-hour period.
§ 325-9.5. Sample and analysis of waste.
At the time of the discharge of such materials, a sample shall be taken
from such material and preserved by the Water/Wastewater Superintendent
of the City for future analysis of any hazardous materials. If the biological
treatment process is negatively affected at the water/wastewater treatment
facilities of the City because of hazardous materials in the discharge, the
hauler will be liable for damages and expenses incurred by the City.
§ 325-9.6. Certification of hauler.
The hauler discharging such waste to the City of Seward water/wastewater
treatment facilities shall certify in writing that such materials have come
§ 325-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-9.6
1:489
from domestic septic tanks within the County of Seward, Nebraska only, and
listing the location and date when such wastes were loaded and the time
and date to be discharged to said water/wastewater treatment facilities,
and that said waste contains, to the knowledge of the hauler, no hazardous
materials.
§ 325-9.7. Fees.288
The hauler shall pay for the discharge of such materials a fee as set from
time to time by the City Council, payable prior to the discharge of such
materials.
§ 325-9.8. Hours of discharge.
The discharge of such materials shall be during the period of 7:30 a.m.
to 11:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. during the summer months from
Memorial Day to Labor Day; and 8:30 a.m. to 11:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. to
4:30 p.m. during the winter months from Labor Day to Memorial Day; on
each day during such periods, except weekends and holidays.
288. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 325-9.6 SEWARD CODE § 325-9.8
1:490
Chapter 327
SEX OFFENDERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Offenses — See Ch. 290.
Sexually oriented businesses — See Ch. 329.
Zoning and subdivision — See Ch. 410.
§ 325-9.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-9.8
1:491

ARTICLE I
Residency Restrictions
§ 327-1. Findings and intent.
§ 327-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHILD-CARE FACILITY — A facility licensed pursuant to the Child Care
Licensing Act (Neb. RS 71-1980 et seq.).
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — A village, a city, a county, a school district, a
public power district, or any other unit of local government.
SCHOOL — A public, private, denominational, or parochial school which
meets the requirements for accreditation or approval prescribed in Neb. RS
Chapter 79.
SEX OFFENDER — An individual who has been convicted of a crime listed
in Neb. RS 29-4003 and who is required to register as a sex offender
pursuant to the Sex Offender Registration Act (Neb. RS 29-4001 et seq.).
SEXUAL PREDATOR — An individual who is required to register under the
Sex Offender Registration Act, who has committed an aggravated offense as
defined in Neb. RS 29-4001.01, and who has victimized a person 18 years of
age or younger.
§ 327-3. Prohibited residency.
A. The Nebraska Legislature has found that certain sex offenders present
a high risk to commit repeat offenses and has enabled municipalities to
restrict such persons' place of residency as provided in the Sexual
Predator Residency Restriction Act (Neb. RS 29-4015 through
29-4017).
B. Sex offenders who prey on children and who are high risks to repeat
such acts present an extreme threat to public safety. The cost of sex
offender victimization to these children and to society at large, while
incalculable, is exorbitant.
C. It is the intent of this chapter to serve the City's compelling interest to
promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the City of Seward by creating certain areas around locations
where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers where
certain sexual predators cannot reside.
A. Prohibited location of residence. It is unlawful for any sexual predator
to reside within 500 feet from a school or child-care facility.
B. Measure of distance. For purposes of determining the minimum
distance separation, the distance shall be measured by following a
§ 327-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 327-3
1:493
§ 327-4. Violations and penalties.
A person who violates this article shall be punished as provided generally in
the Code.289
§ 327-5. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to a sexual predator who:
straight line from the outer property line of the residence to the nearest
outer boundary line of the school or child-care facility.
A. Resides within a prison or correctional or treatment facility operated by
the state or a political subdivision;
B. Established a residence before July 1, 2006, and has not moved from
that residence; or
C. Established a residence after July 1, 2006, and the school or child-care
facility triggering the restriction was established after the initial date of
the sexual predator's residence at that location.
289. Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, Art. III, General Penalty, and Art. IV, Enforcement and Arrest.
§ 327-3 SEWARD CODE § 327-5
1:494
Chapter 329
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 205.
Amusements — See Ch. 209.
Offenses — See Ch. 290.
Sex offenders — See Ch. 327.
Zoning and subdivision — See Ch. 410.
§ 327-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 327-5
1:495

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 329-1.1. Purpose and findings.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented
businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general
welfare of the citizens of the City, and to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to prevent the inappropriate location and
concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the City. The
provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.
Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny
access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market; neither is it
the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the
distribution of obscene material.
B. Findings. Based on evidence concerning the advance secondary effects
of adult use on the community presented in hearings and in reports
made available to the Council, and on findings incorporated in the cases
of City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v.
American Mini Theaters, 426 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theater,
Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., TDA "Kandyland",
529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 121
S.Ct. 1223 (2001); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); 44
Liquormart, Inc. v. Rhode Island, 517 U.S. 484 (1996); Jake's Ltd., Inc. v.
City of Coates, 284 F.3d 884 (8th Cir. 2002); Bzaps, Inc., v. City of
Mankato, 268 F.3d 603 (8th Cir. 2001); DLH, Inc. v. Nebraska Liquor
Control Commission, 266 Neb. 361, 665 N.W.2d 629 (2003); Village of
Winslow v. Sheets, 261 Neb. 203; 622 N.W.2d 595 (2001); Major
Liquors, Inc. v. City of Omaha, 188 Neb. 628, 198 N.W.2d 483 (1972);
and on studies on other communities, including, but not limited to,
Phoenix, Arizona; Tucson, Arizona; Garden Grove, California; Los
Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Adams County, Colorado;
Denver, Colorado; Manatee County, Florida; Indianapolis, Indiana;
Kansas City, Kansas; Minneapolis, Minnesota; St. Paul, Minnesota; Las
Vegas, Nevada; Ellicottville, New York; Islip, New York; New York City,
New York; Syracuse, New York; Times Square, New York; New Hanover,
North Carolina; Cleveland, Ohio; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Amarillo,
Texas; Austin, Texas; Beaumont, Texas; Cleburne, Texas; Dallas, Texas;
El Paso, Texas; Ft. Worth, Texas; Houston, Texas; Newport, Virginia;
Bellevue, Washington; Des Moines, Washington; Seattle, Washington;
St. Croix County, Wisconsin; and also on findings from the
Environmental Research Group to the American Center for Law and
Justice (March 31, 1996), the Council finds:
§ 329-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-1.1
1:497
(1) Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful
and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the
operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no
mechanism to make the owners of these establishments
responsible for the activities that occur on their premises.
(2) Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses defined in this
chapter as adult theaters and cabarets engage in higher incidence
of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other
establishments.
(3) Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at
sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide
private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos,
or live sex shows.
(4) Offering and providing such space encourages such activities,
which creates unhealthy conditions.
(5) Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other
sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex
within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses.
(6) Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics
which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those
substantial governmental concerns.
(7) A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to
place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and
the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a
licensing procedure will place an incentive on the operators to see
that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent
with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as
well as the citizens of the City. It is appropriate to require
reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of
the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of
the premises and activities occurring therein.
(8) Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting
on premises with adult booths advances a substantial
governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual
activity occurring in adult theaters.
(9) Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep
information regarding current employees and certain past
employees will help reduce the incidents of certain types of
criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential
witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working in
such establishments.
(10) The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the
§ 329-1.1 SEWARD CODE § 329-1.1
1:498
sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially
related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of
such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted
diseases.
(11) The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been
convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational
assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in
contravention of this chapter.
(12) The barring of such individuals from the management of adult uses
for a period of years serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct
which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases.
(13) The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the
City will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter.
§ 329-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-1.1
1:499

ARTICLE II
Definitions and Interpretation
§ 329-2.1. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any form of consideration, or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion-picture
machines, projectors, video or laserdisc players, or other image-producing
devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine
at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE —
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or other commercial
establishment which features:
A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal purposes,
offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more
of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video
reproductions, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, or other
visual representations which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas; or
(1)
Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use
in connection with specified sexual activities.
(2)
A.
A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas and still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult
novelty store, or adult video store. Such other business purposes will
not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being
categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video
store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering
for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
B.
A. Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude; or
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
B.
§ 329-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-2.1
1:501
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which:
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes,
compact discs, digital video discs, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
This shall not include hotels or motels which offer adult movies for viewing
as part of a selection of available movies that includes non-adult movies, on
a pay-per-view basis.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which features persons who appear in a state of
nudity or semi-nude, or live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
EMPLOYEE — A person who performs any service on the premises of
a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis,
whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid
a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business.
"Employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair
or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the
delivery of goods to the premises.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who or which
furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its
primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any of the following:
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has
a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the
availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or
A.
Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than 10
hours; or
B.
Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for
a period of time that is less than 10 hours.
C.
The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new businesses;
A.
§ 329-2.1 SEWARD CODE § 329-2.1
1:502
LICENSEE — A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually
oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an
applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a
person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in
a sexually oriented business.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears seminude,
in a state of nudity, or who displays specified anatomical areas and
is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any
form of consideration. "Nude model studio" shall not include a proprietary
school licensed by the State of Nebraska or a college or junior college.
NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY — The showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less
than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less
than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the
covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
SEMI-NUDE or IN A SEMI-NUDE CONDITION — The showing of the female
breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest
point or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall
include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not
include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited
by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel,
provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial enterprise
that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult
motion-picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or
sexual encounter center.
The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
B.
The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business; or
C.
D. The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex; or
A.
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same
sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
B.
§ 329-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-2.1
1:503
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY — Any of the following: prostitution or
promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution or
display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child;
possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness or public
indecency; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in
organized criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a child; gambling;
distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those
described above under the criminal or penal code of other states or
countries; for which fewer than 10 years have elapsed since the date
of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date. The fact that a conviction is being
appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant.290
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Any of the following:
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
— The increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%,
as the floor areas exist on the date this chapter takes effect.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS — Includes any of the following:
The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered; or
A.
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above
the top of the areola.
B.
The actual or simulated fondling or other erotic touching of human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
A.
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or
B.
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in Subsections A and B above.
C.
A. The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
B.
The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
C.
290. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 329-2.1 SEWARD CODE § 329-2.2
1:504
§ 329-2.2. Classification.
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
A. Adult arcades;
B. Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, or adult video stores;
C. Adult cabarets;
D. Adult motels;
E. Adult motion-picture theaters;
F. Adult theaters;
G. Escort agencies;
H. Nude model studios; and
I. Sexual encounter centers.
§ 329-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-2.2
1:505

ARTICLE III
Licenses
§ 329-3.1. Licenses required.
§ 329-3.2. Business license.
A. It is unlawful:
(1) For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a
valid sexually oriented business license issued by the City pursuant
to this chapter.
(2) For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to
employ, contract with, arrange or allow or permit a person to work
for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a sexually
oriented business employee by the City pursuant to this chapter.
(3) For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented
business without having secured a sexually oriented business
employee license pursuant to this chapter.
B. An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
City.
C. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter. The application may request and the applicant shall provide
such information (including fingerprints) as to enable the City to
determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in
this chapter.
A. A person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business must sign
the application for a license as an applicant. If a person other than an
individual wishes to operate a sexually oriented business, all persons
legally responsible for the operations of the sexually oriented business
or who have power to control or direct its operations must sign the
application for a license as applicant. Such persons include, but are not
limited to, general partners, corporate officers, corporate directors,
and controlling shareholder(s). Each application must be qualified
under the following section and each applicant shall be considered a
licensee if a license is granted.
B. The completed application for a sexually oriented business license shall
contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the
following documents:
(1) If the applicant is:
(a) An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and
any aliases and submit proof that he/she is 19 years of age.
(b) A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name,
and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is
§ 329-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-3.2
1:507
general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if
any.
(c) A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name,
the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in
good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, the
names and capacity of all officers, directors and controlling
stockholders, and the name of the registered corporate agent
and the address of the registered office for service of process.
(2) If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant; he or she must:
(a) State the sexually oriented business's fictitious name; and
(b) Submit the required registration documents.
(3) Whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
activity as defined in this chapter, and, if so, the specified criminal
activity involved, the date, place, and jurisdiction of each.291
(4) Whether the applicant has had a previous license under this
chapter or other sexually oriented business ordinance from another
city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name
and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit
was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial,
suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant has been a
partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal
stockholder of a corporation that is licensed under this chapter
whose license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked,
including the name and location of the sexually oriented business
for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as
the date of denial, suspension or revocation.292
(5) Whether the applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter
or other sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or
county and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed
businesses.293
(6) A description of each classification of sexually oriented business for
which the applicant submits an application for a license.
(7) The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a
legal description of the property, street address, and telephone
number(s), if any.
(8) The applicant's mailing address and residential address.
(9) A recent photograph of the applicant(s).
291. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
292. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
293. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 329-3.2 SEWARD CODE § 329-3.2
1:508
§ 329-3.3. Employee license.
(10) The date, issuing state and number of driver's permit or other
identification card information for the applicant.
(11) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business.
The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it
must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches.
(12) A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30
days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting
the property lines and the structures containing any existing
sexually oriented businesses within 400 feet of the property to be
certified; the property lines of any established religious institution/
synagogue, school, or public park or recreation area within 400
feet of the property to be certified. For purposes of this subsection,
a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence
at the time an application is submitted.
(13) If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business,
other than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises, in a
viewing room or booth of less than 150 square feet of floor space,
films, videocassettes, compact discs, digital video discs or other
video reproductions, or live entertainment which depicts specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the applicant
shall comply with the application requirements set forth in
§ 329-4.3.
A. Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business
employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by
the City the following information:
(1) The applicant's name or any other name (including "stage" names)
or aliases used by the individual;
(2) Age, date, and place of birth;
(3) Height, weight, hair and eye color;
(4) Present residence address and telephone number;
(5) Present business address and telephone number;
(6) Date, issuing state and number of driver's permit or other
identification card information; and
(7) Proof that the individual is at least 19 years of age.
B. Attached to the application form for a sexually oriented business
employee license as provided above shall be the following:
§ 329-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-3.3
1:509
§ 329-3.4. Issuance.
(1) A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's
face, and the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the
Police Department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints
shall be paid by the applicant.
(2) A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the
five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the
application, including whether such applicant previously operated
or is seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city, state, or
country or has ever had a license, permit, or authorization to do
business denied, revoked, or suspended, or had any professional or
vocational license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended. In the
event of any such denial, revocation, or suspension, state the name
of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the
reason for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any
order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be attached to the
application.
(3) A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a
specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter and, if so, the
specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction
of each.
A. Employee licenses. Upon the filing of a application for a sexually
oriented business employee license, the City shall issue a temporary
license to said applicant. The application shall then be referred to the
appropriate City departments for an investigation to be made on such
information as is contained on the application. The application process
shall be completed within 30 days from the date the completed
application is filed. After the investigation, the City shall issue a license,
unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or
more of the following findings is true:
(1) The applicant has failed to provide information reasonable
necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form;
(2) The applicant is under the age of 19 years;
(3) The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as
defined in this chapter;
(4) The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for
employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute,
rule or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this
chapter; or
(5) The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee
license revoked in this City or in any other jurisdiction within five
years of the date of the current application. If the sexually oriented
§ 329-3.3 SEWARD CODE § 329-3.4
1:510
business employee license is denied, the temporary license
previously issued is immediately deemed null and void. Denial,
suspension, or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this
subsection shall be subject to appeal as set forth in § 329-3.9.
B. A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual
renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by
the City that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified
criminal activity as defined in this chapter or committed any act during
the existence of the previous license, which would be grounds to deny
the initial license application. The renewal of the license shall be
subject to the payment of the fee as set forth in § 329-3.5.
C. Business licenses.
(1) Within 30 days after receipt of a completed sexually oriented
business application, the City shall approve or deny the issuance of
a license to an applicant. The City shall approve the issuance of a
license to an applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance
of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
(a) An applicant is under 19 years of age.
(b) An applicant is overdue in payment to the City of taxes, fees,
fines, utility services, or penalties assessed against or imposed
upon him/her in relation to any business.294
(c) An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form.
(d) The applicant has had a previous license under this chapter or
other sexually oriented business ordinance from another city
or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name
and location of the sexually oriented business for which the
permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date
of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the
applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer,
director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is
licensed under this chapter whose license has previously been
denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location
of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was
denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of denial,
suspension or revocation.295
(e) An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity
defined in this chapter.296
294. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
295. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
296. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 329-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-3.4
1:511
§ 329-3.5. Fees.297
(f) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business
have not been approved by the Health Department, Fire
Department, and the Building Official as being in compliance
with applicable laws and ordinances.
(g) The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
(h) An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or
is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter.
(2) The license, if granted shall state on its face the name of the person
or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of
the sexually oriented business and the classification for which the
license is issued pursuant to § 329-2.2. All licenses shall be posted
in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually
oriented business so that they may be easily read at any time.
(3) The Health Department, Fire Department, and the Building Official
shall complete their certification that the premises are in
compliance or not in compliance within 20 days of receipt of the
application by the City.
(4) A single sexually oriented business license shall issue for the
premises although there may be more than one classification of
sexually oriented business for such premises as described pursuant
to § 329-3.2B(6) of this chapter. In the event that the applicant
wishes to add an additional category of sexually oriented business
that is not described in the application for the premises, then a new
application describing such additional classification of sexually
oriented business must be submitted and a new license obtained
for the premises before the additional sexually oriented business so
described may be operated on the premises.
A. Every application for a sexually oriented business license (whether for a
new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied
by an application and investigation fee as set from time to time by the
City Council.
B. In addition to the application and investigation fee required above,
every sexually oriented business that is granted a license (new or
renewal) shall pay to the City an annual license fee, as set from time to
time by the City Council, within 30 days of license issuance or renewal.
C. Every application for a sexually oriented business employee license
(whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be
accompanied by an annual application, investigation, and license fee as
set from time to time by the City Council.
297. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 329-3.4 SEWARD CODE § 329-3.5
1:512
§ 329-3.6. Inspection of premises.
§ 329-3.7. Expiration.
§ 329-3.8. Suspension.
The City shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 90 days if it
determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
§ 329-3.9. Revocation.
D. All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the Clerk of the
City prior to the issuance of the license.
A. An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the Police
Department, Health Department, Fire Department, Zoning
Department, or other City departments or agencies to inspect the
premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring
compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business.
B. A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or
employee commits a misdemeanor if he refuses to permit such lawful
inspection of the premises at any time it is open for business.
A. Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in §§ 329-3.1 through
329-3.3. Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before
the expiration date; and when made less than 30 days before the
expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected.
B. When the City denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be
issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to
denial, the City finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has
been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at
least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final.
A. Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter.
B. Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter.
A. The City shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in § 329-3.8
occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12
months.
B. The City shall revoke a license if it determines that:
(1) A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process;
(2) A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of
controlled substances on the premises;
§ 329-3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-3.9
1:513
§ 329-3.10. Transfer.
A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee
operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any
place other than the address designated in the application.
(3) A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
(4) A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business
during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
(5) Except in the case of an adult motel, a licensee has knowingly
allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation, or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed
premises; or
(6) A licensee is delinquent in payment to the City, county, or state for
any taxes or fees past due, or payment for utility services.
C. When the City revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one
year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business
license for one year from the date the revocation became effective. If,
subsequent to revocation, the City finds that the basis for the
revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted
a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation
became effective.
D. After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application,
or suspension or revocation of any license, the applicant or licensee
may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in the
District Court of Seward County.298
298. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 329-3.9 SEWARD CODE § 329-3.10
1:514
ARTICLE IV
Location and Operating Restrictions
§ 329-4.1. Location restrictions; nonconforming uses.
A. A sexually oriented business may only be located in the I-1 District as
defined and described in Chapter 410, Zoning and Subdivision, of the
Seward Municipal Code. A person violates this chapter and is subject to
the penalty as provided herein if that person locates or operates or
causes to be located or operated a sexually oriented business in any
zoning district other than the I-1 District.
B. A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business within 400 feet of:
(1) A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used
primarily for religious worship and related religious activities;
(2) A public or private educational facility, including but not limited to
child day-care facilities, nursery schools, preschools,
kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate
schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools,
vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools,
special education schools, colleges and universities. "School"
includes the school grounds, but does not include facilities used
primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school;
(3) A boundary of a residential district as defined in Chapter 410,
Zoning and Subdivision;
(4) A public park or recreational area which has been designated for
park or recreational activities, including but not limited to a park,
playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field,
basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness
areas, or other similar public land within the City which is under
the control, operation, or management of the City park and
recreation authorities;
(5) The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in
Chapter 410, Zoning and Subdivision;
(6) An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards
children or family entertainment;
(7) A facility primarily used for activities for senior citizens, or for the
housing and/or care of senior citizens;
(8) A youth or adult correctional facility;
(9) A library;
(10) A mortuary/funeral home;
§ 329-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-4.1
1:515
(11) A medical clinic, hospital, nursing home, mental health facility,
mental health agency, developmental disability facility or
developmental disability home;
(12) A licensed premises, licensed to serve and/or sell alcoholic
beverages by the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission; or
(13)U.S. Highway 34 or State Highway 15.
C. A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the
operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of
ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 400 feet of
another sexually oriented business.
D. A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the
operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually
oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or
the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any
building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually
oriented business without first obtaining a license for such additional
business or floor area.
E. For the purpose of Subsection B of this section, measurement shall be
made in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as
the part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is
conducted to the nearest property line of the premises of a use listed in
Subsection B. Presence of a City, county or other political subdivision
boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying
the distance requirements of this section.
F. For purposes of Subsection C of this section, the distance between any
two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line,
without regard to the intervening structures or objects or political
boundaries, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each
business is located.
G. Nonconforming uses.
(1) Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on June 5, 2007,
that is in violation of Subsections A through F of this section shall
be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be
permitted to continue for a period not to exceed one year, unless
sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a
period of 30 days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be
increased, enlarged, extended, or altered, except that the use may
be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented
businesses are within 400 feet of one another and otherwise in a
permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first
established and continually operating at a particular location is the
conforming use and the later established business(es) is/are
nonconforming.
§ 329-4.1 SEWARD CODE § 329-4.1
1:516
§ 329-4.2. Additional regulations for adult motels.
§ 329-4.3. Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit
films, videos or live entertainment in viewing rooms.
(2) A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use
is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to
the grantor renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a
use listed in Subsection B of this section within 400 feet of the
sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the
renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application
for a license is submitted after a license has expired or been
revoked.
A. Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial
establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a
period of time that is less than 10 hours creates a rebuttable
presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is
defined in this chapter.
B. A person commits a misdemeanor if, as the person in control of a
sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment
that does not have a sexually oriented business license, he rents or
subjects a sleeping room to a person and, within 10 hours from the time
the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again.
C. For purposes of Subsection B of this section, the term "rent" or
"subrent" means the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any
form of consideration.
A. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, other than an adult motel or a motel or hotel which features
pay-per-view adult movies, which exhibits on the premises, in a viewing
room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette,
compact disc, digital video disc, live entertainment, or other video
reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises
showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more
manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures
and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will
not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square
feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at
which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or
architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram
should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or
object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked
dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all
§ 329-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-4.3
1:517
areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus
six inches. The City may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal
applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously
submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has
not been altered since it was prepared.
(2) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
(3) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station
may be made without the prior approval of the City.
(4) It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least
one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's
station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
(5) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of
every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access
for any purpose, excluding rest rooms. Rest rooms may not contain
video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more
manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises
shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted
access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations.
The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight
from the manager's station.
(6) It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area
specified in Subsection A(5) remains unobstructed by any doors,
curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other
materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted
access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an
area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed
pursuant to Subsection A(1) of this section.
(7) No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any
time.
(8) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than five footcandles
as measured at the floor level.
(9) It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination
described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.
(10)No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between
viewing rooms or booths.
§ 329-4.3 SEWARD CODE § 329-4.3
1:518
§ 329-4.4. Additional regulations for escort agencies.
§ 329-4.5. Additional regulations for nude model studios.
§ 329-4.6. Additional regulations concerning public nudity.
(11)No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind
between viewing booths or rooms.
(12) The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the
walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or
holes exist.
(13) The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be
nonporous easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
(14) The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in
viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by,
nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood,
composition board or other porous material shall be used within 48
inches of the floor.
B. A person having a duty under Subsection A(1) through (14) above
commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
A. An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 19
years.
B. A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees to
act as an escort for any person under the age of 19 years.
A. A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 19
years.
B. A person under the age of 19 years commits an offense if the person
appears semi-nude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude
model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the
person under 19 years was in a rest room not open to public view or
visible to any other person.
C. A person commits an offense if the person appears in a state of nudity,
or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a
nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public rightof-
way.
D. A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in
any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a
reception room open to the public.
A. It shall be a misdemeanor for a person to knowingly and intentionally, in
a sexually oriented business, appear in a state of nudity or depict
specified sexual activities.
§ 329-4.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-4.6
1:519
§ 329-4.7. Prohibition against children in sexually oriented
business.
A person commits a misdemeanor if the person knowingly allows a person
under the age of 19 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business.
§ 329-4.8. Hours of operation.
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open
at any time between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekdays and
Saturdays, and 11:00 p.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays.
B. It shall be a misdemeanor for a person to knowingly or intentionally, in a
sexually oriented business, appear in a semi-nude condition unless the
person is an employee who, while semi-nude, shall be at least 10 feet
from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet above the
floor.
C. It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while semi-nude in a
sexually oriented business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any
patron or customer or for any patron or customer to pay or give any
gratuity to any employee, while said employee is semi-nude in a
sexually oriented business.
D. It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while semi-nude, to touch a
customer or the clothing of a customer, and it shall be a misdemeanor
for a customer to touch an employee or the clothing of the employee,
while the employee is semi-nude.
E. No person may appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity in any
premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by the Nebraska Liquor
Control Commission. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to
appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity in a licensed premises, and it
shall be a misdemeanor for any license holder, manager or employer of
a licensed premises to cause, encourage, permit, or allow any person to
appear in such licensed premises in a state of nudity or semi-nudity.
§ 329-4.6 SEWARD CODE § 329-4.8
1:520
ARTICLE V
Enforcement
§ 329-5.1. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this chapter shall be subject to an action for injunction and
shall also be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 and/or 30 days'
imprisonment. Each day a violation occurs is a separate offense. Violations
of this chapter shall further be subject to any remedies available by law.
§ 329-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-5.1
1:521
Chapter 335
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk and junk dealers — See Ch. 271.
Nuisances — See Ch. 284.
Offenses — See Ch. 290.
Streets, sidewalks and municipal
property — See Ch. 340.
Abandoned and wrecked vehicles — See Ch.
377.
Weeds and vegetation — See Ch. 394.
§ 329-5.1 SEWARD CODE § 329-5.1
1:522
ARTICLE I
Collection and Disposal
[Adopted as Ch. 4, Art. 2, of the 1976 Code]
§ 335-1.1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARBAGE — Kitchen refuse, decayed waste, dead animals, or anything that
may decompose and become offensive to the public health.
RUBBISH OR TRASH — Discarded machinery, chips, pieces of wood, sticks,
dead trees, branches, bottles, broken glass, crockery, tin cans, boxes,
papers, rags, or any other litter or debris that is not an immediate hazard to
the health of the residents of the municipality.
WASTE — Cinders, ashes, plaster, brick, stone, sawdust, or sand.
§ 335-1.2. Refuse accumulation hazards; nuisances.
The accumulation of, keeping or disposing of any garbage or refuse within
the municipal limits is hereby declared to be a health hazard. The
accumulation, keeping or disposal of such trash in any other manner than
as provided by this article is declared to be detrimental to the health of
the citizens of the municipality and is hereby declared a nuisance and the
accumulation of, keeping or disposal of garbage and refuse except as herein
provided shall be unlawful.
§ 335-1.3. Refuse accumulation prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep in, on, or about any dwelling,
building, or premises, or any other place in the municipality, decayed
vegetable or animal substance, garbage, or refuse matter of any kind that
may be injurious to the public health or offensive to the residents of the
municipality unless the same is kept in receptacles not exceeding a thirtygallon
capacity and as nearly airtight as may be practical. It shall be
unlawful to throw or sweep into the streets, alleys, parks, or other public
grounds any dirt, paper, nails, pieces of glass, refuse, waste, or rubbish
of any kind. No person may permit garbage, rubbish, waste, or refuse to
collect and all persons shall remove the same from their property within 24
hours after being notified to do so by the Municipal Police representing the
Board of Health. Any person having garbage, rubbish, waste, or refuse that
is subject to decay or fermentation within a short period of time shall be
required to place the same in a standard garbage can with a tight cover, or
a durable plastic container that is securely tied at its opening. All persons
shall have the contents of their garbage cans removed at least once a week.
(Neb. RS 19-2106)
§ 335-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-1.4
1:523
§ 335-1.4. Receptacles for commercial establishments.
It is hereby made the duty of any motel keeper, boardinghouse keeper,
and restaurant keeper to provide and use a receptacle made of substantial
material, lined with or made of iron, tin or zinc and provided with a lid, for
the purpose of receiving all the garbage, slop, offal and waste from his place
of business. Such receptacle shall be in accordance with the specifications
set forth in this article. If the receptacle is maintained at an interior location
with reference to said business, a plastic container may be used.
§ 335-1.5. Dead animals.
All dead animals shall be immediately removed and buried by the owner of
such animals; and if the owner of such animal cannot be found within two
hours after discovering the same, then such animal shall be removed by and
at the expense of the municipality. Dead animals shall not be buried within
the corporate limits of the municipality, nor within two miles thereof, nor in
or above the course of groundwater that is used for drinking purposes by
the municipality or its inhabitants. Such animals may, however, be buried in
the municipal dumping ground.
§ 335-1.6. Composting organic materials. [Amended 1-2-1980 by
Ord. No. 2-80]
Except as of otherwise provided herein, the composting of organic materials
shall be permitted but shall be limited to plant residues only. Compost heaps
shall not be permitted to smoke or emit odor. Compost heaps shall be kept in
and surrounded by a woven wire fence or other suitable retaining material.
Any compost heap which emits smoke or odor is declared a nuisance and
upon service of notice from the City the same shall be abated by the person
maintaining said compost heap or, if such person cannot be found, such
notice shall be served upon the owner of the premises where such compost
heap is located. The composting of organic materials upon City streets and
street rights-of-way is prohibited.
§ 335-1.7. Hauling garbage or refuse.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to load,
haul, transport or be in possession of garbage or refuse, unless the same is
loaded and transported in receptacles with tight-fitting covers at all times,
or in closed trucks or vehicles, or in trucks covered with a tarpaulin or
similar equivalent cover.
§ 335-1.8. Unlawful disposal of refuse.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or suffer any offal, manure,
rubbish, filth or any refuse, animal or vegetable matter, or any foul or
nauseous liquors, oil or gasoline to be discharged out of or flow from any
premises owned or occupied by him, or left in or thrown into, deposited or
upon any street, alley, avenue, public square, vacant lot or other place in
§ 335-1.4 SEWARD CODE § 335-1.8
1:524
the City, and any person so offending shall be deemed to be maintaining a
public nuisance.
§ 335-1.9. Accumulation prohibited; removal by City. [Amended
7-5-1988 by Ord. No. 15-88]
A. The accumulation of garbage or refuse upon any lot or land within the
corporate limits of the City of Seward or within the zoning jurisdiction
of the City of Seward, or upon the streets, roads or alleys abutting said
lot or land which constitutes a public nuisance is prohibited.299
B. The owner or owner's duly authorized agent or tenant of said lot or land
shall remove or cause to be removed all garbage and refuse from such
lot or land and streets, roads and alleys.
C. The City, through its proper officers, shall remove or cause to be
removed any collection of such garbage and refuse so found or existing,
upon failure of the owner, or owner's authorized agent, or tenant, if any,
of such lot or land to remove or cause to be removed such collection of
garbage and refuse by complying with the provisions of this article as
hereinafter provided.
D. Notice shall be given to such owner, or owner's duly authorized agent or
tenant, if any, of such lot or land that the Mayor and Council intend to
determine that said collection of garbage or refuse constitutes a public
nuisance and set a date and time for hearing thereon. Upon hearing, if
the Mayor and City Council determines such collection to be a public
nuisance, it shall by resolution declare and determine such collection of
garbage and refuse a public nuisance and direct that notice shall be
given to the owner or owner's duly authorized agent or to the tenant, if
any, of such determination. Such notice and a copy of the resolution as
passed shall be served upon the owner or owner's duly authorized
agent or the tenant thereof, if any, by personal service or by certified
mail. After providing such notice and service thereof, the City, through
its proper officers, shall remove the garbage or refuse or cause the
same to be removed from said lot or land and streets, roads and alleys.
E. If the Mayor or President of the Council, in his absence, of the City
declares in writing that the accumulation of such garbage or refuse
upon any lot or land constitutes an immediate nuisance and hazard to
public health and safety, the City, through its proper officers, upon
order, shall remove the garbage or refuse, or cause it to be removed
from such lot or land within 48 hours after notice by personal service or
following receipt of certified letter by such owner or authorized agent
or tenant, if any, if such garbage or refuse has not been removed.
F. Upon removal by the City of the accumulation of garbage or refuse or
causing it to be removed from any lot or land pursuant to this section,
299. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 335-1.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-1.9
1:525
§ 335-1.10. Violations and penalties.300
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
the City shall, after hearing and notice to the owner or authorized agent
or tenant, if any, assess the cost of removal against such lot or land.
300. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 335-1.9 SEWARD CODE § 335-1.10
1:526
ARTICLE II
Garbage Collectors
[Adopted as Ch. 4, Art. 3, of the 1976 Code]
§ 335-2.1. License required; conditions. [Amended 10-19-1993 by
Ord. No. 37-93; 4-3-2007 by Ord. No. 6-07]
A. It shall be unlawful for any persons, corporations or other legal entities
to collect, haul or convey wastes, refuse, garbage, rubbish, junk,
hazardous waste, or solid waste (as those terms are defined under the
laws of the State of Nebraska) for hire within the incorporated area of
the City without first having procured a license to do so.
B. Application for a license to collect, haul or convey wastes, refuse,
garbage, rubbish, junk, hazardous waste or solid waste for hire shall be
made to the City Clerk upon blanks furnished by the City Clerk. Said
application blanks shall set forth the name and residence of the
applicant, the business address of the applicant, the ownership of the
vehicle or vehicles to be used, the number and kinds of vehicles to be
used, with a definite description of each such vehicle, and such other
information as may be required to satisfactorily identify the applicant
and vehicles. The applicant shall pay to the City Clerk the required
license fee as hereinafter provided. Before any license shall be issued,
the applicant shall execute and file with the City Clerk a bond in an
amount set from time to time by the City Council with one or more
sufficient sureties thereon to be approved by the City Council,
conditioned that said applicant shall indemnify and save harmless the
City from any damage or injury due to or on account of the act, neglect,
fault or default of such applicant and conditioned further that such
applicant shall comply with all ordinances or regulations of the City and
State of Nebraska regarding the collecting, hauling or conveying of
wastes, refuse, garbage, rubbish, junk, hazardous waste or solid
waste.301
C. It shall be unlawful for any persons, corporations, or other legal entities
licensed under this section, or any other persons, to haul or convey any
solid waste generated within the corporate limits of the City to any
facility or system (as those terms are defined under state law) with
which the City, either alone or in combination with other cities, villages
or counties, has not contracted for the safe and sanitary disposal of
solid waste generated within the City's jurisdiction area.
D. All persons, corporations, or other legal entities licensed under this
section shall provide, in addition to services regarding the collection,
hauling, and conveying of solid waste, assistance in providing services
for curbside pick-up of recyclable materials, yard waste, and discarded
appliances.
301. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 335-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-2.1
1:527
§ 335-2.2. License fee. [Amended 9-21-1993 by Ord. No. 36-93302]
An annual license fee as set from time to time by the City Council shall be
charged for each vehicle used in the collecting, hauling and conveying of
wastes, garbage, rubbish, junk, hazardous waste or solid waste. All license
fees shall be due and payable on January 2 of each year, and all licenses
hereunder shall expire on December 31 following issuance.
§ 335-2.3. License transfer.
Any licensee may, upon application to the City Clerk, have a license
transferred from one vehicle to another vehicle upon presentation of a
certificate of approval from the Board of Health showing the vehicle to
which the license is to be transferred meets the requirements of the
Municipal Code regarding hauling of refuse.
§ 335-2.4. Collection of refuse and garbage.303
It shall be unlawful for any licensed person to collect, haul or convey refuse
and garbage, except during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. during the
day on Monday through Saturday of the week. The restriction as to hours
herein provided shall not apply in and to the area of the Central Business
District. The City Council, by resolution, may change or alter such time and
days of collection; provided that in the event of an emergency requiring the
removal of refuse or garbage, the Street Superintendent may issue a special
permit for such purpose, which permit shall state the period of time during
which such hauling may be done and the date of expiration of such special
permit.
§ 335-2.5. Vehicle specifications.304
E. All persons, corporations, or legal entities licensed under this section
shall cooperate with their customers within the City in finding outside
sources for the collection, hauling, conveying and disposal of hazardous
waste generated within the corporate limits of the City.
A. Any vehicle used by any licensed garbage collector in collecting and
hauling refuse over the streets of the City after March 1, 1971, shall
comply with the following specifications:
(1) Shall have a watertight, metal body, fully enclosed. "Watertight," as
used herein, shall mean so constructed that liquid materials will
not spill or be discharged therefrom between the point of loading
and the designated disposal ground. This shall not prohibit license
holders from having an open truck for the transporting of refuse
other than garbage; provided that said truck is covered by a
tarpaulin or other cover approved by the Board of Health.
302. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
303. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
304. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 335-2.1 SEWARD CODE § 335-2.5
1:528
§ 335-2.6. License revocation; violations and penalties. [Amended
11-15-1977 by Ord. No. 1103; 9-21-1993 by Ord. No. 35-93]
(2) Shall be so constructed as to be readily cleaned.
(3) Shall be so constructed as to enclose materials carried in it to
prevent them from escaping therefrom while moving through and
upon the streets of the City and to the dumping ground.
B. All vehicles licensed hereunder shall be kept as clean and presentable
as possible, both inside and outside, at all times. Before making
application for a license as hereinafter provided, the applicant shall
have his vehicle or vehicles inspected by the Board of Health to
determine compliance with the specifications. If such vehicle or
vehicles comply in all respects with the specifications above set forth,
the Board of Health shall issue a certificate of approval for such vehicle,
describing and identifying the vehicle so approved.
A. The license of any person, corporation, or other legal entity licensed to
collect, haul or convey waste, refuse, garbage, rubbish, junk, hazardous
waste or solid waste within the City may be revoked by the governing
body of the City for failure to comply with any of the provisions of this
Article II. No revocation of license shall be made except on public
hearing before the governing body after notice of such hearing, stating
the reasons therefor, to the licensee of the time and date of said hearing
by certified or registered mail.
B. Any person, corporation, or other legal entity found to be in violation of
any of the provisions of this Article II shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed the sum of $500.
§ 335-2.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-2.6
1:529

ARTICLE III
Dumping Grounds
[Adopted as Ch. 4, Art. 4, of the 1976 Code]
§ 335-3.1. Designated by Council; use by nonresidents prohibited;
other dumping prohibited. [Amended 11-15-1977 by Ord. No. 1102]
The Council shall, by resolution, designate a place or places for the dumping
of all garbage, scavenger matter, refuse, rubbish, filth, slops, manure,
ashes, offal, excrement of any kind and other offensive or obnoxious
substances. Such dumping grounds shall be for the use only of residents
of the City and for the dumping and disposal of such matter collected from
and for residents of the City. It shall be unlawful to dump or dispose of such
matter in such designated place or places for dumping and disposal by or
for nonresidents of the City. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump,
deposit or otherwise dispose of any garbage, scavenger matter, refuse,
rubbish, filth, slops, manure, ashes, offal, excrement of any kind and other
offensive or obnoxious substances or bury or dispose of any dead animals
within the corporate limits of the City or within two miles of the limits
thereof, upon any ground, premises or place other than that designated by
the City Council.
§ 335-3.2. Rules and regulations. [Amended 1-3-1978 by Ord. No.
1110]
A. Such dumping ground shall be under the supervision of the custodian
designated and employed by the City.
B. Said dumping grounds shall be kept open for dumping purposes a
minimum of eight hours each day, Monday through Friday of each week,
inclusive, and a minimum of four hours on each Saturday, except
holidays; provided that the City Council shall by resolution fix the hours
of opening and closing of such dumping ground on such days and may
from time to time by resolution change the opening and closing hours of
such dumping ground. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump any
refuse at any such dumping ground except during such hours so fixed.
C. The custodian or his assistant in charge of said dumping ground shall
designate the place or places where all refuse brought to such dumping
ground shall be placed. Said custodian may require persons bringing
refuse to said dumping ground for disposal to separate such refuse
according to kinds and classes of materials, and to deposit such
different kinds or classes of materials in different places on said
dumping ground, and may direct the manner and method of dumping
and disposing of such refuse.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to bring any automobiles, automobile
bodies, parts of automobiles or machinery to such dumping grounds
without having first dismantled or taken same apart so that the pieces
and parts thereof shall lie flat on the ground, and the custodian shall not
§ 335-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-3.2
1:531
§ 335-3.3. Setting fires prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to set a fire upon, or cause a fire to be set
upon, any dumping or disposal ground heretofore or hereafter designated
as such under the provisions of this article.
§ 335-3.4. Scavenging prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than duly authorized City
employees, to enter upon any dumping grounds, except only for the purpose
of dumping and depositing thereon articles or substances permitted to be
dumped or deposited at such dumping ground. It shall be unlawful for any
person to search over or remove any article, thing or substance which has
been dumped at such dumping ground.
§ 335-3.5. Custodian.305
The custodian of the dump or dumps designated in accordance with this
article shall be the Street Superintendent unless a custodian is appointed,
provided a custodian may be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed as
other appointive offices by the Council, and said custodian shall have full
authority to regulate all dumping on the premises of said dumping grounds.
The custodian so appointed shall receive such compensation payable in
monthly installments from the General Fund as the Mayor and Council shall
fix and determine at the time of his appointment. The Street Superintendent
shall receive no additional compensation while acting as custodian.
§ 335-3.6. Violations and penalties.306
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
permit the same to be deposited at the dumping ground unless so
dismantled or taken apart.
305. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
306. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 335-3.2 SEWARD CODE § 335-3.6
1:532
Chapter 340
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND MUNICIPAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 225.
Nuisances — See Ch. 284.
Offenses — See Ch. 290.
Sewers — See Ch. 325.
Solid waste — See Ch. 335.
Trees — See Ch. 364.
Utilities — See Ch. 370.
Zoning and subdivision — See Ch. 410.
§ 335-3.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-3.6
1:533

ARTICLE I
Municipal Property
§ 340-1.1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applied throughout this chapter. When no
definition is specified, the normal dictionary usage of the word shall apply.
SIDEWALK SPACE — That portion of a street between curblines and
adjacent property lines.
§ 340-1.2. Sale and conveyance. [Amended 11-17-1998 by Ord. No.
45-98; 3-20-2012 by Ord. No. 18-12]
A. The municipality may sell and convey any real estate or personal
property owned by the municipality, including park land, in such
manner and upon such terms and conditions as may be deemed in the
best interests of the municipality; except that real estate owned by the
municipality may be conveyed without consideration to the State of
Nebraska for state armory sites or, if acquired for state armory sites,
shall be conveyed in the manner strictly as provided in Neb. RS 18-1001
to 18-1006.
B. The power to sell and convey any real estate owned by the municipality,
including park land, except real estate used in the operation of public
utilities and except real estate for state armory sites for the use of the
State of Nebraska as expressly provided in Subsection A of this section,
shall be exercised by ordinance directing the conveyance of such real
estate and the manner and terms thereof. Notice of such sale and the
terms thereof shall be published for three consecutive weeks in a legal
newspaper published in or of general circulation in the municipality
immediately after the passage and publication of such ordinance.
C. If within 30 days after the passage and publication of such ordinance a
remonstrance against such sale is signed by registered voters of the
municipality equal in number to 30% of the registered voters of the
municipality voting at the last regular municipal election held therein
and is filed with the governing body, the property shall not then, nor
within one year thereafter, be sold. If the date for filing the
remonstrance falls upon a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the
signatures shall be collected within the thirty-day period, but the filing
shall be considered timely if filed or postmarked on or before the next
business day.
D. Upon the receipt of the remonstrance, the governing body, with the aid
and assistance of the Election Commissioner or County Clerk, shall
determine the validity and sufficiency of signatures on the
remonstrance. The governing body shall deliver the remonstrance to
the Election Commissioner or County Clerk by hand carrier, by use of
law enforcement officials, or by certified mail, return receipt requested.
Upon receipt of the remonstrance, the Election Commissioner or
§ 340-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-1.2
1:535
County Clerk shall issue to the governing body a written receipt that
the remonstrance is in the custody of the Election Commissioner or
County Clerk. The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall
compare the signature of each person signing the remonstrance with
the voter registration records to determine if each signer was a
registered voter on or before the date on which the remonstrance was
filed with the governing body. The Election Commissioner or County
Clerk shall also compare the signer's printed name, street and number
or voting precinct, and municipal or post office address with the voter
registration records to determine whether the signer was a registered
voter. The signature and address shall be presumed to be valid only
if the Election Commissioner or County Clerk determines that the
printed name, street and number or voting precinct, and municipal
or post office address matches the registration records and that the
registration was received on or before the date on which the
remonstrance was filed with the governing body. The determinations
of the Election Commissioner or County Clerk may be rebutted by
any credible evidence which the governing body finds sufficient. The
express purpose of the comparison of names and addresses with the
voter registration records, in addition to helping to determine the
validity of the remonstrance, the sufficiency of the remonstrance, and
the qualifications of the signer, shall be to prevent fraud, deception,
and misrepresentation in the remonstrance process. Upon completion
of the comparison of names and addresses with the voter registration
records, the Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall prepare in
writing a certification under seal setting forth the name and address
of each signer found not to be a registered voter and the signature
page number and line number where the name is found, and if the
reason for the invalidity of the signature or address is other than the
non-registration of the signer, the Election Commissioner or County
Clerk shall set forth the reason for the invalidity of the signature. If
the Election Commissioner or County Clerk determines that a signer
has affixed his or her signature more than once to the remonstrance
and that only one person is registered by that name, the Election
Commissioner or County Clerk shall prepare in writing a certification
under seal setting forth the name for the duplicate signature and shall
count only the earliest dated signature. The Election Commissioner or
County Clerk shall certify to the governing body the number of valid
signatures necessary to constitute a valid remonstrance. The Election
Commissioner or County Clerk shall deliver the remonstrance and the
certifications to the governing body within 40 days after the receipt
of the remonstrance from the governing body. The delivery shall be by
hand carrier, by use of law enforcement officials, or by certified mail,
return receipt requested. Not more than 20 signatures on one signature
page shall be counted.
E. The governing body shall, within the 30 days after the receipt of the
remonstrance and certifications from the Election Commissioner or
County Clerk, hold a public hearing to review the remonstrance and
certifications and receive testimony regarding them. The governing
§ 340-1.2 SEWARD CODE § 340-1.2
1:536
§ 340-1.3. Obstructions prohibited.
Trees and shrubs growing upon, or near, the lot line, or upon public ground,
and interfering with the use or construction of any public improvements
shall be deemed an obstruction under this article. Said trees, shrubs and
their roots may be removed by the municipality at the expense of the owner
of the property upon which the tree or shrub is located should the owner
fail or neglect, after notice, to do so. It shall be unlawful for any person,
persons, firm, or corporation to obstruct or encumber, by fences, gates,
buildings, structures, or otherwise, any of the streets, alleys, or sidewalks.
(Neb. RS 16-207)
body shall, following the hearing, vote on whether or not the
remonstrance is valid and shall uphold the remonstrance if sufficient
valid signatures have been received.
F. Subsections B through E shall not apply to the sale of real property if
the authorizing resolution directs the sale of real property having a
total fair market value of less than $5,000. Following passage of the
resolution directing the sale of the property, notice of the sale shall be
posted in three prominent places within the City for a period of not less
than seven days prior to the sale of the property. The notice shall give a
general description of the property offered for sale and state the terms
and conditions of sale. Confirmation of the sale by passage of an
ordinance may be required.307
G. The power of the municipality to convey any personal property owned
by it shall be exercised by resolution directing the sale and the manner
and terms of the sale. Following passage of the resolution directing the
sale of the property, notice of the sale shall be posted in three
prominent places within the City for a period of not less than seven days
prior to the sale of the property. If the fair market value of the property
is greater than $5,000, notice of the sale shall also be published once in
a legal newspaper published in or of general circulation in such City at
least seven days prior to the sale of the property. The notice shall give a
general description of the property offered for sale and state the terms
and conditions of sale.308
H. Personal property may be conveyed, notwithstanding the procedure in
Subsection G of this section, when:
(1) Such property is being sold in compliance with the requirements of
federal or state grants or programs; or
(2) Such property is being conveyed to another public agency
(Neb. RS 16-201, 16-202, 16-207, 18-1001 through 18-1006)
307. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
308. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 340-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-1.4
1:537
§ 340-1.4. Permitted obstructions.309
Persons engaged in the erection, construction, reconstruction, wrecking,
or repairing of any building, or the construction or repair of a sidewalk
along any street, may occupy the public street space with such building
material and equipment as long as is necessary if such persons shall make
application to and receive a permit in writing from the Street
Superintendent to do so; provided that no permit for the occupancy of the
sidewalk space, and more than 1/3 of the roadway of the public space
adjacent to the real estate on which said building is to be constructed,
erected, reconstructed, wrecked, or repaired, shall be granted; and
provided, further, that a suitable passageway for pedestrians shall be
maintained within the public space included in the permit, which shall be
protected and lighted in the manner required by the Street Superintendent.
§ 340-1.5. Weeds.310
It is hereby the duty of the Street Superintendent or his duly authorized
agent to view and inspect the sidewalk space within the corporate limits for
growing weeds during the growing season, and if rank and noxious weeds
are found growing thereon, he shall notify the owner or occupant thereof
to cut down such weeds as close to the ground as can be practicably done
and keep the weeds cut thereon in like manner during the growing season
for weeds. In the event that the owner of any lot or parcel of land within
the municipality is a nonresident of the municipality or cannot be found
therein, the notice may be given to any person having the care, custody,
or control of such lot or parcel of land. In the event that there can be
found no one within the municipality to whom notice can be given, it shall
be the duty of the Street Superintendent or his agent to post a copy of
the notice on the premises and then to cut or cause the weeds thereon to
be cut as therein provided and report the cost thereof in writing to the
governing body. The cost shall then be audited and paid by the municipality
and the amount thereof shall be assessed against the lot or parcel of land
as a special tax thereon and shall be collected as are other taxes of the
municipality or may be recovered by civil suit brought by the municipality
against the owner of the parcel of land. In the event the property owner
is a nonresident of the county in which the property lies, the municipality
shall, before levying any special assessment against that property, send a
copy of any notice required by law to be published by means of certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the nonresident
property owner. The last known address shall be that address listed on the
current tax rolls at the time such required notice was first published. (Neb.
RS 16-230, 18-1719)
309. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
310. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 394, Weeds and Vegetation. Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 340-1.4 SEWARD CODE § 340-1.6
1:538
§ 340-1.6. Awnings in sidewalk space.
All awnings hereafter erected or suffered to remain in the sidewalk space
shall be elevated at least seven feet at the lowest part from the top of the
public sidewalk and shall not project over said sidewalk to exceed 3/4 of
the width thereof. They shall be supported without posts by iron brackets
or by any iron framework attached firmly to the building, so as to leave
the sidewalk wholly unobstructed thereby; provided that nothing herein
shall be construed to prevent the owner of any building from constructing a
substantial awning or marquee of noncombustible material supported with
or without posts over the sidewalk space if located flush with the outer edge
thereof and if permission in writing shall have first been secured from the
Mayor and Council.
§ 340-1.7. Curb pumps and filling stations.
No curb pump or filling station used for the storage and sale of petroleum
products shall be constructed or suffered to remain within the limits of any
street between lot line and lot line. All such curb pumps or filling stations
now erected or hereafter constructed in the streets of the City are hereby
declared to be a nuisance and, regardless of any permit heretofore granted
by the Mayor and Council, the Mayor and Council are hereby empowered
at any time the public good demands to order the removal of such curb
pump or filling station. Before any curb pump or filling station now located
within the limits of any street shall be removed, the Chief of Police shall
serve a notice on the owner and tenant or user of such pump or station, if
there be any, to remove said pump or filling station beyond the limits of the
street. The Chief of Police shall not serve such order of removal until the
Council by resolution shall direct the same upon a vote of a majority of the
members of the Council. If the owner or lessee of said curb pump or filling
station shall refuse or neglect to comply with the notice of removal, then
the Chief of Police shall remove said obstruction from the street in which
it is situated, shall restore the street to a condition safe for public travel
thereon, shall notify the owner or lessee that the salvage from said curb
pump or filling station is located at a definite place within the corporate
limits at the expense or risk of said owner or lessee, shall report the expense
of such removal to the Mayor and Council, and, if the expense incident to
the removal thereof be approved by the Council, then a warrant shall be
drawn on the General Fund to reimburse the Chief of Police for the money
expended by him in abating said nuisance. The City shall thereupon recover
the sum so expended by civil suit brought against the owner or lessee of the
pump or filling station in any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 340-1.8. Special improvement districts; assessment and creation.
[Added 10-6-1987 by Ord. No. 22-87]
A. The governing body may, by ordinance, create a special improvement
district for the purpose of replacing, reconstructing, or repairing an
existing street, alley, water line, sewer line, or any other such
improvement.
§ 340-1.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-1.8
1:539
§ 340-1.9. Acquisition of real property. [Added 3-7-1995 by Ord. No.
20-95312]
When acquiring an interest in real property by purchase or eminent domain,
the municipality shall do so only after the governing body has authorized
the acquisition by action taken in a public meeting after notice and public
hearing. The City shall provide to the public a right of access for
recreational use to the real property acquired for public recreational
purposes. Such access shall be at designated access points and shall be
equal to the right of access for recreational use held by adjacent
landowners. The right of access granted to the public for recreational use
shall meet or exceed such right held by a private landowner adjacent to the
real property. (Neb. RS 18-1755)
§ 340-1.10. Appraisal of property acquired by City. [Added 3-7-1995
by Ord. No. 21-95313]
The municipality shall not purchase, lease-purchase, or acquire for
consideration real property having an estimated value of $100,000 or more
unless an appraisal of such property has been performed by a certified real
property appraiser. (Neb. RS 13-403)
§ 340-1.11. Public works involving architecture or engineering.
[Amended 12-5-2000 by Ord. No. 56-00; 4-5-2005 by Ord. No. 20-05]
B. Except as provided in Neb. RS 19-2428 to 19-2431, the governing body
may levy a special assessment, to the extent of such benefits, for the
costs of such improvements upon the properties found especially
benefitted thereby, whether or not such properties were previously
assessed for the same general purpose. In creating such special
improvement district, the governing body shall follow procedures
applicable to the creation and assessment of the same type of
improvement district as otherwise provided by law.311
(Neb. RS 18-1751)
A. Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, the municipality
shall not engage in the construction of any public works involving
architecture or engineering unless the plans, specifications, and
estimates have been prepared and the construction has been observed
by an architect, a professional engineer, or a person under the direct
supervision of an architect, professional engineer, or those under the
direct supervision of an architect or professional engineer.
B. Subsection A of this section shall not apply to the following activities:
311. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
312. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
313. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 340-1.8 SEWARD CODE § 340-1.11
1:540
(1) Any public works project with contemplated expenditures for the
completed project that do not exceed the amount set forth in Neb.
RS 81-3445, as amended;314
(2) Any alteration, renovation, or remodeling of a building if the
alteration, renovation, or remodeling does not affect architectural
or engineering safety features of the building;
(3) Performance by the municipality of professional services for itself if
the municipality appoints a municipal engineer or employs a fulltime
person licensed under the Engineers and Architects
Regulation Act (Neb. RS 81-3401 et seq.) who is in responsible
charge of architectural or engineering work;
(4) The practice of any other certified trade or legally recognized
profession;
(5) Earthmoving and related work associated with soil and water
conservation practices performed on any land owned by the
municipality that is not subject to a permit from the Department of
Natural Resources;
(6) The work of employees and agents of the municipality performing,
in accordance with other requirements of law, their customary
duties in the administration and enforcement of codes, permit
programs, and land use regulations and their customary duties in
utility and public works construction, operation, and maintenance;
(7) Those services ordinarily performed by subordinates under direct
supervision of a professional engineer or those commonly
designated as locomotive, stationary, marine operating engineers,
power plant operating engineers, or manufacturers who supervise
the operation of or operate machinery or equipment or who
supervise construction within their own plant;
(8) The construction of water wells as defined in Neb. RS 46-1212, the
installation of pumps and pumping equipment into water wells, and
the decommissioning of water wells, unless such construction,
installation, or decommissioning is required by the municipality to
be designed or supervised by an engineer or unless legal
requirements are imposed upon the municipality as a part of a
public water supply; and
(9) Any other activities described in Neb. RS 81-3449 to 81-3453.
(Neb. RS 81-3423, 81-3445, 81-3449, 81-3453)
314. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 340-1.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-1.11
1:541

ARTICLE II
Sidewalks315
§ 340-2.1. Accumulations prohibited. [Amended 10-19-1993 by Ord.
No. 40-93316]
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any lot or lots, or the owner
of any vacant lot or lots within the corporate limits to allow snow, sleet,
mud, ice, or other substance to accumulate on the sidewalks or to permit
any snow, sleet, ice, mud, or other substance to remain upon said sidewalk.
All sidewalks within the Central Business District shall be cleaned within
five hours after the cessation of a storm, unless the storm or fall of snow
takes place during the night, in which case the sidewalk shall be cleaned
before 8:30 a.m. the following day. All sidewalks within the residential
district shall be cleaned within 24 hours after the cessation of a storm or
fall of snow. (Neb. RS 16-207, 16-663)
§ 340-2.2. Notice to remove accumulations; abatement by City.
[Amended 10-19-1993 by Ord. No. 41-93]
If the requirements of § 340-2.1 are not complied with, notice to remove
snow, sleet, mud, ice or other substance from any lot(s) or vacant lot(s)
within the corporate limits shall be made to the occupant or owner. The
notice shall be made by the Street Superintendent or his/her agent either
verbally, by telephone, posting, or mail service, and complete
documentation on the notice given shall be maintained. The notice shall
contain the location of the violation and the occupant or owner shall be
allowed 24 hours in which to comply. If the notice is not complied with, the
Street Superintendent or his/her agent shall order the substance removed
from the sidewalks, and the cost, as adopted by City policy, will be assessed
to the property. If the costs are not paid and are deemed delinquent, the
municipality may file a lien against the property, which shall be collected in
the manner provided by law. (Neb. RS 16-207, 16-663)
§ 340-2.3. Maintenance.
Every owner of any lot, lots, or piece of land within the corporate limits
shall at all times keep and maintain the sidewalk along and contiguous to
said lot, lots, or pieces of land, as the case may be, in good and proper
repair, and in a condition reasonably safe for travel for all travelers thereon.
In the event that the owner or owners of any lot, lots, or lands abutting
on any street, avenue, or part thereof shall fail to construct or repair any
sidewalk in front of his, her, or their lot, lots, or lands, within the time and
in the manner as directed and required herein after having received due
notice to do so, they shall be liable for all damages or injury occasioned
by reason of the defective or dangerous condition of any sidewalk, and
315. Editor's Note: Original § 8-201 of the 1976 Code, Overhanging Branches, was repealed
6-1-1982 by Ord. No. 12-82.
316. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 340-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-2.3
1:543
the governing body shall have power to cause any such sidewalks to be
constructed or repaired and assess the costs thereof against such property.
(Neb. RS 16-661, 16-662)
§ 340-2.4. Repair.
The City Administrator may require sidewalks of the municipality to be
repaired. Notice to the owners of property upon which such sidewalks in
disrepair are located shall require, within five days from issuance of the
notice, said owners to make arrangements to have the sidewalk repaired.
Said repairs shall be completed within 30 days after issuance of said notice.
No special assessment shall be levied against the property unless said
owner shall neglect or refuse to repair within the time prescribed. In the
event that such owner fails to repair, the municipality shall cause the
repairs to be made and assess the property owner the expense of such
repairs. In the event the property owner is a nonresident of the county in
which the property lies, the municipality shall, before levying any special
assessment against that property, send a copy of any notice required by
law to be published by means of certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the last known address of the nonresident property owner. The last known
address shall be that address listed on the current tax rolls at the time such
required notice was first published. (Neb. RS 16-661, 16-662)
§ 340-2.5. Construction by owner.
A. Any person desiring to construct, or cause to be constructed, any
sidewalk shall do so only as herein provided. It shall be unlawful for any
person to construct any sidewalk without first having obtained a permit.
B. Said owner shall make application in writing for a permit and file such
application in the office of the Street Superintendent. The permit shall
give a description of the lot or piece of land along which the sidewalk is
to be constructed. The Street Superintendent shall issue the desired
permit unless good cause shall appear why said permit should be
denied; provided that if it is desired to construct the sidewalk at any
other than the regularly prescribed location, grade, or elevation, the
Street Superintendent shall submit the application to the governing
body, which shall determine whether the permit should be granted or
denied. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or cause to be
constructed said sidewalk at any other location, grade, or elevation
than so designated by the municipality. All sidewalks shall be built and
constructed on the established grade, or elevation, and if there is no
established grade, then on the grade or elevation indicated by the
Street Superintendent.317
(Neb. RS 16-250)
317. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 340-2.3 SEWARD CODE § 340-2.6
1:544
§ 340-2.6. Construction materials.
All sidewalks, on either side of the streets and avenues of this City, in front
of or along any lot, lots or lands abutting upon the same, which shall be
hereinafter constructed, reconstructed or replaced, shall be of concrete. No
person shall construct, reconstruct or replace any sidewalk of any other
material within the limits of this City without the written permission of the
Mayor and Council.
§ 340-2.7. Width and distance from lot line.
All sidewalks shall be of such width as the Mayor and Council in each case
by resolution shall fix. Sidewalks shall be located at a distance of 18 inches
from the lot line, unless otherwise authorized by the Mayor and Council.
Whenever possible, they shall correspond in width to sidewalks already
built to which they are adjacent or adjoin.
§ 340-2.8. Manner of construction.
A. All concrete sidewalks shall be constructed according to the following
specifications:
(1) Cement. The cement shall be a standard Portland cement.
(2) Water. The water shall be clean, free from oil, acid, strong alkalies
or vegetable matter.
(3) Sand. The sand shall be clean, coarse, hard, durable, free from
loam, vegetable or other deleterious matter.
(4) Subbase. The subbase shall consist of a layer of sand one inch
thick, well tamped.
(5) Subgrade. All soft or spongy places shall be removed, and all
depressions filled with suitable material, which shall be thoroughly
compacted by flooding and tamping in layers not exceeding six
inches in thickness.
(6) Deep fills. When a fill exceeding one foot in thickness is required to
bring the walk to grade, it shall be made in a manner satisfactory to
the Superintendent. The top of all fills shall extend beyond the walk
on each side at least one foot, and the sides shall have a slope of not
less than one to 1 1/2.318
(7) Proportions of materials. The proportions shall not exceed one part
cement and four parts of gravel and sand. All sidewalks shall be
float-finished.
(8) Measuring. The method of measuring the materials for the
concrete, including water, shall be one which will ensure separate
uniform proportions at all times.
318. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 340-2.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-2.8
1:545
§ 340-2.9. Expansion joints.
All concrete sidewalks and driveways hereafter constructed, reconstructed
or repaired within the limits of the City that shall abut on City streets
with concrete curbing or pavement shall be constructed with a minimum
expansion joint, of approved design and materials, of one inch between
sidewalk and concrete curbing, or pavement, and a minimum expansion
joint, of approved design and materials, of one inch between driveway and
curb or apron, which shall be located a minimum distance of four feet
from the edge of pavement or street and a maximum distance from edge
of pavement or street of 10 feet, or at the edge of existing sidewalk, where
such exists at a lesser distance from the edge of pavement or street.
(9) Mixing. The ingredients of the concrete shall be thoroughly mixed
dry, sufficient water added to obtain the desired consistency, and
mixing continued until the materials are uniformly distributed and
the mass is uniform in color and homogeneous.
(10) Slabs. The slabs shall be four feet square, except in the Central
Business District, where the size of the slabs shall be determined
by the Street Superintendent before the construction of the
walk.319
(11) Thickness. The thickness of the slabs for the Residential District
shall not be less than four inches and for the Central Business
District not less than five inches.320
B. Sidewalks shall be laid upon a grade of 1/4 of an inch to the foot above
the curb grade, unless otherwise authorized by the Mayor and Council.
All sidewalks shall conform to the specifications adopted by the City as
to the quality of work and materials. The whole work of grading and
laying of said sidewalk, whether done by the City or by the owner of the
respective lot, lots, or parcels of land abutting upon the same, shall be
under the supervision of the Street Superintendent, and subject to his
approval. All sidewalks shall conform to the grade where established,
and on streets where no grade is yet established, then on a grade
established by the Engineer or Street Superintendent with relation to
the particular points between which said sidewalk is to be built. The
Street Superintendent shall assist the Engineer in establishing grades
on streets where the same have not yet been run.321
C. Sidewalks shall be built on a grade or level with the surface of the
ground as near as can be. When ordered by the Council, any property
owner shall rebuild or reconstruct his sidewalk to conform to the grade
thus established. It shall be the duty of the Engineer to furnish sidewalk
grade when requested by the Street Superintendent.322
319. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
320. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
321. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
322. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 340-2.8 SEWARD CODE § 340-2.10
1:546
§ 340-2.10. Construction not in accordance with regulations.323
In case any lot owner or the owners of a piece of land within the corporate
limits of this City, under notice given or otherwise, shall construct a
sidewalk in violation of this article, the Street Superintendent may stop
the work of such construction and order the same to be constructed in
accordance with said article and the work already done to be changed;
and on the failure of such owner to change any such work, the Street
Superintendent or other officer shall forthwith change said work, and the
expense of the same shall be assessed on said lot and collected as a special
assessment, as provided by law.
§ 340-2.11. Municipal construction.
A. The governing body may, by resolution, order the construction of a
sidewalk on any lot or piece of ground within the municipality. Notice of
the governing body's intention to construct said sidewalk shall be given
by the Municipal Clerk by publication of notice one time in a legal
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality.
B. A copy of said notice shall be personally served upon the occupant in
possession of such property, or, when personal service is not possible,
said notice shall be posted upon such premises 10 days prior to the
commencement of construction. The notice required in this section
shall be prepared by the Municipal Attorney in accordance with the
provisions of this section. Such service shall include a form of return
evidencing personal service or posting as herein required.
C. Said notice shall notify the owner of the premises of the passage of the
resolution ordering him to construct or cause to be constructed a
sidewalk within 30 days after the date of publication and further that if
he fails to construct the sidewalk or cause the same to be done within
the time allowed, the municipality will cause the sidewalk to be
constructed and the cost thereof shall be levied and assessed as a
special assessment against the premises; provided that the notice shall
contain the official estimate of the cost of said construction and no
special assessment in excess of this estimate shall be assessed against
the property. In the event the property owner is a nonresident of the
county in which the property lies, the municipality shall, before levying
any special assessment against that property, send a copy of any notice
required by law to be published by means of certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the last known address of the nonresident
property owner. The last known address shall be that address listed on
the current tax rolls at the time such required notice was first
published.324
(Neb. RS 16-250, 16-664, 16-666)
323. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
324. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 340-2.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-2.12
1:547
§ 340-2.12. Construction on corner lots.
In the case of corner lots, such lots shall not be charged with the costs
of so much additional walk between the outer edge of the sidewalk line
and the curbline as was required to be laid for the intersections of the
walks abutting the frontage of such lots, but such work of construction shall
be done by the City, unless otherwise ordered by the Mayor and Council.
The City shall construct all crossings and crosswalks from curbline to
curbline in all streets. The cost of the construction, widening or rebuilding
of any sidewalks shall be levied upon the lot or lots or parcel of ground
fronting and adjoining which such sidewalks are laid, widened or rebuilt
by resolution, which resolution shall specify the street upon which such
walk has been so constructed, widened or rebuilt, the length and width
of each walk constructed, widened or rebuilt fronting on any lot or piece
of ground. Such assessment shall be made by the Council at a special
meeting by resolution, fixing the valuation of the lots assessed, taking into
account the benefits derived, or injuries sustained, in consequence of such
improvements, and the amount charged against the same, which, with the
vote thereon, by "yeas" and "nays," shall be spread upon the minutes. Notice
of the time and place of holding such meeting and the purpose for which
it is to be held shall be published in a legal newspaper published and in
general circulation in the City, at least four weeks before the same shall
be held, or in lieu thereof, personal service may be made upon the person
owning the property to be assessed. All such assessments shall be known
as "Special Assessments for Improvement" and shall be levied and collected
as a separate tax in addition to the tax for general purposes to be placed
upon the tax roll for collection, subject to the same penalties and collected
in like manner as other City taxes. Whenever any such special tax is levied,
the Clerk shall forthwith deliver a certified copy of such resolution to the
County Clerk, who shall place the same on the tax list to be collected by law
as in such cases made and provided.
§ 340-2.12 SEWARD CODE § 340-2.12
1:548
ARTICLE III
Streets
§ 340-3.1. Names and numbers. [Amended 1-17-1989 by Ord. No.
1-89]
The governing body may at any time, by ordinance, rename any street or
provide a name for any new street. Buildings used for residence or business
purposes and located along such streets shall retain such numbers as the
governing body may require. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector,
upon the approval of a permit for the construction of any new building or
buildings, to assign the proper numbers to said building or buildings and
give notice to the owner or owners and occupant or occupants of the same.
(Neb. RS 16-609, 16-614)
§ 340-3.2. Widening or opening.
The governing body shall have the power to open or widen any street,
alley, or lane within the limits of the municipality; and to create, open, and
improve any new street, alley, or lane; provided that all damages sustained
shall be ascertained in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance.
(Neb. RS 16-609, 16-645)
§ 340-3.3. Excavations.325
It shall be unlawful for any person to make an excavation in any street or
streets for any purpose whatsoever unless a written permit is issued by the
Street Superintendent.
§ 340-3.4. Heavy equipment. [Amended 11-4-1980 by Ord. No.
39-80]
A. It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person or persons to move or
operate heavy equipment across any curb, gutter, bridge, culvert,
sidewalk, crosswalk, or crossing on any unpaved street without first
having protected such curb, gutter, bridge, culvert, sidewalks,
crosswalk, or crossing with heavy plank sufficient in strength to
warrant the breaking or damaging of such curb, gutter, bridge, culvert,
sidewalk, crosswalk, or crossing. Hereafter, it shall be unlawful to run,
drive, move, operate, or convey over or across any paved street a
vehicle, machine, or implement with sharp discs or sharp wheels that
bear upon said pavement; with wheels having cutting edges; with
wheels having lugs, any protruding parts, or bolts thereon that extend
beyond a plain tire so as to cut, mark, mar, indent, or otherwise injure
or damage any pavement, gutter, or curb; provided that where heavy
vehicles, structures, and machines move along paved or unpaved
streets, the Municipal Police are hereby authorized and empowered to
325. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 340-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-3.4
1:549
§ 340-3.5. Construction notice.
The Mayor and Council shall notify the owners in fee simple of real estate
abutting a street, alley, or a part thereof which is to be put under contract
for paving or repaving. Notice shall also be given to all gas, electric service,
and telephone companies. Notice shall also be given to all consumers of
gas, water, and sewer services which will be discontinued during such
construction. Said notice shall be published one time in a legal newspaper
at least 20 days prior to the beginning of such construction by the party
undertaking such construction, and said notice shall state at what date
connections must be made and excavation completed. All gas, water, sewer,
and underground connections must be made prior to the paving or repaving
of the street under construction. After expiration of such time, permits for
excavation will not be issued, nor will excavation be allowed, until after
the completion of the pavement in said street or alley, and the formal final
acceptance thereof by the proper officials of the municipality.
§ 340-3.6. Protection of paving.
No person shall remove, destroy, or tear down any barricade, fence, railing,
or other device erected or constructed for the purpose of protecting paving
or any other work while in course of construction or after it has been
constructed on any of the streets, alleys or public grounds of the City. No
choose the route over which the moving of such vehicles, structures, or
machines will be permitted and allowed.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to pneumatic tires
with metal or metal-type studs not exceeding 5/16 of an inch in
diameter inclusive of the stud-casting with an average protrusion
beyond the tread surface of not more than 7/64 of an inch between
October 1 and April 15; provided that school buses and emergency
vehicles shall be permitted to use metal or metal-type studs all year;
and it shall be permissible to use farm machinery with tires having
protuberances which will not injure the streets. It shall be permissible
to use a rubber-tired crane with a fixed load when such vehicle will be
transported on a state highway or on any road within the corporate
limits of the municipality, the municipality in which the crane is
intended to be transported has authorized a one-day permit for the
transportation of the crane and specified the route to be used and the
hours during which the crane can be transported, such vehicle is
escorted by another vehicle or vehicles assigned by the municipality,
and such vehicle's gross weight does not exceed the limits set out in
Neb. RS 60-6, 294; and it shall be permissible to use tire chains of
reasonable proportions upon any vehicle when required for safety
because of snow, ice, or other condition tending to cause a vehicle to
slide or skid.326
(Neb. RS 60-6, 250)
326. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 340-3.4 SEWARD CODE § 340-3.6
1:550
person shall drive over or upon or go upon any paving or other public work
in any of the streets, alleys, or public grounds of the City while the same
is protected by any barrier, fence, or railing, or until such barrier, fence, or
railing has been removed by the contractors in charge of such work, or by
the duly authorized officials of the City.
§ 340-3.7. Land adjacent to improvement district. [Amended
9-18-1979 by Ord. No. 1189; 10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 25-87]
Supplemental to any existing law on the subject, a municipality may include
land adjacent to such municipality when creating an improvement district,
such as a sewer, paving, water, water extension, or sanitary sewer extension
district. The governing body shall have power to assess, to the extent of
special benefits, the costs of such improvements upon the properties found
especially benefitted thereby, except as provided in § 340-3.8.
§ 340-3.8. Deferral from special assessments. [Amended 10-4-1983
by Ord. No. 26-83; 10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 24-87]
A. Whenever the governing body of a municipality creates an
improvement district as specified in § 340-3.7 which includes land
adjacent to the municipality which is within an agricultural use zone
and is used exclusively for agricultural use, the owners of record title of
such adjacent land may apply for a deferral from special assessments.
For purposes of this section, the terms "agricultural use" and
"agricultural use zone" shall have the meaning specified in Neb. RS
19-2428.327
B. Any owner of record title eligible for the deferral granted by this section
shall, to secure such assessment, make application to the governing
body of the municipality within 90 days after creation of an
improvement district as specified in § 340-3.7. Any owner of record title
who makes application for the deferral provided by this section shall
notify the County Register of Deeds of such application in writing prior
to approval by the governing body. The governing body shall approve
the application of any owner of record title upon a determination that:
(1) The property is within an agricultural use zone and is used
exclusively for agricultural use; and
(2) The owner has met the requirements of this section.
C. The deferral provided for in this section shall be terminated upon any of
the following events:
(1) Notification by the owner of record title to the governing body to
remove such deferral;
327. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 340-3.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-3.8
1:551
§ 340-3.9. Petition for improvements. [Amended 10-4-1983 by Ord.
No. 27-83]
Owners of lots or lands abutting upon any street, avenue, or alley within
the municipality representing 3/4 of the front footage thereon may petition
the governing body to create an improvement district, so that such district,
when created, will make up one continuous or extended thoroughfare or
more without cost to the municipality. The governing body shall assess
the entire cost of any such improvements in any such street, avenue, or
alley, including intersections of streets or avenues and spaces opposite
alleys, against the private property within such improvement district or
districts. It shall be the duty of the governing body to create the proper
improvement district or districts, which shall be consecutively numbered,
and to improve the same and to proceed in the same manner and form
as hereinbefore provided for in other paving and improvement districts;
provided that the governing body shall have power to levy the entire cost
of such improvements of any such street, avenue, or alley, including
intersections of streets or avenues and spaces opposite alleys, against the
private property within such district, and to issue street improvement bonds
to pay for such improvements. Such bonds shall be issued to cover the
entire cost of so improving such streets or avenues, intersections of the
same, and spaces opposite alleys. If the assessments hereinbefore provided
(2) Sale or transfer to a new owner who does not make a new
application within 60 days of the sale or transfer, except as
provided in Subsection C(3) of this section;
(3) Transfer by reason of death of a former owner to a new owner who
does not make application within 125 days of the transfer;
(4) The land is no longer being used as agricultural land; or
(5) Change of zoning to other than an agricultural zone.
D. Whenever property which has received a deferral pursuant to this
section becomes disqualified for such deferral, the owner of record title
of such property shall pay to the municipality an amount equal to:
(1) The total amount of special assessments which would have been
assessed against such property, to the extent of special benefits,
had such deferral not been granted; and
(2) Interest upon the special assessments not paid each year at the
rate of 6% from the dates at which such assessments would have
been payable if no deferral had been granted.
E. In cases where the deferral provided by this section is terminated as a
result of a sale or transfer described in Subsection C(2) or (3) of this
section, the lien for assessments and interest shall attach as of the day
preceding such sale or transfer.
(Neb. RS 19-2428 through 19-2431)
§ 340-3.8 SEWARD CODE § 340-3.9
1:552
for, or any part thereof, shall fail, or for any reason shall be invalid, the
governing body make other and further assessments upon such lots or lands
as may be required to collect from the same the cost of any improvements
properly chargeable thereto, as herein provided. The governing body shall
have the discretion to deny the formation of the proposed district when the
area to be improved has not previously been improved with a water system,
sewer system, and grading of streets. If the governing body should deny a
requested improvement district formation, it shall state its grounds for such
denial in a written letter to interested parties. (Neb. RS 16-624)
§ 340-3.10. Driveway approaches. [Amended 8-21-1984 by Ord. No.
22-84328]
§ 340-3.11. Vacation of streets and alleys. [Amended 8-20-2002 by
Ord. No. 31-02329]
A. The Street Superintendent may require the owner of property served by
a driveway approach constructed or maintained upon the street rightof-
way to repair or replace any such driveway approach which is
cracked, broken, or otherwise deteriorated to the extent that it is
causing or is likely to cause damage to or interfere with any street
structure, including pavement or sidewalks.
B. The Municipal Clerk shall give the property owner notice by registered
letter or certified mail, directed to the last-known address of such
owner or the agent of such owner, directing the repair or replacement
of such driveway approach. If within 30 days of mailing such notice the
property owner fails or neglects to cause such repairs or replacements
to be made, the Street Superintendent may cause such work to be done
and assess the cost upon the property served by such approach.
(Neb. RS 18-1748)
A. Upon the vacation of any street or alley by the City, the title to such
property shall vest in the owners of the abutting property and become a
part of such property, one-half on each side thereof, unless the City
reserves title in the ordinance vacating such street or alley. If title is
retained by the City, such property may be sold, conveyed, exchanged,
or leased upon such terms and conditions as shall be deemed in the best
interests of the City.
B. When a portion of a street or alley is vacated only on one side of the
center thereof, the title to such property shall vest in the owner of the
abutting property and become part of such property, unless the City
reserves title in the ordinance vacating a portion of such street or alley.
If title is retained by the City, such property may be sold, conveyed,
exchanged, or leased upon such terms and conditions as shall be
deemed in the best interests of the City.
328. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
329. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 340-3.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-3.11
1:553
C. When the City vacates all or any portion of a street or alley, the City
shall, within 30 days after the effective date of the vacation, file a
certified copy of the vacating ordinance with the Register of Deeds for
the county in which the vacated property is located to be indexed
against all affected lots.
D. The title to property vacated pursuant to this section shall be subject to
the following:
(1) There is reserved to the City the right to maintain, operate, repair,
and renew public utilities existing at the time title to the property is
vacated there; and
(2) There is reserved to the City, any public utilities, and any cable
television systems the right to maintain, repair, renew, and operate
water mains, gas mains, pole lines, conduits, electrical
transmission lines, sound and signal transmission lines, and other
similar services and equipment and appurtenances, including
lateral connections or branch lines, above, on, or below the surface
of the ground that are existing as valid easements at the time title
to the property is vacated for the purposes of serving the general
public or the abutting properties and to enter upon the premises to
accomplish such purposes at any and all reasonable times.
(Neb. RS 16-611)
§ 340-3.11 SEWARD CODE § 340-3.11
1:554
ARTICLE IV
Curbs and Gutters
§ 340-4.1. Permit required for cutting into paving, curbs, streets,
alleys or sidewalks. [Amended 2-6-1979 by Ord. No. 1156;
10-19-1982 by Ord. No. 32-82330]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to cut into any paving,
curb, street, alley, sidewalk, or any City property for the purpose of
removing same, or for the constructing of a driveway, sidewalk, or for
any other purpose, or to make any excavations on City property
whatsoever without first having obtained a written permit issued by the
City Building and Purchasing Office. Any person or persons to whom a
permit is granted under this section shall maintain good and sufficient
barricades, guards, lights, and signals so as to fully protect the public
from injury or damage by reason of any cutting or excavation made, and
shall, before commencing any such work, file with the City Building and
Purchasing Office a performance bond with sureties to be approved by
the City Council of Seward, Nebraska, in a sum set from time to time by
the City Council, which bond shall be conditioned as follows:
(1) To cover and provide the cost of any unfinished, unskilled and
inadequate work;
(2) That said applicant, if requested by the City, properly replace and
repair each and every place cut into any pavement, curb or
sidewalk under the rules as prescribed by the Street
Superintendent in as good a condition as before the same was cut;
(3) That said applicant will promptly compensate the City for all work
done by the City in replacing or repairing any places cut in
pavement, curb or sidewalk or for any excavation made into any
City property, in order to place the same in as good a condition as it
was before the same was cut;
(4) That the applicant will obey the ordinances and regulations of the
City;
(5) That the applicant will defend, save harmless and indemnify the
City of Seward, Nebraska from any and all liability, claims,
damages, judgments, costs and expenses of every nature and
description caused by or growing out of the cutting or removal of
any paving, curb or sidewalks or any excavation made on City
property not covered by or provided for by liability or property
damage insurance.
B. The applicant shall also provide certificates of liability insurance
coverage for bodily injury coverage and coverage for property damage
in sums set from time to time by the City Council.
330. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 340-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-4.1
1:555
C. Permits for curb cuts, street cuts, driveway access and excavation shall
be issued by the Street Superintendent in accordance with the
ordinances and the rules and regulations and specifications which are
adopted by the governing body. A copy of such rules, regulations and
specifications and any amendments thereto shall be filed with the City
Clerk, Street Superintendent and Building Department.
§ 340-4.1 SEWARD CODE § 340-4.1
1:556
ARTICLE V
Enforcement331
§ 340-5.1. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who violates the
prohibitions or provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an amount not to exceed
$500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of said
payment the offender shall stand committed to the County Jail until such
fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on which a
violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
331. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 340-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 340-5.1
1:557
Chapter 344
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning and subdivision — See Ch. 410.
§ 340-5.1 SEWARD CODE § 340-5.1
1:558
ARTICLE I
Annexations
[Adopted as Ch. 12, Art. 9, of the 1976 Code]
§ 344-1.1. Required; petition.
Any subdivision in which there are lands dedicated to the City or any
subdivision serviced by public utilities shall be annexed to the City. Before
approval for the final plat is given, the governing body shall receive a
petition for annexation from the owners of the subdivided properties.
§ 344-1.2. Resolution, plan and hearing.
A. The City Council desiring to annex land under the authority of this
article shall first adopt both a resolution stating that the City is
considering the annexation of the land and a plan for extending City
services to the land. The resolution shall state:
(1) The time, date, and location of the public hearing required below;
(2) A description of the boundaries of the land proposed for
annexation; and
(3) That the plan of the City for extension of City services to the land
proposed for annexation is available for inspection during regular
business hours in the office of the City Clerk.
B. The plan adopted by the City Council shall contain sufficient detail to
provide a reasonable person with a full and complete understanding of
the intentions of the City for extending City services to the land
proposed for annexation. The plan shall:
(1) State the estimated cost impact of providing the services to such
land;
(2) State the method by which the City plans to finance the extension
of services to the land and how any services already provided to the
land will be maintained;
(3) Include a timetable for extending services to the land proposed for
annexation; and
(4) Include a map drawn to scale clearly delineating the land proposed
for annexation, the current boundaries of the City, the proposed
boundaries of the City after annexation, and the general land-use
pattern in the land proposed for annexation.
C. A public hearing on the proposed annexation shall be held within 60
days following the adoption of the resolution to allow the City Council to
receive testimony from interested persons. The City Council may recess
the hearing, for good cause, to a time and date specified at the hearing.
§ 344-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 344-1.2
1:559
§ 344-1.3. Variances.
§ 344-1.4. Amendments.
Any provision of these regulations may from time to time be amended,
supplemented, changed, modified, or repealed by the governing body
according to law; provided, however, that such amendments, supplements,
changes, modifications or repealed provisions shall not become effective
until after study and report by the Planning Commission.
D. A copy of the resolution providing for the public hearing shall be
published in the official newspaper in the City at least once not less
than 10 days preceding the date of the public hearing. A map drawn to
scale delineating the land proposed for annexation shall be published
with the resolution. A copy of the resolution providing for the public
hearing shall be sent by first-class mail, following its passage, to the
school board of any school district in the land proposed for annexation.
A. The Planning Commission may recommend, and the legislative body
may grant, variances from the provision of these regulations but only
after determining that:
(1) There are unique circumstances or conditions affecting the
property.
(2) The variance is necessary for the reasonable and acceptable
development of the property in question.
(3) The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to adjacent property.
B. The requirement of filing and recording a plat for subdivision shall not
be waived.
§ 344-1.2 SEWARD CODE § 344-1.4
1:560
Chapter 350
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 205.
Electrical system — See Ch. 237.
Fireworks — See Ch. 248, Art. II.
Utilities — See Ch. 370.
§ 344-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 344-1.4
1:561

ARTICLE I
Sales and Use Tax
[Adopted 11-19-2002 by Ord. No. 41-02 (Ch. 1, Art. 15, § 1-1502, of
the 1976 Code)]
§ 350-1.1. Findings.
The qualified electors of the City of Seward, Nebraska, at the general
election held on November 5, 2002, approved the imposition of a onepercent
City sales and use tax for property tax relief and for the funding of
economic development.
§ 350-1.2. Tax imposed; amount.
The City of Seward, Nebraska does hereby impose a sales and use tax of 1%
upon the same transactions within such municipality on which the State of
Nebraska is authorized to impose a tax.332
§ 350-1.3. Use of proceeds.
The tax so collected shall be utilized for the purposes of property tax relief
and economic development, with the lesser of 10% of said tax or $75,000
annually to be used to fund economic development and the balance of said
tax to be used for the purpose of reducing property taxes within the City of
Seward.
332. Editor's Note: See Neb. RS 77-2703.
§ 350-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-1.3
1:563

ARTICLE II
Occupation Tax
[Adopted as Ch. 10, Art. 9, of the 1976 Code]
§ 350-2.1. Services taxed; amounts. [Amended 3-21-1978 by Ord.
No. 1127; 12-6-1983 by Ord. No. 29-83; 3-29-1989 by Ord. No. 7-89;
9-19-1995 by Ord. No. 38-95; 3-15-2005 by Ord. No. 16-05;
4-19-2005 by Ord. No. 25-05; 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 27-06;
9-20-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-16]
A. Sale of alcoholic beverages. As authorized by Neb. RS 53-132(4) of the
Nebraska Liquor Control Act, the occupation taxes for liquor license
holders of the City of Seward Nebraska will be two times the amount of
the license fees established by the Nebraska Liquor Control
Commission. For new licenses that are applied for and received on
dates other than the renewal dates, the fees will be prorated on a
quarterly basis as outlined by the Nebraska Liquor Control
Commission.
B. Sale of fireworks as authorized by §§ 248-2.3 and 248-2.4 of the City
Code:
(1) Local nonprofit organizations: $100.
(2) Retail vendors: $500 ($400 of the retail fee to be donated to Seward
Fourth of July Celebration).
C. Telephone companies: 4% of annual gross revenues derived from
intrastate business to, from, and within City limits.
D. Mobile telecommunications services: 4% of annual gross revenues
derived from mobile telecommunications services, which shall mean a
wireless communication service carried on between mobile stations or
receivers and land stations, and by mobile stations communicating
among themselves, and includes:
(1) Both one-way and two-way wireless communications services;
(2) A mobile service which provides regularly interacting group of
base, mobile, portable, and associated control and relay stations,
whether on an individual, cooperative, or multiple basis for private
one-way or two-way land mobile radio communications by eligible
users over designated areas of operation; and
(3) Any personal communications service.
E. Natural gas companies: 4% of annual gross revenues derived by the
grantee from sales of natural gas delivered within the City limits.
F. Cable TV companies: 5% of the annual gross revenues, due and payable
on March 1 of each year for the previous calendar year.
§ 350-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-2.1
1:565
§ 350-2.2. Nonprofit organization defined. [Amended 3-21-1978 by
Ord. No. 1128]
For the purpose of levy of an occupation tax as provided by § 350-2.1,
a "nonprofit organization" shall mean and be a nonprofit corporation as
defined by Chapter 53 of the Revised Statutes of the State of Nebraska 1943
as amended.333
§ 350-2.3. Fire insurance companies.
For the use, support, and maintenance of the Municipal Fire Department,
all revenue realized from the occupation tax on fire insurance companies
shall be appropriated to the Fire Department Fund. (Neb. RS 35-106)
§ 350-2.4. Collection date; accounting for revenue. [Amended
12-6-1983 by Ord. No. 29-83; 9-20-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-16]
All occupation taxes, except as otherwise provided for in § 350-2.1, shall be
due and payable on the first day of May of each year, except in the event
that the tax is levied daily, and upon the payment thereof by any person
or persons to the Municipal Clerk, the Clerk shall give a receipt, properly
dated, and specifying the person paying the tax and the amount paid;
provided that occupation taxes collected from Class C liquor licensees shall
be due and payable on the first day of November; and provided, further,
that occupation taxes collected from telephone companies shall be due and
payable semiannually, on or before May 31 of each year for the preceding
six-month period ending April 30 and on or before November 30 of each
year for the preceding six-month period ending October 31. The revenue
collected shall then be immediately deposited into the General Fund by
the Municipal Treasurer. The Municipal Treasurer shall keep an accurate
account of all revenue turned over to him. All forms and receipts herein
mentioned shall be issued in duplicate. One copy shall then be kept by each
party in the transaction.
§ 350-2.5. Certificates.
The receipt issued after the payment of any occupation tax shall be the
"occupation tax certificate." Said certificate shall specify the amount of
the tax and the name of the person and business that paid the tax. The
G. Electric utilities: 10% of annual gross revenues from the use of its plant
and properties within the City of Seward, due and payable quarterly
during the fiscal year.
H. Water utilities: 5% of annual gross revenues from the use of its plant
and properties within the City of Seward.
I. Sewer utilities: 5% of annual gross revenues from use of its plant and
properties within the City of Seward.
333. Editor's Note: See Neb. RS 53-103.26.
§ 350-2.1 SEWARD CODE § 350-2.5
1:566
occupation tax certificate shall then be displayed in a prominent place, or
carried in such a way as to be easily accessible, while business is being
conducted.
§ 350-2.6. Failure to pay. [Amended 12-6-1983 by Ord. No. 29-83]
If any person, company, or corporation fails or neglects to pay the
occupation tax as provided herein on the day it becomes due and payable,
the municipality shall then proceed by civil suit to collect the amount due.
All delinquent taxes shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per month until
paid.
§ 350-2.7. Verification statement. [Amended 12-6-1983 by Ord. No.
29-83]
Where the occupation tax imposed is based upon gross receipts, the
company subject to the tax imposed shall file with the City Clerk-Treasurer
on or before the date said tax is payable a verified statement covering each
tax period. Said statement shall show the gross receipts derived from the
business for which said tax is levied as set forth in § 350-2.1 of this article.
§ 350-2.8. Inspections. [Amended 12-6-1983 by Ord. No. 29-83]
Duly authorized representatives of the City may, upon request and during
business hours, inspect the books and records of any company whose
occupation tax is based upon gross receipts for the purpose of verifying
such statement or statements filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer.
§ 350-2.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-2.8
1:567
Chapter 355
TOBACCO PRODUCTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 205.
§ 350-2.8 SEWARD CODE § 350-2.8
1:568
ARTICLE I
Possession and Use
[Adopted as Ch. 6, Art. 3, §§ 6-315 and 6-316, of the 1976 Code334]
§ 355-1.1. Possession and use by minors.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to possess,
smoke, use, purchase, or attempt to acquire tobacco products, vapor
products or alternative nicotine products of any kind. "Tobacco products"
shall be defined to mean any substance containing tobacco leaf, including,
but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco,
or dipping tobacco. "Vapor products" and "alternative nicotine products" are
defined in Neb. RS 28-1418.01. Upon conviction, the penalty for said offense
shall be a fine not to exceed $500.
§ 355-1.2. Sale to minors prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or attempt to sell to any person
under the age of 18 any tobacco products, vapor products or alternative
nicotine products of any kind. Upon conviction, the penalty for said offense
shall be a fine not to exceed $500.
334. Editor's Note: Amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 355-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-1.2
1:569

ARTICLE II
Sales
[Adopted as Ch. 10, Art. 8, of the 1976 Code]
(Neb. RS 28-1418 et seq.)
§ 355-2.1. License required; term; fee; disposition of revenue.
[Amended 11-17-1998 by Ord. No. 44-98]
§ 355-2.2. Scope of license.
The license herein provided shall authorize the sale of cigars, tobacco,
cigarettes, and cigarette material by the licensee and employees to persons
over the age of 18 at that place of business described in said license
from the date of filing such application and paying such license fee to and
including December 31 of the calendar year in which application for such
license is made, unless the same is forfeited as hereinafter provided. (Neb.
RS 28-1424)
§ 355-2.3. Forfeiture of license.336
Any licensee who shall sell, give, or furnish in any way, to any person
under the age of 18 years, or who shall willingly allow to be taken from his
place of business by anyone under the age of 18 years, any cigars, tobacco,
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, limited-liability
company, or corporation to sell, keep for sale, or give away any cigars,
tobacco, cigarettes, or cigarette material to anyone without first
obtaining a license as hereinafter provided.
B. Every person, partnership, limited-liability company, or corporation
desiring a license to sell tobacco at retail shall file with the Municipal
Clerk a written application, on forms provided by the municipality,
stating the name of the person, partnership, limited-liability company,
or corporation for whom or which such license is desired, and the exact
location of the place of business; and shall deposit with the application
a license fee as set from time to time by the City Council. If the
applicant is an individual, the application shall include the applicant's
social security number. The term for which said license shall run shall
be for one year; provided, however, if application for a license is made
after July 1 of any calendar year, the fee shall be one-half of the fee
provided in this section.335
C. All monies collected as license fees under the provisions of this article
shall be paid over by the Clerk to the Treasurer of the School District
lying wholly or partially within the corporate limits.
335. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
336. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 355-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-2.3
1:571
cigarettes, cigarette material, vapor products or alternative nicotine
products shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and in addition thereto
his license shall be forfeited and revoked, and all rights under said license
shall at once cease and terminate. (Neb. RS 28-1425)
§ 355-2.4. Transfer of license.
In case of the sale of the business where the owner has a license hereunder,
the Clerk may authorize such license to be transferred to the purchaser. In
case of the change of the location by a licensee hereunder, the Clerk may
transfer such license to the new location. (Neb. RS 28-1428)
§ 355-2.5. New license upon revocation.
In the event that the license of any licensee shall be revoked and forfeited,
as herein provided for, no new license shall be issued to the licensee until
the expiration of one year from the date of such revocation and forfeiture.
(Neb. RS 28-1429)
§ 355-2.6. Violations and penalties.337
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who violates the
prohibitions or provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an amount not to exceed
$500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of said
payment the offender shall stand committed to the County Jail until such
fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on which a
violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
337. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 355-2.3 SEWARD CODE § 355-2.6
1:572
Chapter 360
TRAILER COURTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 225.
Offenses — See Ch. 290.
Solid waste — See Ch. 335.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 382.
Zoning and subdivision — See Ch. 410.
§ 355-2.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-2.6
1:573

ARTICLE I
Location and Operating Regulations
§ 360-1.1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
DEPENDENT TRAILER COACH — A trailer coach which does not have a
toilet and a bathtub or shower.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Board of Health of the City or its authorized
representative.
INDEPENDENT TRAILER COACH — A trailer coach that has a toilet and a
bathtub or shower.
PERMIT — A written permit issued by the Health Officer permitting the
trailer court to operate under this article and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
SERVICE BUILDING — A building, housing toilet facilities for men and
women, with slop-water closet and laundry facilities, and with separate bath
or shower accommodations.
TRAILER COACH — Any vehicle used, or so constructed as to permit its
being used, as a conveyance upon the public streets or highways and
duly licensable as such, and constructed in such a manner as will permit
occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons.
TRAILER COACH SPACE — A plot of ground within a trailer court
designated for the accommodation of one trailer coach.
TRAILER COURT — Any lot of ground upon which two or more trailer
coaches, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located.
§ 360-1.2. Permit required; authority to enforce.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain, operate, or alter
any trailer court within the limits of the City unless he holds a valid permit
issued annually by the Health Officer in the name of such person for the
specific trailer court. The Health Officer is authorized to issue, suspend,
or revoke permits in accordance with the provisions of this article and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
§ 360-1.3. Inspections.
The Health Officer is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections
to determine the condition of the trailer courts located within the City in
order that he may perform his duty of safeguarding the health and safety
of occupants of trailer courts and of the general public. The Health Officer
shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public
property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating
to the enforcement of this article or of regulations promulgated thereunder.
§ 360-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-1.4
1:575
§ 360-1.4. Adoption of regulations.
The Health Officer is hereby authorized to make and, after public hearing,
to adopt such written regulations as may be necessary for the proper
enforcement of the provisions of this article; provided that such regulations
shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this article. Such regulations
shall have the same force and effect as the provisions of this article.
§ 360-1.5. Location, space and general layout.
A. The trailer court shall be located on a well-drained site, shall be so
located that its drainage will not endanger any water supply, and shall
be in conformity with a plan approved by the Health Officer. The Health
Officer shall promulgate regulations for trailer court location and plan
approval, which shall provide for adequate drainage, space, lighting,
safety, service buildings and other sanitary facilities necessary to
protect the public health and prevent nuisances.
B. The area of the trailer court shall be large enough to accommodate:
(1) The designated number of trailer coach spaces;
(2) Necessary streets and roadways;
(3) Parking areas for motor vehicles; and
(4) Service areas and playgrounds.
C. Each trailer coach space shall contain a minimum of 1,000 square feet
and shall be at least 25 feet wide, and shall abut on a driveway or other
clear area with unobstructed access to a public street. Such spaces
shall be clearly defined, and trailer coaches shall be parked in such
spaces so that there will be a minimum of 20 feet between trailer
coaches and so that no trailer coach will be less than 10 feet from the
exterior boundary of the trailer court.
D. It shall be unlawful to park a trailer coach less than 25 feet from any
street or highway, or so that any part of such trailer coach will obstruct
any roadway or walkway.
E. It shall be unlawful to allow any trailer coach to remain in a trailer court
unless a trailer coach space is available.
F. Access roads shall be provided to each trailer coach space. Each access
road shall be continuous, shall connect with a street or highway, and
shall have a minimum width of 25 feet.
G. Areas shall be provided for the parking of motor vehicles. Such areas
shall accommodate at least the number of vehicles equal to the number
of trailer coach spaces provided.
H. Playground areas shall be provided and shall be restricted to such use.
These areas shall be protected from the main highway and from parking
§ 360-1.4 SEWARD CODE § 360-1.5
1:576
§ 360-1.6. Service buildings.
§ 360-1.7. Water supply.
An accessible, adequate, safe, and potable supply of water shall be provided
in each trailer court, capable of furnishing a minimum of 125 gallons per
day per trailer coach space. Where a public supply of water of such quality
is available, connection shall be made thereto and its supply shall be used
exclusively. The development of an independent water supply to serve the
trailer court shall be made only after express approval has been granted by
the Health Officer.
§ 360-1.8. Plumbing.
All plumbing in the trailer court shall comply with state and local plumbing
laws and regulations.
areas. A minimum of 100 square feet per coach space shall be made
available in one or more places for such playground areas.
A. Each trailer court shall be provided with one or more service buildings
adequately equipped with flush-type toilet fixtures. No service building
shall contain less than two toilets for women, one toilet for males, one
lavatory and shower for each sex, one urinal for males, one laundry tray,
and one slop-water closet. Dependent trailer coaches shall be parked
not more than 200 feet from the service building.
B. Service buildings shall:
(1) Be located 10 feet or more from any trailer coach space.
(2) Be of permanent construction, and be adequately lighted.
(3) Be of moisture-resistant material, to permit frequent washing and
cleaning.
(4) Have sufficient toilet and laundry facilities, according to
requirements promulgated by the Health Officer, to serve
adequately both males and females.
(5) Have adequate heating facilities to maintain a temperature of 70°
F. during cold weather, and to supply a minimum of three gallons of
hot water per hour per coach space during times of peak demand.
(6) Have all rooms well-ventilated, with all openings effectively
screened.
(7) Have at least one slop-water closet, supplied with hot and cold
water, in a separate room.
§ 360-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-1.9
1:577
§ 360-1.9. Sewage disposal.
Trailer courts shall be serve by a public sewer system, or by a private
disposal system which has the approval of the Health Officer. Each trailer
coach space shall be provided with a satisfactory sewer connection. All
sewage disposal apparatus, including appurtenances thereto, shall be
provided, maintained, and operated so as not to create a nuisance or health
hazard.
§ 360-1.10. Refuse disposal.
The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse in the court shall be so
managed as to create no health hazard, rodent harborage, insect breeding
areas, accident hazards, or air pollution. All refuse shall be stored in
flytight, watertight, rodentproof containers, which shall be provided in
sufficient number and capacity to prevent any refuse from overflowing.
Satisfactory container racks or holders shall be provided and shall be
located not more than 150 feet from any trailer coach space.
§ 360-1.11. Insect and rodent control.
Insect and rodent control measures to safeguard public health, as
recommended by the Health Officer, shall be applied in the trailer court.
§ 360-1.12. Electricity.
An electrical outlet supplying at least 110 volts shall be provided for each
trailer coach space. The installation shall comply with all state and local
electrical codes. Such electrical outlets shall be weatherproof. No power
line shall be permitted to lie on the ground or to be suspended less than 18
feet above the ground.
§ 360-1.13. Fuel.
Liquefied petroleum gas for cooking purposes shall not be used at individual
trailer coach spaces unless the containers are properly connected by copper
or other suitable metallic tubing. Liquefied petroleum gas cylinders shall
be securely fastened in place and adequately protected from the weather.
No cylinder containing liquefied petroleum gas shall be located in a trailer
coach nor within five feet of a door thereof.
§ 360-1.14. Fire protection.
The court area shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the City fire
prevention authority.
§ 360-1.15. Alterations and additions.
No permanent additions of any kind shall be built onto, nor become a part
of, any trailer coach. Skirting of coaches is permissible, but such skirting
shall not permanently attach the coach to the ground, provide a harborage
§ 360-1.9 SEWARD CODE § 360-1.15
1:578
for rodents, or create a fire hazard. Jacks or stabilizers may be placed under
the frame of the coach to prevent movement on the springs while the coach
is parked and occupied.
§ 360-1.16. Animals and pets.
No owner or person in charge of a dog, cat or other pet animal shall permit
it to run at large or to commit any nuisance within the limits of any trailer
court.
§ 360-1.17. Registration of occupants; reporting of communicable
diseases.
§ 360-1.18. Prohibited location of trailers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any trailer coach on any street,
alley, highway or other public place or upon any private lot or tract of land
within the corporate limits of the City, or within the two-mile zone beyond
the corporate limits, outside any approved trailer court except on a trailer
sales lot of a regularly licensed dealer on which unoccupied trailer coaches
are parked for purposes of inspection and sale, except on premises for
which a special limited permit has been granted as hereinafter provided,
and except camping trailers of less than 28 feet in length, which shall not
be occupied or used as a dwelling or for sleeping purposes in the prohibited
area.
A. Every trailer court owner or operator shall maintain a register
containing a record of all trailer coaches and occupants using the
trailer court. Such register shall be available to any authorized person
inspecting the court, and shall be preserved for the period required by
the Health Officer. Such register shall contain:
(1) The names and addresses of all trailer coach occupants stopping in
the court;
(2) The make, model and license number of each motor vehicle and
trailer coach;
(3) The state, territory, or county issuing the trailer license; and
(4) The dates of arrival and departure of each trailer coach.
B. Every owner, operator, attendant, or other person operating a trailer
court shall notify the local Health Officer immediately of any suspected
communicable or contagious disease within the trailer court. In the
case of diseases diagnosed by a physician as quarantinable, such owner,
operator, attendant or other person operating a trailer court shall not
permit the departure of a trailer coach or its occupants, or the removal
therefrom of clothing or other articles which have been exposed to
infection, without approval of the Health Officer.
§ 360-1.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-1.19
1:579
§ 360-1.19. Emergency or temporary parking.
Emergency or temporary stopping or parking of trailer coaches may be
permitted for no longer than 24 hours, subject to any other and further
prohibitions, regulations or limitations imposed by traffic and parking
regulations elsewhere in this Code.338
§ 360-1.20. Emergency or temporary parking permits.
A permit may be granted by the Chief of Police for emergency or temporary
parking of trailer coaches, subject to the provisions of this article and
subject to regulations of a temporary nature prescribed by the Mayor and
City Council.
§ 360-1.21. Violations and penalties.339
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
338. Editor's Note: See Ch. 382, Vehicles and Traffic.
339. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 360-1.19 SEWARD CODE § 360-1.21
1:580
Chapter 364
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tree Board — See Ch. 12, Art. XI.
Solid waste — See Ch. 335.
Streets, sidewalks and municipal
property — See Ch. 340.
Weeds and vegetation — See Ch. 394.
§ 360-1.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-1.21
1:581

ARTICLE I
Planting and Maintenance Regulations
§ 364-1.1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LARGE TREES — Trees which by their nature attain heights greater than
45 feet at maturity.
MEDIUM TREES — Trees which by their nature normally attain heights of
from 25 feet to 45 feet at maturity.
PARK TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in
public parks and all areas owned by the City or to which the public has free
access.
SMALL TREES — Trees which by their nature do not normally attain heights
greater than 25 feet at maturity.
STREET TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on
land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or
ways within the City.
§ 364-1.2. Tree species to be planted. [Amended 2-1-1994 by Ord.
No. 4-94]
The City Tree Board shall establish and maintain a list of tree species
which shall constitute the official street tree species for the municipality of
Seward, Seward County, Nebraska. Said list shall be reviewed on an annual
basis by the City Tree Board, and a copy of the listing of official street tree
species for the City shall be maintained on file with the City Clerk, and said
list shall be made available to any person upon request.
§ 364-1.3. Distance from utility lines and fire hydrants.
No street trees or park trees other than those species listed as small trees
in § 364-1.1 of this article, or species specifically approved by the Municipal
Tree Board, may be planted under or within 10 lateral feet of any overhead
utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line,
sewer line, transmission line or other utility, line, wire or main. No street
tree shall be planted within 10 feet of any fire hydrant.
§ 364-1.4. Care and removal.
A. The municipality shall have the right, after notifying the property
owner(s) and allowing sufficient time for the owner(s) to eliminate the
problem(s), to plant, prune, maintain or remove street trees or park
trees within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and
public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to
preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds
and after approval by the Tree Board.
§ 364-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 364-1.4
1:583
§ 364-1.5. Tree topping.
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or municipal
department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property.
Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger
than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree
as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely
damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires
or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical, may
be exempted from this article at the determination of the Municipal Tree
Board.
§ 364-1.6. Obstruction, pruning and removal; liability for costs and
expenses.
B. The Municipal Tree Board may, after notifying the property owner(s)
and allowing sufficient time for the owner(s) to eliminate the
problem(s), cause or order to be removed any street tree or park tree or
part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which, by reason of its
nature, is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines
or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus,
insect or other pest.
C. The utility companies may remove, at their expense, trees or parts
thereof which are injurious to their utility lines, after negotiating with
the property owner(s).
D. No person or property owner shall remove any live street tree or park
tree for any reason without written permission of the Municipal Tree
Board; provided, however, that when said utility companies confront an
emergency situation, they will have the authority to trim or remove the
trees or parts thereof at their own discretion and expense.
A. All trees and shrubs within the municipality shall be pruned or removed
when such trees or shrubs obstruct the light from any street lamp,
obstruct the visibility of any traffic control device or sign, obstruct the
passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, or obstruct the view of any street
or alley intersection. The minimum clearance of any overhanging
portion thereof shall be 14 feet on all arterial and collector streets and
11 feet on all residential streets and seven feet over sidewalks.
B. All shrubs and hedges defined as street trees in this article shall be kept
trimmed by the abutting property owner at least one foot back from all
curbs, sidewalks, driveways or alleys; and the same shall at all times be
kept trimmed to a height not greater than 30 inches above the top of the
curb unless the Municipal Tree Board, for other than corner lots,
determines that a greater height would not constitute a hazard to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
C. The Municipal Tree Board shall notify, in writing, the owners of such
trees or shrubs on private property. Pruning shall be done by said
§ 364-1.4 SEWARD CODE § 364-1.6
1:584
§ 364-1.7. Dead or diseased trees.
§ 364-1.8. Work ordered or done by City. [Amended 6-17-1986 by
Ord. No. 8-86]
Written permission shall not be required for any tree, shrub or hedge
planting, pruning, spraying or removal ordered or done by the City;
however, all such work shall be done in conformance with the requirements
of § 364-1.2 through and including § 364-1.7 of this article and the following
regulations and provisions.
owners at their own expense within 60 days after the date of
notification. In the event of failure of owners to comply with said notice,
the municipality shall have the authority to prune said trees or shrubs
and assess the cost of said pruning to the property owner. If the owner
fails to reimburse the municipality after being properly billed, the cost
may be assessed against the real estate and the governing body shall
have the assessment certified to the County Treasurer and the same
shall be collected in the manner as provided by law.
A. All trees and shrubs within the municipality shall be pruned or removed
when such trees or shrubs constitute a hazard to life and property, or
harbor insects or disease which constitutes a threat to other trees or
shrubs within the City.
B. The Municipal Tree Board shall have the power and authority to prune
or remove, or order to prune or remove, any such trees or shrubs on
private property. The Municipal Tree Board shall notify, in writing, the
owners of such trees or shrubs. Pruning or removal shall be done by
said owners at their own expense within 60 days after the date of
notification. In the event of failure of owners to comply with said notice,
the municipality shall have the authority to prune or remove said trees
or shrubs and assess the cost of said pruning to the property owner. If
the owner fails to reimburse the municipality after being properly
billed, the cost may be assessed against the real estate and the
governing body shall have the assessment certified to the County
Treasurer and the same shall be collected in the manner as provided by
law.
A. General provisions.
(1) The City of Seward Electric Department is responsible for
maintaining adequate clearance from trees and branches
approaching overhead primary, secondary and service electrical
lines. The City Street Department is similarly responsible for
ensuring that the City's streets, alleys and walkways are clear of
any trees, branches or shrubs which could obstruct the path or
sight distance of the motorist and/or pedestrian.
(2) The City of Seward is also cognizant of the fact that trees serve an
important aesthetic and energy-saving purpose for the residents of
§ 364-1.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 364-1.8
1:585
the City. It is therefore necessary to establish clear and specific
rules regulating how the trimming and/or removal of trees and
shrubs is to be implemented when necessary.
B. Notices to residents.
(1) When it is determined that a tree or shrub requires trimming or
removal, the City shall deliver or mail by means of certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the owner or tenant of the abutting or
affected property a notice advising him/her of the problem, the
approximate location, and the suggested remedy. In addition, the
notice shall advise the owner/tenant that he/she has 10 days in
which to contact the City if questions or objections concerning the
action exist; and that if no contact is made with City personnel
during this time, the City will proceed with the project as described
in the notice.
(2) The notice, as described above, shall apply to all cases, except
when an emergency exists or when it is necessary to remove a tree
or branches in order to restore electrical service or to open up a
street blocked by a tree or branch.
C. Removal of trees or shrubs. Trees shall be taken out only if the
following conditions exist:
(1) If the tree of concern is dead or affected by disease to the extent
that it could not survive on a long-term basis.
(2) If the tree or shrub of concern is located in such a position that it
cannot be trimmed properly to resolve the problem, without
ruining its aesthetic appearance.
D. Trimming of trees or shrubs. If, in the opinion of City personnel, it is
necessary and feasible to trim a tree or shrub, trimming shall be
completed in the following manner:
(1) Tree branches affecting overhead power lines shall be trimmed
back from the power line a minimum of 48 inches.
(2) Tree branches nearer to a street or sidewalk than the standards set
forth in § 364-1.6 of this article shall be trimmed back to a point
which meets these standards.
(3) Wherever feasible, branches shall not be stubbed in the middle of a
branch; rather, the branch shall be trimmed at that point where it
joins with a greater sized branch of the tree.
E. Removal of branches. Trees, branches and shrubs taken down by the
City shall be removed from the property as soon as is practical after
they have been felled. In no case shall the timber be left on the property
longer than five working days after the trimming took place.
§ 364-1.8 SEWARD CODE § 364-1.8
1:586
§ 364-1.9. Abuse or mutilation.
Unless specifically authorized by the Municipal Tree Board, no person
shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any street tree
or park tree; attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or other
contrivance to such trees; allow any gaseous, liquid, or solid substance
which is harmful to such trees to come in contact with them; or set fire
or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure
any portion of such trees. The preceding restrictions do not apply to proper
planting, staking and guying practices.
§ 364-1.10. Protection of trees.
F. Appeal of conflicts between City personnel and property owner or
tenant. If a property owner and/or tenant objects to the action proposed
by City personnel and efforts to mutually resolve the objection between
the parties involved fail, the City's Tree Board shall serve as a hearing
board to resolve the dispute. Appeal to the Tree Board shall be made in
writing to the City Clerk/Treasurer's office. When an appeal is filed, City
personnel shall take no further action to trim or remove the tree or
shrub until the Tree Board has acted on the appeal. The Tree Board
shall hear all appeals of this nature within 30 days after the appeal has
been filed with the City Clerk/Treasurer.
G. Applicability of tree policy for trees located on private property and on
public property. The above policies shall be applicable to trees and
shrubs located on private property, as well as those located on public
property, rights-of-way and easements.
H. Removal of stumps. If a tree must be removed, the City will be
responsible for removing the stump. Stumps are generally removed
once a year, usually in October or November of the year. All stumps
from trees removed from the City shall be removed within one year of
tree removal.
A. All street trees or park trees near any excavation or construction of any
building, structure or street work shall be guarded with a substantial
fence, frame or box not less than four feet high and eight feet square,
and all construction materials, soil or other debris shall be kept outside
the barrier. This shall be the responsibility of the persons or firms doing
the construction work.
B. No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches or lay any drive
within 10 feet of any street tree or park tree without first obtaining
written permission from the Municipal Tree Board.
C. No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any public
property of the municipality any stone, brick, sand, soil, concrete or
other material which may impede the free passage of water, air and
fertilizer to the roots of any street tree or park tree, except by written
permission of the Municipal Tree Board.
§ 364-1.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 364-1.11
1:587
§ 364-1.11. Removal of stumps.
All stumps of street trees and park trees shall be removed below the surface
of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface
of the ground.
§ 364-1.12. Review of Tree Board actions by governing body.
The City Council of the municipality shall have the right to review the
conduct, acts and decisions of the Municipal Tree Board. Any person may
appeal any ruling or order of the Municipal Tree Board to the governing
body, which may hear the matter and make a final decision.
§ 364-1.13. Removal of street or park trees without permission.
[Amended 8-7-2007 by Ord. No. 18-07]
It shall be unlawful for any person or property owner to remove any street
tree or park tree for any reason without written permission of the Municipal
Tree Board. Upon conviction, the penalty for said offense shall not be less
than $100 nor more than $500.
§ 364-1.14. Violations and penalties.340
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who violates the
prohibitions or provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an amount not to exceed
$500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of said
payment the offender shall stand committed to the County Jail until such
fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on which a
violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
340. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 364-1.11 SEWARD CODE § 364-1.14
1:588
Chapter 370
UTILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 225.
Electrical system — See Ch. 237.
Offenses — See Ch. 290.
Water — See Ch. 390.
§ 364-1.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 364-1.14
1:589

ARTICLE I
Discontinuance of Service
(Neb. RS 70-1605 et seq.)
§ 370-1.1. Domestic subscribers. [Amended 9-4-1979 by Ord. No.
1179; 9-21-1982 by Ord. No. 20-82; 9-18-1984 by Ord. No. 29-84;
4-16-1991 by Ord. No. 10-91; 8-17-1999 by Ord. No. 39-99;
11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 29-06]
A. The municipality shall have the right to discontinue services and
remove its properties if the charges for such services are not paid prior
to the date that the same become delinquent. If the consumer shall
neglect or refuse to pay his bill on or before the delinquent date, the
City, through the Electric Superintendent, shall discontinue service
until all amounts in arrears are paid, together with the service charges
to resume service. Before any termination, the Department of Utilities
shall first give notice to any domestic subscriber whose service is
proposed to be terminated. Such notice shall be given in person, by first
class mail, or by electronic delivery, except that electronic delivery shall
only be used if the subscriber has specifically elected to receive such
notices by electronic delivery. If notice is given by first class mail, such
notice shall be conspicuously marked as to its importance. Service shall
not be discontinued for at least seven days after notice is sent or given.
Holidays and weekends shall be excluded from the seven days. If
disconnect proceedings have begun in the Utility Office, after the stated
date and time, a labor charge as set from time to time by the City
Council shall be paid by the consumer during regular working hours. If
disconnect proceedings have occurred and service is requested at any
time other than regular hours of the Electric Department employees,
the consumer shall be charged with a labor charge as set from time to
time by the City Council. (Neb. RS 70-1605)341
B. The notice shall contain the following information:
(1) The reason for the proposed disconnection;
(2) A statement of the intention to disconnect unless the domestic
subscriber either pays the bill or reaches an agreement with the
Department regarding payment of the bill;
(3) The date upon which service will be disconnected if the domestic
subscriber does not take appropriate action;
(4) The name, address, and telephone number of the employee or
department to whom the domestic subscriber may address an
inquiry or complaint;
341. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 370-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1.1
1:591
(5) The domestic subscriber's right, prior to the disconnection date, to
request a conference regarding any dispute over such proposed
disconnection;
(6) A statement that the Department may not disconnect service
pending the conclusion of the conference;
(7) A statement to the effect that disconnection may be postponed or
prevented upon presentation of a duly licensed physician's
certificate which shall certify that the domestic subscriber's
household has an existing illness or handicap which would cause
such subscriber or resident to suffer an immediate and serious
health hazard by the disconnection of the utility's service to that
household. Such certificate shall be filed with the Department of
Utilities within five days of receiving notice under this section and
will prevent the disconnection of the Department's services for a
period of 30 days from such filing. Only one postponement of
disconnection shall be allowed under this subsection for each
incidence of nonpayment of any due account;
(8) The cost that will be borne by the domestic subscriber for
restoration of service;
(9) A statement that the domestic subscriber may arrange with the
Department for an installment payment plan;
(10) A statement to the effect that those domestic subscribers who are
welfare recipients may qualify for assistance in payment of their
utility bill and that they should contact their caseworker in that
regard; and
(11) Any additional information not inconsistent with this section which
has received prior approval from the governing body.
(Neb. RS 70-1606)
C. A domestic subscriber may dispute the proposed discontinuance of
service by notifying the utility with a written statement that sets forth
the reasons for the dispute and the relief requested. If a statement has
been made by the subscriber, a conference shall be held before the
utility may discontinue services. (Neb. RS 70-1609)
D. The procedures adopted by the governing body for resolving utility
bills, three copies of which are on file in the office of the Municipal
Clerk, are hereby incorporated by reference in addition to any
amendments thereto and are made a part hereof as though set out in
full.
E. This section shall not apply to any disconnections or interruptions of
services made necessary by the utility for reasons of repair or
maintenance or to protect the health or safety of the domestic
subscriber or of the general public.
§ 370-1.1 SEWARD CODE § 370-1.2
1:592
§ 370-1.2. Commercial customers. [Amended 10-5-1982 by Ord. No.
27-82; 4-16-1991 by Ord. No. 11-91; 8-17-1999 by Ord. No. 40-99;
8-21-2007 by Ord. No. 23-07342]
Utility bills shall be mailed to the commercial consumers on or about the
25th day of each month and shall be considered delinquent on the 15th
day of the following month. If the commercial consumer shall neglect or
refuse to pay his bill by the delinquent date, the City, through its Electric
Superintendent, shall discontinue service until all amounts in arrears are
paid, together with the service charge to resume services. Before any
termination, the Department of Utilities shall first give notice. Such notice
shall be given in person, by first class mail, or by electronic delivery,
except that electronic delivery shall only be used if the subscriber has
specifically elected to receive such notices by electronic delivery. Such
notice shall be conspicuously marked as to its importance. Service shall not
be discontinued for at least three days after notice is given. If disconnect
proceedings have begun in the Utility Office after the stated date and time,
a labor charge as set from time to time by the City Council shall be paid by
the consumer during regular working hours. If disconnect proceedings have
occurred and service is requested at any time other than regular hours of
the Electric Department employees, the consumer shall be charged with a
labor charge as set from time to time by the City Council.
342. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 370-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-1.2
1:593

ARTICLE II
Diversion of Services
§ 370-2.1. Civil action for violations. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 48-95; 4-15-2003 by Ord. No. 16-03]
A. For purposes of this section, the definitions found in Neb. RS 25-21, 275
shall apply.
B. Basis.
(1) The municipality may bring a civil action for damages against any
person who commits, authorizes, solicits, aids, abets, or attempts
bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized metering when such act
results in damages to a municipal utility. The municipality may
bring a civil action for damages pursuant to this section against any
person receiving the benefit of utility service through means of
bypassing, tampering or unauthorized metering.
(2) In any civil action brought pursuant to this section, the municipality
shall be entitled, upon proof of willful or intentional bypassing,
tampering, or unauthorized metering, to recover as damages:
(a) The amount of actual damage or loss if the amount of the
damage or loss is susceptible to reasonable calculation; or
(b) Liquidated damages of $750 if the amount of actual damage or
loss is not susceptible to reasonable calculation.
(c) In addition to damage or loss under Subsection A(2)(a) or (b),
the municipality may recover all reasonable expenses and
costs incurred on account of the bypassing, tampering, or
unauthorized metering, including, but not limited to,
disconnection, reconnection, service calls, equipment, costs of
the suit, and reasonable attorney's fees in cases within the
scope of Neb. RS 25-1801.
(Neb. RS 25-21, 276)
C. Rebuttable presumption.
(1) There shall be rebuttable presumption that a tenant or occupant at
any premises where bypassing, tampering or unauthorized
metering is proven to exist caused or had knowledge of such
bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized metering if the tenant or
occupant:
(a) Had access to the part of the utility supply system on the
premises where the bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized
metering is proven to exist; and
§ 370-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2.1
1:595
§ 370-2.2. Meter tampering, unauthorized reconnection, prohibited;
evidence. [Amended 4-15-2003 by Ord. No. 17-03]
(b) Was responsible or partially responsible for payment, either
directly or indirectly, to the utility or to any other person for
utility services to the premises.
(2) There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a customer at any
premises where bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized metering is
proven to exist caused or had knowledge of such bypassing,
tampering, or unauthorized metering if the customer controlled
access to the part of the utility supply system on the premises
where the bypassing, tampering, or unauthorized metering was
proven to exist.
(Neb. RS 25-21, 277)
D. The remedies provided by the section shall be deemed to be
supplemental and additional to powers conferred by existing laws. The
remedies provided in this section are in addition to and not in limitation
of any other civil or criminal statutory or common law remedies (Neb.
RS 25-21, 278)
(Neb. RS 86-329 through 86-331)
A. It is an offense for any person:
(1) To connect any instrument, device, or contrivance with any wire
supplying or intended to supply electricity or electric current or to
connect any pipe or conduit supplying water, without the
knowledge and consent of the municipality, in such manner that
any portion thereof may be supplied to any instrument by or at
which electricity, electric current, or water may be consumed
without passing through the meter made or provided for measuring
or registering the amount or quantity thereof passing through it;
(2) To knowingly use or knowingly permit the use of electricity, electric
current, or water obtained unlawfully pursuant to this section;
(3) To reconnect electrical or water service without the knowledge and
consent of the municipality if the service has been disconnected
pursuant to Neb. RS 70-1601 to 70-1615 or § 370-1.2 of this
chapter; or
(4) To willfully injure, alter, or by any instrument, device, or
contrivance in any manner interfere with or obstruct the action or
operation of any meter made or provided for measuring or
registering the amount or quantity of electricity, electric current, or
water passing through it, without the knowledge and consent of the
municipality.
§ 370-2.1 SEWARD CODE § 370-2.2
1:596
B. Proof of the existence of any wire, pipe, or conduit connection or
reconnection or of any injury, alteration, interference, or obstruction of
a meter is prima facie evidence of the guilt of the person in possession
of the premises where such connection, reconnection, injury, alteration,
interference, or obstruction is proved to exist.
(Neb. RS 28-515.02)
§ 370-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2.2
1:597
Chapter 377
VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND WRECKED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 284.
Offenses — See Ch. 290.
Seized and abandoned property — See Ch.
308.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 382.
§ 370-2.2 SEWARD CODE § 370-2.2
1:598
ARTICLE I
Abandoned Vehicles
[Adopted as Ch. 6, Art. 3, § 6-359, of the 1976 Code]
(Neb. RS 60-1901 through 60-1911)
§ 377-1.1. Abandonment and interfering with abandoned vehicles
prohibited.
§ 377-1.2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOBILE HOME — A movable or portable dwelling constructed to be towed
on its own chassis, connected to utilities, and designed with or without a
permanent foundation for year-round living. It may consist of one or more
units that can be telescoped when towed and expanded later for additional
capacity, or of two or more units, separately towable but designed to be
joined into one integral unit, and shall include a manufactured home as
defined in Neb. RS 71-4603. "Mobile home" does not include a mobile home
or manufactured home for which an affidavit of affixture has been recorded
pursuant to Neb. RS 60-169.343
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any privately owned property which is not included
within the definition of public property.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any public right-of-way, street, highway, alley, or
park or other state, county, or municipally owned property.
§ 377-1.3. Determination of abandonment.
A. No person shall cause any vehicle to be an abandoned vehicle as
described in § 377-1.3A, B or C of this article. (Neb. RS 60-1907)
B. No person other than one authorized by the municipality or appropriate
state agency shall destroy, deface, or remove any part of a vehicle
which is left unattended on a highway or other public place without
license plates affixed or which is abandoned. (Neb. RS 60-1908)
A. A motor vehicle is an abandoned vehicle:
(1) If left unattended, with no license plates or valid in-transit stickers
issued pursuant to the Motor Vehicle Registration Act (Neb. RS
60-301 et seq.) affixed thereto, for more than six hours on any
public property;
(2) If left unattended for more than 24 hours on any public property,
except a portion thereof on which parking is legally permitted;
343. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 377-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-1.3
1:599
(3) If left unattended for more than 48 hours after the parking of such
vehicle has become illegal, if left on a portion of any public property
on which parking is legally permitted;
(4) If left unattended for more than seven days on private property if
left initially without permission of the owner, or after permission of
the owner is terminated;
(5) If left for more than 30 days in the custody of a law enforcement
agency after the agency has sent a letter to the last-registered
owner under § 377-1.6 of this article; or
(6) If removed from private property by the City pursuant to a
municipal ordinance.
B. An all-terrain vehicle, a utility-type vehicle, or a minibike is an
abandoned vehicle:344
(1) If left unattended for more than 24 hours on any public property,
except a portion thereof on which parking is legally permitted;
(2) If left unattended for more than 48 hours after the parking of such
vehicle has become illegal, if left on a portion of any public property
on which parking is legally permitted;
(3) If left unattended for more than seven days on private property if
left initially without permission of the owner, or after permission of
the owner is terminated;
(4) If left for more than 30 days in the custody of a law enforcement
agency after the agency has sent a letter to the last-registered
owner under § 377-1.6; or
(5) If removed from private property by the municipality pursuant to a
municipal ordinance.
C. A mobile home is an abandoned vehicle if left in place on private
property for more than 30 days after the municipality has sent a
certified letter to each of the last-registered owners and posted a notice
on the mobile home, stating that the mobile home is subject to sale or
auction or vesting of title as set forth in § 377-1.5.345
D. No motor vehicle subject to forfeiture under Neb. RS 28-431 shall be an
abandoned vehicle under this article.
(Neb. RS 60-1901)
344. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
345. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 377-1.3 SEWARD CODE § 377-1.4
1:600
§ 377-1.4. Title vesting in local authority.346
If an abandoned vehicle, at the time of abandonment, has no license plates
of the current year or valid in-transit stickers issued pursuant to Neb. RS
60-376 affixed and is of a wholesale value, taking into consideration the
condition of the vehicle, of $250 or less, title shall immediately vest in the
local authority or state agency having jurisdiction thereof as provided in
Neb. RS 60-1904. Any certificate of title issued under this section to the
local authority or state agency shall be issued at no cost to such authority
or agency. (Neb. RS 60-1902)
§ 377-1.5. Notice; procedure upon abandonment.
A. Except for vehicles governed by § 377-1.3 of this article, the
municipality shall make an inquiry concerning the last-registered
owner of an abandoned vehicle as follows:
(1) Abandoned vehicle with license plates affixed: to the jurisdiction
which issued such license plates; or
(2) Abandoned vehicle with no license plates affixed: to the
Department of Motor Vehicles.
B. The municipality shall notify the last-registered owner, if any, that the
vehicle in question has been determined to be an abandoned vehicle
and that, if unclaimed, either:
(1) It will be sold or will be offered at public auction after five days
from the date such notice was mailed; or
(2) Title will vest in the municipality 30 days after the date such notice
was mailed.
C. If the municipality is notified that a lien or mortgage exists, the notice
described in Subsection B of this section shall also be sent to the lien
holder or mortgagee. Any person claiming such vehicle shall be
required to pay the cost of removal and storage of such vehicle.
D. Title to an abandoned vehicle, if unclaimed, shall vest in the
municipality:
(1) Five days after the date the notice is mailed if the vehicle will be
sold or offered at public auction under Subsection B(1) this section;
(2) Thirty days after the date the notice is mailed if the municipality
will retain the vehicle; or
(3) If the last-registered owner cannot be ascertained, when notice of
such fact is received.
346. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 377-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-1.5
1:601
§ 377-1.6. Vehicles held by law enforcement agencies for
investigatory purposes.
§ 377-1.7. Disposition of proceeds from sale.
Any proceeds from the sale of an abandoned vehicle, less any expenses
incurred by the municipality, shall be held by the municipality, without
interest, for the benefit of the owner or lien holders of such vehicle for
a period of two years. If not claimed within such two-year period, the
proceeds shall be paid into the general fund of the municipality. (Neb. RS
60-1905)
§ 377-1.8. Liability for removal.
Neither the owner, lessee, nor occupant of the premises from which any
abandoned vehicle is removed, nor the municipality, shall be liable for any
loss or damage to such vehicle which occurs during its removal or while in
the possession of the municipality or its contractual agent or as a result of
any subsequent disposition. (Neb. RS 60-1906)
E. After title to the abandoned vehicle vests pursuant to Subsection D of
this section, the municipality may retain for use, sell, or auction the
abandoned vehicle. If the municipality has determined that the vehicle
should be retained for use, the municipality shall, at the same time that
the notice, if any, is mailed, publish in a newspaper of general
circulation in the jurisdiction an announcement that the municipality
intends to retain the abandoned vehicle for its use and that title will
vest in the municipality 30 days after publication.
(Neb. RS 60-1903)
A. If the municipal law enforcement agency has custody of a motor vehicle
for investigatory purposes and has no further need to keep it in custody,
it shall send a certified letter to each of the last-registered owners
stating that the vehicle is in the custody of the agency, that the vehicle
is no longer needed for law enforcement purposes, and that after 30
days the agency will dispose of the vehicle.
B. This section shall not apply to motor vehicles subject to forfeiture under
Neb. RS 28-431.
C. No storage fees shall be assessed against the registered owner of a
motor vehicle held in custody for investigatory purposes under this
section unless the registered owner or the person in possession of the
law enforcement agency took the vehicle into custody. If a registered
owner or the person in possession of the vehicle when it is taken into
custody is charged with a felony or misdemeanor but is not convicted,
the registered owner shall be entitled to a refund of the storage fees.
(Neb. RS 60-1903.01)
§ 377-1.5 SEWARD CODE § 377-1.9
1:602
§ 377-1.9. Liability for storage and removal costs.
The last-registered owner of an abandoned vehicle shall be liable to the
municipality for the costs of removal and storage of such vehicle. (Neb. RS
60-1909)
§ 377-1.10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-17-2000 by Ord.
No. 46-00; 6-15-2010 by Ord. No. 13-10]
Any person who violates the provisions of this article is guilty of an offense.
§ 377-1.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-1.10
1:603

ARTICLE II
Wrecked Vehicles
[Adopted as Ch. 6, Art. 3, § 6-360, of the 1976 Code; amended
7-2-1992 by Ord. No. 18-92; 8-15-2006 by Ord. No. 18-06]
§ 377-2.1. Nuisance; presumptions.
Any nonoperating, wrecked, junked or partially dismantled vehicle or any
vehicle or parts thereof which have lost their identity, character, utility or
serviceability which is allowed to remain on any property within the City
limits and its zoning jurisdiction longer than seven calendar days is hereby
declared a nuisance, and is subject to removal as provided by this article.
The lack of vehicle insurance and a current license or registration shall be
presumptive evidence that such vehicle has lost its utility or serviceability.
§ 377-2.2. Nuisances prohibited; exceptions.347
It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in charge or control of any
property within the City or its zoning jurisdiction to allow any motor vehicle
or parts thereof, as described in § 377-2.1, to remain on such property
longer than seven calendar days; provided that this section shall not apply
to any motor vehicle or part thereof kept in an enclosed building on the
premises of any business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner,
when necessary to the lawful operation of such business enterprise, any
vehicle which is shielded from the general public view by a cover that is
manufactured for vehicle coverage so as to make it completely shielded
from sight, or any vehicle which qualifies as an historic or special interest
vehicle as defined in Neb. RS 60-333 and 60-351. No vehicle cover with a
tear of six inches or greater or hole of six inches in diameter or greater shall
be deemed to be in compliance with this section.
§ 377-2.3. Investigation of complaints; issuance of citations.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to investigate all violations or
complaints relating to this article, and the Police Department is authorized
to issue a citation to any person deemed to be in violation of this article.
§ 377-2.4. Investigation by City Administrator.
As an additional remedy, the City Administrator or his/her authorized
representative may investigate any complaints relating to the maintenance
of a nuisance as defined in this article.
§ 377-2.5. Notification of owner.
Whenever the City Administrator shall determine that any motor vehicle or
part thereof is a nuisance as defined in this article, he/she may notify by
certified mail the owner or person in charge or control of the property upon
347. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 377-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-2.5
1:605
which the nuisance is being maintained of his/her determination and issue
an order commanding such person to remove the nuisance within seven
calendar days from the date the certified letter was received and signed for
by the owner or the person in charge or control. Refusal or nondelivery of
the certified mail shall not abate the seven days.
§ 377-2.6. Failure to remove; abatement by City.
If the owner or person in charge or control of said property fails or refuses
to comply with the order to remove the nuisance within seven calendar days
of acceptance of the notice thereof, the City Administrator shall direct the
appropriate City officials to remove the vehicles.
§ 377-2.7. Failure to pay costs of removal and storage.
In the event the owner, agent, occupant or person in possession, charge or
control of the real property shall fail to pay the costs of removal and storage,
the City may assess the actual cost thereof against the real property in
the same manner as other special taxes for improvements are levied and
assessed in an amount as determined by the resolution of the City Council.
§ 377-2.8. Sale of unclaimed property.
If such removed property is unclaimed after five days from the date of
removal, it may be sold at public auction and the proceeds applied to the
costs of removal. Any person claiming such property shall be required to
pay all costs incurred, including storage.
§ 377-2.9. Violations and penalties.348
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
348. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 377-2.5 SEWARD CODE § 377-2.9
1:606
Chapter 382
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 303.
Streets, sidewalks and municipal
property — See Ch. 340.
Abandoned and wrecked vehicles — See Ch.
377.
Zoning and subdivision — See Ch. 410.
§ 377-2.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-2.9
1:607

ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 382-1.1. Terms defined. [Amended 9-4-1984 by Ord. No. 24-84;
8-16-1994 by Ord. No. 49-94349]
A. The words and phrases used in this chapter, pertaining to motor
vehicles and traffic regulations, shall be construed as defined in
Chapter 60, Article 6 of the Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, as now
existing or hereafter amended. If not defined in the designated statute,
the word or phrase shall have its common meaning. (Neb. RS 60-605)
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALLEY — A highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of
lots or buildings and not intended for the purpose of through vehicular
traffic. (Neb. RS 60-607)
ARTERIAL HIGHWAY — A highway primarily for through traffic, usually
on a continuous route. (Neb. RS 60-609)
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Such Fire Department
vehicles, police vehicles, rescue vehicles, and ambulances as are
publicly owned, such other publicly or privately owned vehicles as
are designated by the Director of Motor Vehicles, and such publicly
owned military vehicles of the National Guard as are designated by the
Adjutant General pursuant to Neb. RS 55-133. (Neb. RS 60-610)
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT — Includes that portion of the
municipality embraced within and the area of public streets
enumerated as follows:
CROSSWALK —
(1) Jackson Avenue, from 4th Street to 8th Street.
(2) Fourth Street, from Jackson Avenue to South Street.
(3) South Street, from 4th Street to 8th Street.
(4) Eighth Street, from South Street to Jackson Avenue.
That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of
such roadway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs,
from the edge of the roadway; or
(1)
Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
designated by competent authority and marked for pedestrian
crossing by lines, signs, or other devices.
(Neb. RS 60-616)
(2)
349. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-1.1
1:609
DRIVER — See "operator."
FOUR-LANE STREET — A street constructed to provide for four driving
lanes, two on 1/2 of the street for vehicular traffic moving in the same
direction in said two lanes and also two lanes on the opposite 1/2 of
the highway for vehicular traffic moving in the same direction in said
two lanes with vehicular traffic in 1/2 of said street but traveling in a
direction opposite to vehicles traveling in the other 1/2 of said street.
HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary limits of any
street, road, avenue, boulevard, or way which is publicly maintained
when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of
vehicular travel. (Neb. RS 60-624)
INTERSECTION or STREET INTERSECTION — The area embraced
within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines or, if there
are no lateral curblines, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of
two or more highways which join one another at, or approximately at,
right angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. When a
highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every
crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event
such intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more
apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be
regarded as a separate intersection. The junction of an alley with a
highway shall not constitute an intersection. (Neb. RS 60-627)
MEDIAN — That part of a divided highway, such as a physical barrier or
clearly indicated dividing section or space, so constructed as to impede
vehicular traffic across or within such barrier, section, or space or to
divide such highway into two roadways for vehicular travel in opposite
directions.
MOTOR VEHICLES — Every self-propelled land vehicle, not operated
upon rails, except bicycles, mopeds, self-propelled chairs used by
persons who are disabled, and electric personal assistive mobility
devices. (Neb. RS 60-638)
MUFFLER — A device consisting of a series of chamber or baffle plates,
or other mechanical design for the purpose of receiving exhaust gas
from an internal combustion engine, and effective in reducing noise.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS OR DEVICES — All official traffic signs,
markings, and devices, other than mechanical or electrical signals, not
inconsistent with this chapter, placed or erected by authority of the
governing body for the purpose of directing, warning, or regulating
traffic. (Neb. RS 60-670 and 60-671)
OPERATOR — Any person who operates, drives, or is in actual physical
control of a vehicle. (Neb. RS 60-642)
OWNER — A person other than a lienholder, having the property in or
title to a vehicle, including a person entitled to the use and possession
§ 382-1.1 SEWARD CODE § 382-1.1
1:610
of a vehicle subject to a security interest in another person, but
excluding a lessee under a lease not intended as security. (Neb. RS
60-644)
PARK or PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. (Neb. RS
60-645)
PEDESTRIAN — Any person afoot. (Neb. RS 60-647)
POLICE OFFICER — Every officer of the Police Department of the
municipality or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or
make arrests for the violation of traffic regulation. (Neb. RS 60-646)
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT — Includes the residential districts as
adopted by ordinance and as appear upon the Zoning Map of the City
of Seward. (Neb. RS 60-654)
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed
in a lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian
approaching under such circumstances of direction, speed, and
proximity as to give rise to danger of collision unless one grants
precedence to the other. (Neb. RS 60-655)
SIDEWALK — That portion of a highway between the curblines, or the
lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for
use by pedestrians. (Neb. RS 60-662)
STOP or STOPPING — (Neb. RS 60-667)
STORAGE OR TURNING LANE — A lane at or near the center of a fourlane
street as it approaches an intersection in addition to the two lanes
provided for moving traffic and to the left thereof providing sufficient
space for entry of one or more vehicles for the purpose of turning left
from any said storage lane and to the right thereof providing sufficient
space for entry of one or more vehicles for the purpose of turning right
from any said storage lane at any intersection which said storage lane
approaches.
STREET — See "highway."
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices
moved solely by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails
or tracks. (Neb. RS 60-676)
Stop, when required, shall mean a complete cessation of
movement.
(1)
Stop or stopping, when prohibited, shall mean any halting, even
momentarily, of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
the directions of a peace officer or traffic control device.
(2)
§ 382-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-1.1
1:611

ARTICLE II
Municipal Traffic Regulations
§ 382-2.1. Turning at intersections controlled by automatic signal
systems.
No vehicle shall turn at any intersection where an automatic signal system
is in operation except when such signal system is displaying a green light;
provided that vehicles may turn on a red signal when in compliance with the
provisions of this article governing such turns. No vehicle shall be turned
so as to proceed in the opposite direction at any intersection where an
automatic signal system is in operation. (Neb. RS 60-6, 119; 60-6, 123)
§ 382-2.2. Obedience to automatic signal system.
At each intersection where an automatic signal system is in operation, all
vehicular and pedestrian traffic crossing such street intersection shall be
governed by such automatic signal system. The display of the red signal
light shall be a signal for traffic to stop outside of the street intersection.
The display of the yellow signal light shall announce that traffic be at
attention to stop when the red light is displayed; and the green signal light
shall be a signal for traffic to promptly move forward. It shall be unlawful
for any person to violate any such signal. (Neb. RS 60-6, 119; 60-6, 123)
§ 382-2.3. Right turn on red.
Except where a traffic-control device is in place prohibiting a turn, vehicles
facing a steady red signal may cautiously enter the intersection to make
a right turn after stopping. Such turning vehicle shall yield the right-ofway
to pedestrians lawfully within the adjacent crosswalk and to other
vehicular traffic lawfully using the intersection. The governing body of
the municipality has the authority to prohibit turning right on red at any
intersection within the municipality where it deems such a prohibition
necessary; provided that those intersections where turning right on red
is prohibited shall bear signs to that effect placed and printed in such
a manner so as to be conspicuous from a vehicle about to enter the
intersection. (Neb. RS 60-6, 123; 60-680)
§ 382-2.4. Loading zones.
The governing body may, by resolution, designate any portion of a street as
a loading zone and shall provide for appropriate signs or markings when
such street has been so designated. (Neb. RS 60-680)
§ 382-2.5. Truck routes.
The governing body may, by resolution, designate certain streets in the
municipality that trucks shall travel upon, and it shall be unlawful for
persons operating such trucks to travel on other streets than those
designated for trucks, unless to pick up or deliver goods, wares, or
merchandise, and in that event, the operator of such truck shall return to
§ 382-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-2.5
1:613
such truck routes as soon as possible in traveling through or about the
municipality. The governing body shall cause notices to be posted, or shall
erect signs indicating the streets so designated as truck routes. (Neb. RS
16-209, 60-681)
§ 382-2.6. One-way traffic.
The governing body may, by resolution, provide for one-way travel in any
street or alley located in the municipality and shall provide for appropriate
signs and markings when said streets have been so designated by
resolution. (Neb. RS 60-680)
§ 382-2.7. Emergency snow routes.
The governing body may, by resolution, designate any street as a snow route
and shall provide for appropriate signs or markings when such street has
been so designated. (Neb. RS 60-680)
§ 382-2.8. Traffic lanes.
The governing body may, by resolution, mark lanes for traffic on street
pavements at such places as it may deem advisable. (Neb. RS 60-680)
§ 382-2.9. Arterial streets.
The governing body may, by resolution, designate any street or portion
thereof as an arterial street and shall provide for appropriate signs or
markings when such street has been so designated. (Neb. RS 60-680)
§ 382-2.10. U-turns.
No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction, except
at a street intersection. No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in
the opposite direction at any intersection where an automatic signal is in
operation, or where a sign is posted indicating that U-turns are prohibited.
(Neb. RS 60-680)
§ 382-2.11. Turning signals.350
A. A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given continuously
during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before
turning. The signals herein required shall be given either by means of
the hand and forearm, or by a signal device of a type approved by the
Department of Roads.
B. The hand and forearm signals herein required shall be given from the
left side of the vehicle in the following manner:
(1) Stop or decreased speed: hand and forearm extended downward.
350. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-2.5 SEWARD CODE § 382-2.11
1:614
§ 382-2.12. Turning generally.
Vehicles turning to the right into an intersecting street shall approach such
intersection in the lane of traffic nearest to the right-hand side of the
highway and must turn the corner as near the right-hand curb as possible
to keep between the curb to the right and the center of the intersection
of the two streets. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left
shall approach such center line of the highway, and in turning shall pass
as near as possible to the center of the intersection, passing as closely as
practicable to the right thereof before turning such vehicle to the left. For
the purposes of this section, the "center of the intersection" shall mean the
meeting point of the medial lines of the highways intersecting one another.
(Neb. RS 60-6, 159)
§ 382-2.13. Turning with caution.351
The operator of a vehicle shall, before stopping, turning, or changing the
course of such vehicle, see that there is sufficient space to make such
movement in safety. A signal of intention to turn or move right or left when
required shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet
traveled by the vehicle before turning. Every driver of a vehicle shall leave a
safe distance of no less than three feet clearance, when applicable, to avoid
colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give an audible
signal when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing
any child or obviously confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway.
(Neb. RS 60-6, 109; 60-6, 161; 60-180)
§ 382-2.14. Crossing median.
No person or vehicle shall use or travel over or on any medians for any
purpose. No vehicle shall enter or traverse any opening provided in any
median for a railroad track crossing.
§ 382-2.15. Parking upon four-lane streets prohibited.
No vehicle shall park or stop for any purpose whatsoever upon a four-lane
street, or upon the right-of-way of such street.
§ 382-2.16. Left turn prohibited.
No vehicle shall turn left from the right traveling lane of either half of the
traveling portions of a four-lane street.
(2) Left turn: hand and forearm extended horizontally.
(3) Right turn: hand and forearm extended upward.
(Neb. RS 60-60, 161 through 60-6, 163)
351. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-2.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-2.17
1:615
§ 382-2.17. Proper lane for turning.
No vehicle shall make a left turn at any intersection on a four-lane street
without first entering the storage or turning lane where a storage or turning
lane is provided at any such intersection.
§ 382-2.18. Changing lanes.
All traffic entering a four-lane street shall travel on either of the right two
lanes provided for travel. Before movement of a vehicle from one lane to the
other lane for any purpose, including passing, the operator of such vehicle
shall give adequate signal of such movement. Adequate signal may be given
by use of an automatic turn signal indicating left turn or right turn, or by
arm signal indicating left turn or right turn.
§ 382-2.19. Right-of-way. [Amended 7-25-1994 by Ord. No. 36-94]
A. When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection at approximately
the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the rightof-
way to the vehicle on the right when the paths of such vehicles
intersect and there is danger of a collision, unless otherwise directed by
a Municipal Policeman stationed at the intersection.
B. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an
intersection, or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the
right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction
which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
C. The driver of a vehicle on any street shall yield the right-of-way to a
pedestrian crossing such street within any clearly marked crosswalk, or
at any regular pedestrian crossing at the end of a block where the
movement of traffic is being regulated by traffic officers or traffic
direction devices. Every pedestrian crossing a street at any point other
than a pedestrian crossing, crosswalk, or intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles upon the street.
D. The driver of a vehicle emerging from or entering an alley, building,
private road, or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
approaching on any sidewalk.
E. The driver of a vehicle entering a municipal street from a private road
or drive shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such
streets.
F. The driver of a vehicle upon a street shall yield the right-of-way to
authorized emergency vehicles when the latter are operated upon
official business and the drivers thereof make proper use of visual or
audible signals.
(Neb. RS 60-6, 146 through 60-6, 154)
§ 382-2.17 SEWARD CODE § 382-2.20
1:616
§ 382-2.20. Overtaking vehicles.
The driver of a vehicle about to be overtaken and passed by another vehicle
approaching from the rear shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle. (Neb. RS 60-6, 133)
§ 382-2.21. Slow-moving vehicles.
Vehicles moving slowly shall keep as close as possible to the curb on the
right, allowing more swiftly moving vehicles free passage to their left.
Vehicles in motion shall be kept between the curb at the right and the center
of the street. (Neb. RS 60-6, 133; 60-680)
§ 382-2.22. Emergency vehicles.
Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle, every vehicle
within one block of the route of such emergency vehicle shall immediately
stop; except at the time they are on or crossing a street intersection, in
which event such vehicle shall drive clear of the street intersection and
then stop. Every vehicle along the route of such emergency vehicle shall
immediately move to a position as near the right-hand curb as possible
and remain there until such authorized emergency vehicle or vehicles have
passed; provided that said vehicles are operated on official business and the
drivers thereof make use of proper visual or audible signals. (Neb. RS 60-6,
151)
§ 382-2.23. Position of vehicle on highway.
Upon all highways of sufficient width, one-way streets excepted, the driver
of a vehicle shall drive the same on the right half of the roadway. In passing
or meeting other vehicles, drivers shall give each other at least half of the
main traveled portion of the roadway. (Neb. RS 60-6, 131)
§ 382-2.24. Change of direction; vehicles traveling in opposite
directions.352
No vehicle shall cross from one side of the street to the other except at
a street intersection; provided that upon appropriate signal being given
indicating a change of direction, vehicles may cross from one side of the
street to another when entering or departing from an alley entrance, filling
station or garage. Vehicles moving in opposite directions must pass each
other by keeping to the right, each giving to the other an equal portion of
the street.
§ 382-2.25. Position of vehicle on highway; passing.353
(Neb. RS 60-6, 136)
352. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
353. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-2.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-2.25
1:617
§ 382-2.26. Backing.355
The driver of a vehicle shall not back such vehicle on any roadway unless
such movement can be made with safety and without interfering with other
traffic. The driver of a vehicle shall not back such vehicle upon any roadway
or shoulder of any freeway. (Neb. RS 60-6, 169; 60-680)
§ 382-2.27. Crosswalks.
The governing body may, by resolution, establish and maintain, by
appropriate devices, markers, or lines upon the street, crosswalks, at
intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the
street, and at such other places as it may deem necessary. (Neb. RS 60-680)
§ 382-2.28. Signs and signals; compliance required.
The governing body may, by resolution, provide for the placing of stop signs,
or other signs, signals, standards, or mechanical devices in any street or
alley under the municipality's jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating or
prohibiting traffic thereon. Such resolution shall describe the portion of the
street or alley wherein traffic is to be regulated or prohibited; the regulation
A. No driver shall overtake and pass another vehicle or drive to the left of
the center of the roadway whenever:
(1) He or she approaches the crest of a grade or is upon a curve in the
highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance
as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach
from the opposite direction;
(2) He or she approaches within 100 feet of or traverses any
intersection or railroad grade crossing;
(3) The view is obstructed when he or she approaches within 100 feet
of any bridge, viaduct, or tunnel; or
(4) The section of roadway is designated as a no-passing zone under
Neb. RS 60-6, 137.
B. The limitations imposed by Subsection A of this section shall not apply:
(1) Upon a one-way roadway;
(2) Under the conditions described in Subdivision (1)(b) of Neb. RS
60-6, 131; or
(3) To the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private
road, or driveway unless otherwise prohibited by signs.354
354. Editor's Note: Original § 5-226 of the 1976 Code, Position of vehicle on highway; slow
vehicles, which immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
355. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-2.25 SEWARD CODE § 382-2.28
1:618
or prohibition; the location where such sign, signal, standard or mechanical
device shall be placed; and the hours when such regulation or prohibition
shall be effective. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect, or
refuse to comply with such regulation or prohibition. (Neb. RS 60-6, 119
through 60-6, 121; 60-680)
§ 382-2.29. Stop signs.
Every person operating any vehicle shall, upon approaching any stop sign
erected in accordance with the resolution prescribed heretofore, cause such
vehicle to come to a complete stop before entering or crossing any street,
highway, or railroad crossing. The vehicle operator shall stop at a marked
stop line, or, if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk; but if
neither is indicated, then as near the right-of-way line of the intersecting
roadway as possible. (Neb. RS 60-6, 119 through 60-6, 121, 60-680)
§ 382-2.30. Interference with signs and signals prohibited.
[Amended 12-19-1989 by Ord. No. 45-89356]
It shall be unlawful for any person to, without lawful authority, attempt to or
in fact willfully or maliciously deface, injure, remove, obstruct, knock down
or interfere with any official traffic sign or signal, traffic control device, or
traffic control surveillance device. (Neb. RS 60-6, 129; 60-6, 130)
§ 382-2.31. Emergency routes; emergency prohibitions. [Amended
10-19-1993 by Ord. No. 38-93]
A. The following streets located within the City are hereby designated as
emergency routes:
Name of Street Location
2nd Street Blue River Bridge to Pinewood Avenue
14th Street Highway 34 to Seward Street
Ash Street Columbia Avenue to Highway 15
Columbia Avenue Dike at W/WWTW Plant to 1285 north of
Pinewood Avenue
Highway 15 Burlington Northern Railroad tracks to
Pinewood Avenue
Highway 34 Blue River Bridge to Plum Creek Bridge
Hillcrest Drive 1/2 block west of 12th Street to 1/2 block east
of Eastridge Drive
Karol Kay Boulevard Pinewood Avenue to north property line of Plum
Creek Park
Moffitt Street Locust Avenue to 10th Street
Pinewood Avenue Karol Kay Boulevard to Highway 15
356. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-2.28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-2.31
1:619
Name of Street Location
Seward Street Plumb Creek Bridge to 14th Street
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or allow to remained parked
any motor vehicle at any time on an emergency route as designated
under Subsection A after an emergency has been declared by the Mayor
or his/her designated representative.
C. Streets which are emergency routes shall be designated by ordinance.
The City shall place appropriate signs or other traffic control devices
indicating the existence of such emergency routes. A designation of any
street, avenue, road or highway, or portion thereof as an emergency
route shall in no way affect any previous designation of that street,
avenue, road or highway for any other purposes.
D. Whenever the Mayor, or his/her designated representative, shall find,
on the basis of falling snow, sleet or freezing rain, or on the basis of an
official forecast by the United States Weather Bureau, of snow, sleet, or
freezing rain, or that other weather conditions, such as tornado or
violent electrical storms, will make it necessary that motor vehicle
traffic be expedited and that parking on City emergency routes be
prohibited or restricted for snow plowing and/or other purposes, the
Mayor or his/her designated representative may place into effect a
parking prohibition on all emergency routes by declaring that an
emergency condition exists. In such declaration of emergency
conditions, the Mayor or his/her designated representative shall state
the time that said emergency shall be in effect, and from the time so
designated it shall be unlawful to park or allow to remain parked any
motor vehicle on emergency routes. Once in effect, such parking
prohibition imposed shall remain in effect until terminated by
declaration of the Mayor or his/her designated representative;
provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to
permit parking at any time or place where it is forbidden by any other
provision of law.
E. Whenever the Mayor or his/her designated representative shall find on
the basis of accumulated snow, falling snow, sleet, freezing rain, on the
basis of an official forecast by the United States Weather Bureau, of
snow, sleet or freezing rain, or by other weather conditions such as
tornado or violent electrical storms that conditions make it necessary
that parking on local and residential streets be prohibited or restricted
for snow plowing and/or other purposes, he or she may put into effect a
parking prohibition on parts of or on all local and residential streets by
declaring that parking is prohibited on one side of the local and
residential streets, designating either the odd or even address
numbered side, at his or her discretion, and by declaring that parking is
prohibited within the turnaround area of a circular area of a cul-de-sac.
In such declaration, the Mayor or his/her designated representative
shall state the date and time on which such parking prohibition shall
take effect. The prohibition shall remain in effect until terminated by
§ 382-2.31 SEWARD CODE § 382-2.31
1:620
announcement of the Mayor or his/her designated representative, who
may then declare that there shall be in effect a parking prohibition
on the opposite side of those local and residential streets designated
above, which prohibition shall remain in effect until terminated by
announcement of the Mayor or his/her designated representative.
While the prohibition is in effect, it shall be unlawful for any person
to park or allow to remain parked any vehicle on any side of a street
whereon parking is prohibited.
F. Whenever any emergency has been declared pursuant to this article, it
shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle on an
emergency route to allow such vehicle to become stalled or stuck for
any reason. Whenever a motor vehicle becomes stalled or stuck for any
reason, whether or not in violation of this article, on any emergency
route on which there is a parking prohibition in effect, the person
operating such vehicle shall take immediate action to have the vehicle
towed or pushed off the roadway of such emergency route, either onto
the nearest cross street which is not an emergency route or other
appropriate location. No person shall abandon or leave his vehicle in
the roadway of an emergency route, except for the purpose of securing
assistance during the actual time necessary to go to a nearby telephone
or to a nearby garage, gasoline station, or other place of assistance and
return without delay.
G. Impounding of vehicles in violation.
(1) All members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to
remove or have removed a vehicle from a street to another place or
location on a street or to a lot, garage, storage yard, or other
similar facility designated by the Police Department when:
(a) The vehicle is parked on an emergency route on which a
parking prohibition is in effect.
(b) The vehicle is stalled on an emergency route on which there is
a parking prohibition in effect and the person who is operating
said vehicle does not appear to be removing it in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
(c) The vehicle is parked on any street in violation of any parking
prohibition or provision of law contained in this article and is
interfering or about to interfere with snow removal operations
or any other weather conditions.
(2) The Police Department may cause such vehicles to be removed to a
private lot, garage, storage yard, or other similar facility, and such
vehicle shall not be released therefrom except upon payment by the
owner of the vehicle to the person or persons in charge of the lot,
garage, storage yard or other similar facility for the cost of towing,
and a receipt for such fees shall be issued to the owner of the
vehicle. It shall be the duty of the person or persons in charge of
the lot, garage, storage yard or other similar facility designated by
§ 382-2.31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-2.31
1:621
§ 382-2.32. Engine compression brakes. [Amended 11-17-1998 by
Ord. No. 47-98; 1-16-2001 by Ord. No. 1-01]
It shall be unlawful for anyone to use engine compression brakes within
the City limits of the City of Seward. In the event that anyone violates
this section and is convicted of the same, he or she shall be fined in an
amount not more than the sum of $100. Signs shall be posted on each of
the highways entering the City limits giving notice that engine braking is
prohibited.
the Police Department to keep a record of the name of the owner
of all vehicles towed in under the provisions hereof, together with
the registration number of each vehicle, and the nature and
circumstances of each violation, and the amount of fees collected
hereunder, and to deliver a report of each transaction to the Chief
of Police weekly.
H. The Mayor or his/her designated representative shall cause each
declaration of an emergency made by him/her to be publicly announced
by means of broadcast or telecast from broadcasting stations with a
normal operating range covering the City, and he/she may cause such
declaration to be further announced in newspapers of general
circulation whenever feasible or by other communication methods in
current use by the City. Each announcement shall describe the action
taken by the Mayor or his/her designated representative, including the
time it became or will become effective, and shall specify the streets or
areas affected. The Mayor or his/her designated representative shall
make or cause to be made a record of each time and date when any
declaration is announced to the public by issuing an executive order as
soon after the declaration of an emergency as is feasible. Whenever the
Mayor or his/her designated representative shall find that some or all of
the conditions which gave rise to a parking prohibition placed in effect
pursuant to the provisions of this article no longer exist, he/she may
declare the prohibition terminated, in whole or in part, effective
immediately upon announcement or at a later specified time.357
I. Any provision of this article which becomes effective by declaration of
the Mayor or his/her designated representative upon the occurrence of
an emergency, while temporarily in effect, takes precedence over other
conflicting provisions of law normally in effect, except that it shall not
take precedence over provisions of law relating to traffic accidents,
emergency vehicles, or emergency traffic directions by a police officer.
357. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-2.31 SEWARD CODE § 382-2.32
1:622
ARTICLE III
Prohibitions and Enforcement
§ 382-3.1. Littering.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drop, or cause to be left, upon
any municipal highway, street, or alley, except at places designated by the
governing body, any rubbish, debris, or waste, and any person so doing shall
be guilty of littering. (Neb. RS 39-311)
§ 382-3.2. Glass; pointed objects.
No person shall throw, cast, lay, or place upon any street any thorns, nails,
tacks, glass, bottles, window glass, or other articles made of, or containing,
glass, and in case of an accident causing the breaking of any glass upon
any street, the owner or person in charge of such glass, or the person
responsible for such breakage, shall at once remove, or cause the same to
be removed, from the street. (Neb. RS 39-311)358
§ 382-3.3. Unauthorized display of signs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or display upon or in view of
any street any unofficial sign, signal, or device which purports to be, is an
imitation of, or resembles an official traffic sign or signal which attempts to
direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view, or interferes with
the effectiveness of any official sign or signal. Every such prohibited sign,
signal, or device is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and any police
officer is hereby empowered to remove the same, or cause it to be removed,
without notice. (Neb. RS 60-6, 127)
§ 382-3.4. Siren signaling devices.
Siren signaling devices shall not be used on any vehicle except those
operated by the Police Department, Fire Department, the Sheriff, and
authorized utility vehicles when on emergency calls. No person shall make
or cause to be made any unnecessary noise with any signaling device or use
the same except as a road signal.
§ 382-3.5. Display of merchandise in or blocking parking zone.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any parking stall, lane, or space for
the display of merchandise, goods, or wares, or for any purpose whatsoever,
except the parking of motor vehicles; and no parking stall, lane, or space
shall be blocked or barricaded by any person; provided, however, that
parking areas may be temporarily blocked, used, or barricaded for
construction and other necessary purposes, by obtaining special permission
therefor from the Municipal Police.
358. Editor's Note: Original § 5-303 of the 1976 Code, Signs; defacing or interfering with,
which immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-3.6
1:623
§ 382-3.6. Obstructing intersections prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, plant, construct, maintain or
permit to exist any hedge, tree, bush, sign, fence, building or any other
natural or artificial obstruction to vision of drivers of motor vehicles
approaching on intersecting streets, whether said obstruction is on the
street, the street parking, or on the private property of such person. When
such obstruction is found to exist, the Municipal Police shall notify the
owner or occupant of said premises to forthwith remove the same; and in
the event the owner or occupant shall fail to remove the same within five
days of such notice, the City may remove the obstruction at the expense of
the owner or occupant of said premises.
§ 382-3.7. Service charge for parking camping vehicles in City
parks.359
A charge shall be made upon the owner, renter, lessee or the person
otherwise having possession or in charge of a trailer or vehicle designed
and used for camping and camping living quarters for parking in the City
Park. For the purpose of said service charge, a day shall consist of one
twenty-four-hour period and the first seven days need not be consecutive.
The Mayor and Council may by resolution increase or decrease the service
charge and increase or decrease the number of days after which a service
charge shall be made.
§ 382-3.8. Speed limits.360
No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street, alley, or other place
at a rate of speed greater than 25 miles per hour within the residential
district and 20 miles per hour within the Central Business District, unless a
different rate of speed is specifically permitted by ordinance. In no instance
shall a person drive a vehicle on a highway at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions. Where a different maximum
speed is set by ordinance, appropriate signs shall be posted. (Neb. RS 60-6,
186; 60-6, 190)
§ 382-3.9. Speed near schools. [Amended 1-19-1982 by Ord. No.
1-82; 10-17-1989 by Ord. No. 38-89]
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, when passing premises on
which school grounds are located and which are used for school purposes,
during school recess or while children are going to or leaving school during
the opening or closing hours, to drive said vehicle at a rate of speed in
excess of 20 miles per hour past said premises, unless a greater speed is
allowed by resolution of the governing body; and such driver shall stop at all
stop signs located at or near such school premises; and it shall be unlawful
359. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
360. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-3.6 SEWARD CODE § 382-3.9
1:624
for such driver to make a U-turn at any intersection where such stop signs
are located at or near such school premises. (Neb. RS 60-9, 190)
§ 382-3.10. Electronic speed detection. [Amended 10-18-1983 by
Ord. No. 2-8-83]
§ 382-3.11. Driving under influence of controlled substances.
[Amended 9-19-1978 by Ord. No. 1139; 9-21-1982 by Ord. No. 2682;
11-3-1987 by Ord. No. 27-87]
A. Determinations made regarding the speed of any motor vehicle based
upon the visual observation of any law enforcement officer may be
corroborated by the use of radio microwaves or other electronic device.
The results of such radio microwave or other electronic speed
measurement may be accepted as competent evidence of the speed of
such motor vehicle in any court or legal proceeding when the speed of
the vehicle is at issue. Before the municipality may offer in evidence the
results of such radio microwave or other electronic speed measurement
for the purpose of establishing the speed of any motor vehicle, the
municipality shall prove the following:
(1) The measuring device was in proper working order at the time of
conducting the measurement;
(2) The measuring device was being operated in such a manner and
under such conditions so as to allow a minimum possibility of
distortion or outside interference;
(3) The person operating such device and interpreting such
measurement was qualified by training and experience to properly
test and operate the device; and
(4) The operator conducted external tests of accuracy upon the
measuring device, within a reasonable time both prior to and
subsequent to an arrest being made, and the measuring device was
found to be in proper working order.
B. The driver of any such motor vehicle may be arrested without a warrant
under the authority herein granted if the arresting officer is in uniform
or displays his or her badge of authority; provided that such officer shall
have observed the recording of the speed of such motor vehicle by the
radio microwaves or other electronic device or had received a radio
message from the officer who observed the speed of the motor vehicle
recorded by the radio microwaves or other electronic device. In the
event of an arrest based on such a message, such radio message must
have been dispatched immediately after the speed of the motor vehicle
had been recorded, and must include a description of the vehicle and
the recorded speed.
(Neb. RS 60-6, 192)
§ 382-3.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-3.11
1:625
§ 382-3.12. Negligent driving.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in such a
manner as to cause unnecessary noise, spinning or squealing of tires, skids,
slides, abrupt turns or sways or in any other manner so as to indicate a want
of ordinary care and caution that a person of ordinary prudence would use
under like circumstances. (Neb. RS 60-4, 182)
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or be in actual physical
control of, any motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic
liquor, or of any drug or when that person has 0.08% or more by weight
of alcohol in his or her body fluid as shown by chemical analysis of his or
her blood, breath, or urine. Any person who operates or has in his or
her actual physical control a motor vehicle upon a public highway shall
be deemed to have given his or her consent to submit to a chemical test
of his or her blood, breath, or urine for the purpose of determining the
amount of alcohol content in his or her body fluid. Any duly authorized
law enforcement officer may require such person to submit to said
chemical test when such person has been arrested:361
(1) For any offense arising out of acts alleged to have been committed
while the person was driving or in actual physical control of a
motor vehicle if the officer has reasonable grounds to believe that
such person was under the influence of alcoholic liquor at the time
of the offense; or
(2) For refusing to submit to a preliminary test of his or her breath for
alcohol content if the officer has reasonable grounds to believe that
such person has alcohol in his or her body; or
(3) When such preliminary breath test results indicate an alcohol
content of 0.08 of one gram or more by weight of alcohol per 210
liters of his or her breath.
B. Any person who refuses to submit to such preliminary breath test shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person who refuses to submit to a
chemical blood, breath, or urine test as required above or who shall
operate or be in actual physical control of any motor vehicle while
under the influence of alcoholic liquor or of any drug or while in a
condition described in Subsection A of this section shall be deemed
guilty of a crime. Upon conviction of any person for a violation of this
section, there shall be assessed as part of the court costs the fee
charged by any physician or any agency administering tests pursuant to
a permit issued in accordance with Neb. RS 60-6, 201, for the tests
administered and the analysis thereof if such test was actually made.
(Neb. RS 60-6, 196 through 60-6, 211.11)
361. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-3.11 SEWARD CODE § 382-3.13
1:626
§ 382-3.13. Backing.
It shall be unlawful for any person to back a motor vehicle on the municipal
streets except to park in or to remove the vehicle from a permitted parking
position, to move the vehicle from a driveway, or to back to the curb for
unloading where such unloading is permitted; provided that a vehicle shall
be backed only when such movement can be made in safety and in no case
shall the distance of the backing exceed 1 1/2 lengths of the vehicle. (Neb.
RS 60-6, 169; 60-680)
§ 382-3.14. Unnecessary stopping.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop any vehicle on any public street
or alley, other than in permitted parking areas, except when such a stop is
necessary for emergency situations, to comply with traffic control devices
and regulations, or to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians or to other
vehicles. (Neb. RS 60-6, 166; 60-680)
§ 382-3.15. Passing at intersections.
The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction, while traversing a street intersection, if
such passing requires such overtaking vehicle to drive to the left of the
center of the street. (Neb. RS 60-6, 136)
§ 382-3.16. Vehicle being overtaken.
The driver of a vehicle about to be overtaken and passed by another vehicle
shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle. (Neb. RS 60-6, 133)
§ 382-3.17. Driving abreast.
Two or more vehicles shall not be driven abreast except when passing, or
when traversing a multi-lane or one-way street; provided that motorcycles
may be driven no more than two abreast in a single lane. (Neb. RS 60-6,
139; 60-6, 308)
§ 382-3.18. Distance between vehicles.
The operator of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than
is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of the vehicles
and the traffic and condition of the street. (Neb. RS 39-629)362
§ 382-3.19. Overcrowded vehicles.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle when it is so loaded or when there is
in the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three, as to obstruct
362. Editor's Note: Original § 5-320 of the 1976 Code, Following fire apparatus, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-3.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-3.19
1:627
the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or to interfere with
the driver's control over the driving mechanism of such vehicle. (Neb. RS
60-6, 179)
§ 382-3.20. Dragging ropes or chains.
No person shall permit any rope, strap, chain or other article to drop
behind any vehicle while in use on the streets, except persons operating
vehicles transporting gasoline, benzene or other flammable materials. (Neb.
RS 60-680)
§ 382-3.21. Driving over new pavement.
No person shall drive any vehicle over or across any newly laid pavement
in any public street, across or around which pavement there is a barrier or
over or near which there is a person or a sign warning persons not to drive
over or across such pavement. No person shall drive a vehicle over, against
or upon any traffic barrier or sign stating that the street or alley is closed.
§ 382-3.22. Riding outside vehicle.
No person shall permit any other person to ride on the running board,
hood, top, or fenders of any motor vehicle; nor shall any person ride on the
running board, hood, top, or fenders of any motor vehicle. (Neb. RS 60-6,
179; 60-680)
§ 382-3.23. Driving in sidewalk space.
No motor vehicle or livestock shall be driven or ridden within any sidewalk
space, except a permanent or temporary driveway. (Neb. RS 16-210; 60-6,
178)
§ 382-3.24. Emerging from alley or driveway; crossing sidewalks.
A. All vehicles, before crossing a sidewalk when emerging from a garage,
alley, filling station or other place within the Central Business District,
shall come to a complete stop, and, after giving sufficient warning, shall
proceed slowly while crossing such sidewalk or leaving such garage,
alley, filling station or other place. The term "slowly" shall be construed
to mean such rate of speed as is reasonable and proper under the
circumstances and the condition of the street and the traffic thereon.363
B. Every driver of any vehicle when approaching or about to drive over any
sidewalk or sidewalk space, except at a street intersection or at an alley
intersection, shall bring such vehicle to a complete stop and shall then
proceed in a careful and cautious manner, having due regard for the use
of such sidewalk or sidewalk space by pedestrians.
363. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-3.19 SEWARD CODE § 382-3.25
1:628
§ 382-3.25. Muffler required.
Every motor vehicle operated within this municipality shall be provided with
a muffler in good working order to prevent excessive or unusual noise or
smoke. No person shall modify or change the exhaust muffler, intake muffler
or any other noise abatement device of a motor vehicle in a manner such
that the noise emitted by the motor vehicle is increased above that emitted
by the vehicle as originally manufactured. It shall be unlawful to use a
"muffler cutout" on any motor vehicle upon any streets; provided that the
provisions of this section shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles.
(Neb. RS 60-6, 286; 60-6, 371)
§ 382-3.26. Soliciting rides.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand on the traveled portion of any
street or alley for the purpose of soliciting rides from the driver of a vehicle.
§ 382-3.27. Abandoned vehicles.364
The person in charge of any garage or repair shop at which has been left
a motor vehicle of unknown ownership for a period of 15 consecutive days
without being removed by its owner or any other person duly authorized to
remove the same shall report to the Police Department, giving the name,
engine number, manufacturer's serial number, registration plate number,
and the name and address of the person abandoning same, if known.
§ 382-3.28. Advertising vehicles.
No advertising vehicle shall be allowed in any street or alley in the City.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the putting of business notices upon
ordinary business vehicles, so long as such business vehicle is engaged in
the usual business or regular work of the owner and not used merely or
primarily for advertisement. No motor vehicle shall have any poster, sign,
picture or advertising material on the windshield or glass of the side or rear
window thereof and no person shall, by himself or through his agent, place
or post any poster, sign, picture or advertising material on the windshield
or glass of either his own motor vehicle or that of any other person.
§ 382-3.29. Driver's duty in case of accident.
A. The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident upon a public highway,
private road, or private drive resulting in injury or death to any person
shall:
(1) Immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of the accident.
(2) Give his name, address, and the registration number of his vehicle,
and exhibit his operator's or chauffeur's license to the person
struck, or the driver, or occupants, of any vehicle collided with.
364. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 377, Vehicles, Abandoned and Wrecked.
§ 382-3.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-3.29
1:629
§ 382-3.30. Enforcement authority of police.
(3) Render to any person injured in such accident reasonable
assistance, including the carrying of such person to a physician or
surgeon for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that such
treatment is necessary, or is requested by the injured person.
B. The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident, whether upon the
public highway, private road, or private drive, resulting in damage to
property shall:
(1) Immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of the accident.
(2) Give his name, address, and the registration number of his vehicle,
and exhibit his operator's, or chauffeur's license to the owner of the
property struck, or the driver, or occupants of any other vehicle
involved in the collision.
(Neb. RS 60-696, 60-697)
C. Every person convicted of violating the provisions of this section
relative to the duty to stop in the event of certain accidents shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $100. (Neb. RS 60-697; 60-698)
A. The Chief of Police and police officers shall direct all traffic in
conformity with the law, or in the event of a fire or other emergency, or
to expedite traffic or to ensure safety as conditions may require,
notwithstanding the provisions of law. (Neb. RS 81-2005)
B. The Municipal Police are hereby authorized, empowered, and ordered
to exercise all powers and duties in relation to the management of
street traffic and to direct, control, stop, restrict, regulate, and, when
necessary, temporarily divert, or exclude, in the interest of public
safety, health, and convenience the movement of pedestrian, animal,
and vehicular traffic of every kind in streets, parks, and on bridges. The
driver of any vehicle shall stop upon the signal of any police officer.
(Neb. RS 60-683)
C. Refusal to obey. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, or fail to
comply with, any lawful order, signal, or direction of a police officer.
D. Traffic officers. The governing body or the Municipal Police may at any
time detail officers, to be known as "traffic officers," at street
intersections. All traffic officers shall be vested with the authority to
regulate and control traffic at the intersections to which they are
assigned. It shall be their duty to direct the movement of traffic and
prevent congestion and accidents. It shall be unlawful for any person to
violate any order or signal of any such traffic officer, notwithstanding
the directive of a stop sign or signal device which may have been placed
at any such intersection. (Neb. RS 60-6, 222; 60-680; 60-683)
§ 382-3.29 SEWARD CODE § 382-3.31
1:630
§ 382-3.31. Projecting loads.365
When any vehicle shall be loaded in such a manner that any portion of the
load extends more than four feet beyond the rear of the bed or the body of
such vehicle, a red flag of not less than 12 inches both in length and width
shall be carried by day, and a red light after sunset, at the extreme rear end
of such load plainly visible under normal atmospheric conditions at least
200 feet from the rear of such vehicle. (Neb. RS 60-6, 243)
§ 382-3.32. Spilling loads.
All vehicles used for carrying coal, earth, cinders, sand, gravel, rock,
asphalt, tar, or any similar substance shall be so constructed as to prevent
the sifting or spilling of any of the contents. (Neb. RS 60-6, 304)
§ 382-3.33. Radar devices prohibited. [Amended 9-21-1982 by Ord.
No. 25-82]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or possess any radar
transmission device while operating a motor vehicle on any road, street,
highway, or interstate highway in this municipality; except that this
section shall not apply to any such device which has been lawfully
licensed by the Federal Communications Commission or is being used
by law enforcement officials in their official duties.
B. For purposes of this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
POSSESSION — To have a radar transmission device as defined herein
in a motor vehicle if such device is not:
RADAR TRANSMISSION DEVICE — Any mechanism designed to
interfere with the reception of radio microwaves in the electromagnetic
spectrum, which microwaves, commonly referred to as "radar," are
employed by law enforcement officials to measure the speed of motor
vehicles.
TRANSCEIVER — An apparatus contained in a single housing,
functioning alternately as a radio transmitter and receiver.
(Neb. RS 60-6, 275 through 60-6, 276)
(1) Disconnected from all power sources; and
In the rear trunk, which shall include the spare tire compartment,
or any other compartment which is not accessible to the driver or
any other person in the vehicle while such vehicle is in operation. If
no such compartment exists in a vehicle, then such device must be
disconnected from all power sources and be placed in a position not
readily accessible to the driver or any other person in the vehicle.
(2)
365. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-3.31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-3.34
1:631
§ 382-3.34. Child passenger restraint system. [Amended 10-15-1985
by Ord. No. 23-85; 3-20-2001 by Ord. No. 8-01366]
A. Any person who drives any motor vehicle which has or is required to
have an occupant protection system or a three-point safety belt system
shall ensure that all children up to six years of age being transported by
such vehicle use a child passenger restraint system of a type which
meets Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 213 as developed by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, as such standard
existed on January 1, 2009, and which is correctly installed in such
vehicle.
B. Any person who drives any motor vehicle which has or is required to
have an occupant protection system or a three-point safety belt system
shall ensure that all children six years of age and less than 18 years of
age being transported by such vehicle use an occupant protection
system.
C. Subsections A and B of this section apply to autocycles and to every
motor vehicle which is equipped with an occupant protection system or
is required to be equipped with restraint systems pursuant to Federal
Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 208, as such standard existed on
January 1, 2009, except taxicabs, mopeds, motorcycles, and any motor
vehicle designated by the manufacturer as a 1963 year model or earlier
which is not equipped with an occupant protection system.
D. Whenever any licensed physician determines, through accepted
medical procedures, that use of a child passenger restraint system by a
particular child would be harmful by reason of the child's weight,
physical condition, or other medical reason, the provisions of
Subsection A or B of this section shall be waived. The driver of any
vehicle transporting such a child shall carry on his or her person or in
the vehicle a signed written statement of the physician identifying the
child and stating the grounds for such waiver.
E. The drivers of authorized emergency vehicles shall not be subject to the
requirements of Subsection A or B of this section when operating such
authorized emergency vehicles pursuant to their employment.
F. A driver of a motor vehicle shall not be subject to the requirements of
Subsection A or B of this section if the motor vehicle is being operated
in a parade or exhibition and the parade or exhibition is being
conducted in accordance with applicable state law and local ordinances
and resolutions.
G. All persons being transported by a motor vehicle operated by a holder
of a provisional operator's permit or a school permit shall use such
motor vehicle's occupant protection system or a three-point safety belt
system.
366. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-3.34 SEWARD CODE § 382-3.35
1:632
§ 382-3.35. Speed limits on U.S. Highway 34 and Nebraska Highway
15. [Amended 7-7-1992 by Ord. No. 15-92; 8-7-2007 by Ord. No.
16-07; 4-15-2008 by Ord. No. 7-08]
A. Speed limits on U.S. Highway No. 34. No person shall operate a motor
vehicle within the City on U.S. Highway No. 34 at a rate in excess of the
following limits:
Location
Speed Limit
(mph)
From 4th Street to 100 feet east of Bemis Drive 35
From 8th Street to 4th Street 25
From 100 feet east of Bemis Drive to 1,320 feet east
of the east end of the Plum Creek Bridge
45
From 500 feet west of 14th Street to BNSF railroad
crossing
40
Beginning at the west corporate limits to 500 feet
west of 14th Street
50
From the BNSF railroad crossing to 8th Street 35
B. Speed limits on Nebraska State Highway No. 15. No person shall
operate a motor vehicle within said City on Nebraska State Highway
No. 15 at a rate of speed in excess of the following limits:
Location
Speed Limit
(mph)
From 400 feet south of Ash Street to Main Street 30
From 600 feet north of Fletcher Road to 1,000 feet
south of Izaak Walton Road
55
From 290 feet north of Hillcrest Drive to 300 feet
north of Pinewood Avenue
40
From 1,000 feet south of Izaak Walton Road to 400
feet south of Ash Street
50
From Main Street to Roberts Street 25
From 300 feet north of Pinewood Avenue to 500 feet
north of Graham Park Drive
55
From Roberts Street to 290 feet north of Hillcrest
Drive
35
§ 382-3.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-3.35
1:633

ARTICLE IV
Parking
§ 382-4.1. Unattended vehicles.367
No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall allow such
vehicle to stand unattended on a highway without first stopping the motor
of such vehicle, locking the ignition, removing the key from the ignition,
and effectively setting the brakes thereon and, when standing upon any
roadway, turning the front wheels of such vehicle to the curb or side of such
roadway. (Neb. RS 60-6, 168)
§ 382-4.2. Position of parked vehicles. [Amended 9-20-1994 by Ord.
No. 59-94368]
No person shall park any vehicle, or approach the curb with a vehicle,
except when headed in the direction of traffic. Vehicles, when parked, shall
stand parallel with and adjacent to the curb or edge of the roadway, in such
a manner as to have both right wheels within 12 inches of the curb or edge
of the roadway, except where the governing body designates that vehicles
shall be parked at an angle so as to have the front right wheel at the curb
or edge of the roadway. Where stalls are designated, either on the curb or
pavement, vehicles shall be parked within such stalls. No vehicle shall be
parked upon a roadway when there is a shoulder adjacent to the roadway
which is available for parking. (Neb. RS 60-680; 60-6, 167)
§ 382-4.3. Designation of types of parking. [Amended 7-6-1999 by
Ord. No. 15-99]
The governing body may, by resolution, designate any street, or portion
thereof, where vehicles shall be parked parallel with and adjacent to the
curb or at an angle so as to have the right front wheel at the curb, or in
such other manner as the governing body may designate. (Neb. RS 60-6,
167, 60-680)
§ 382-4.4. Restricted or prohibited areas.
The governing body may, by resolution, set aside any street, alley, public
way, or portion thereof where the parking of a particular kind or class of
vehicle shall be prohibited, or where the parking of any vehicle shall be
prohibited. No vehicle prohibited from parking thereon shall stand or be
parked adjacent to the curb of said street, alley, public way, or portion
thereof longer than a period of time necessary to load and unload freight or
passengers. (Neb. RS 60-680)
367. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
368. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-4.5
1:635
§ 382-4.5. Farm machinery prohibited.
No farm machinery shall be parked within the corporate residential limits
of the City; provided that farm machinery may be parked in an enclosed
structure for that purpose within such limits, or upon any area of land
actually farmed; and provided, further, that this section shall not be
construed to include machinery used for gardening purposes for
consumption of products raised by the person or persons engaged in such
gardening.
§ 382-4.6. "No parking" signs.
No vehicle shall be parked at any place designated by a "NO PARKING"
sign.
§ 382-4.7. Obstructing alleys.
No vehicle, while parked, shall have any portion thereof projecting into any
alley entrance. (Neb. RS 60-680)
§ 382-4.8. Alleys.
No vehicle shall be parked in any alley, except for the purpose of loading
or unloading during the time necessary to load or unload, which shall
not exceed a maximum limit of 1/2 hour. Every vehicle while loading or
unloading in any alley shall be parked in such manner as will cause the least
obstruction possible to traffic in such alley. (Neb. RS 60-680)
§ 382-4.9. Zone designations.
A. Parking zones and areas shall be indicated by the use of red, yellow or
orange, green and white paint. The parking color legend shall be as
follows:
(1) Red. The use of red paint upon the curb of any street shall indicate
that parking and stopping of vehicles is entirely prohibited within
such area.
(2) Yellow or orange. The use of yellow or orange paint upon the curb
of any street shall indicate that such space has been set aside for a
bus stop zone.
(3) Green. The use of green paint upon the curb of any street shall
indicate that such space has been set aside for a loading zone.
(4) White. The use of white paint upon the curb of any street shall
indicate that such portion of the street has been restricted to
fifteen-minute parking. White paint upon the surface of the street
at crosswalks shall indicate pedestrian lanes and the location of
crosswalks.
§ 382-4.5 SEWARD CODE § 382-4.9
1:636
§ 382-4.10. Loading or unloading.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to stop, park or stand
such vehicle at any designated loading or unloading zone for a period of
time longer than is necessary for the expeditious loading or unloading of
passengers, merchandise, or materials, and in no event shall the operator
of a vehicle into or from which merchandise or material is being loaded or
unloaded stop, park, or stand such vehicle in any loading zone for a period
longer than 30 minutes, nor shall the operator of any passenger vehicle
stop, park, or stand such vehicle at any such loading or unloading zone for
a period of time longer than five minutes, and then only when the operator
thereof remains in said vehicle.
§ 382-4.11. Large trucks in business, residential and industrial
districts; impoundment. [Amended 2-15-1977 by Ord. No. 1073;
5-1-1984 by Ord. No. 10-84]
B. Parking lanes and stalls shall be indicated on the streets or sidewalks,
or both, by use of white or yellow paint, or both.
A. Central Business District. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any
truck with an overall length of more than 20 feet to stop or park any
such vehicle on a street which the governing body has designated to be
within the Central Business District (see Zoning Map) except to load or
unload, and then only when loading or unloading in an alley is
impossible. Vehicles may stop or stand for a period of time not to exceed
what is reasonably necessary to load or unload. In those cases where a
vehicle, as defined above, must park on a street within the Central
Business District to load or unload, the owner or driver thereof shall
first obtain permission from the Police Department. Permission must be
obtained each time parking within the Central Business District is
necessary. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck, regardless
of length, to park said vehicle within a street intersection, on a
crosswalk, in front of a private driveway, or on a sidewalk. The
governing body may, by resolution, provide truck parking areas
adjoining or adjacent to the Central Business District, and when such
parking areas are provided, it shall be the duty of all truck operators to
use such parking areas for all parking purposes.
B. Residential districts. No truck, truck tractor or semi-trailer (except
pickup trucks 3/4 ton or less), including oil tankers, shall park or stop
for any period of time within the limits of any streets within a
residential district (see Zoning Map) except for the purpose of loading,
unloading the cargo thereof or performing a service in the area in the
ordinary course of business, unless otherwise posted, and except when
parking in special truck parking areas provided by the governing body
by resolution.
§ 382-4.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-4.11
1:637
§ 382-4.12. Fire hydrants and stations. [Amended 9-15-1981 by Ord.
No. 30-81370]
No vehicle shall be parked within 15 feet in either direction of any fire
hydrant nor within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and
on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75
feet of such entrance when properly signposted. (Neb. RS 60-6, 166)
§ 382-4.13. Schools and theaters.
The governing body may, by resolution, prohibit the parking or stopping,
except for loading or unloading of passengers or freight, of vehicles at
the curb on streets directly in front of any entrance to a schoolhouse,
C. Industrial zones. Trucks may park on the streets in the industrial zones
(see Zoning Map) for a period not to exceed 24 hours unless the street
is otherwise restricted.
D. Trucks which are parked in violation of this section or any resolution of
the governing body adopted pursuant to the authority of this section
shall be impounded by the Police Department by the application to such
truck of a mechanism, the effect of which is to prevent the movement of
such vehicles from the place where parked, by attachment of such
mechanism to the wheels or a wheel thereof. The owner or operator of
such truck may cause the release and removal of such impoundment
and by paying to the City an impoundment fee as set from time to time
by the City Council to defray costs and extra work and time required for
such impoundment and removal thereof and any other costs of
administration and shall in addition thereto pay such parking fee or fees
due the Bureau of Violations of the City for such parking violation. The
impoundment fee provided for herein shall be paid over to the
Treasurer of the City and credited to the General Fund of the City.
When such truck has been so impounded so as to prevent its movement,
written notice shall be placed on said truck visible to the operator
thereof, giving notice that said vehicle has been impounded and
rendered immobile by the attachment of the immobilizing mechanism
authorized herein and that said impoundment will be released and
discharged upon payment of impoundment fee as set from time to time
by the City Council in addition to any parking fee due the Bureau of
Violations of the City for such parking violation. In addition thereto,
where possible and practicable, similar notice shall be given the owner
or lessor of the truck so impounded. Within 30 days after payment of
such impoundment fee, the operator, owner or lessor may request a
hearing before the City Council to contest said fee and request refund
thereof, setting forth the reasons and grounds upon which such contest
is based.369
(Neb. RS 60-680)
369. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
370. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-4.11 SEWARD CODE § 382-4.13
1:638
school building, or theater, and such curbs adjacent to the entrance of said
schoolhouse, school building, or theater shall be painted red to indicate
such prohibition. (Neb. RS 60-680)
§ 382-4.14. Street intersections. [Amended 11-7-1978 by Ord. No.
1147]
Except in compliance with traffic control devices, no vehicle shall be parked
or left standing for any purpose, except momentarily to load or discharge
passengers, within 20 feet of the intersection of curblines, nor where said
curblines are painted red to indicate such prohibition. (Neb. RS 60-6, 166)
§ 382-4.15. Obstructing traffic.
No person shall, except in case of an accident or emergency, stop any
vehicle in any location where such stopping will obstruct any street,
intersection, or entrance to an alley or public or private drive. (Neb. RS
60-680)
§ 382-4.16. Curbs.
No vehicle shall park on any street with its left side to the curb, unless said
street has been designated to be a one-way street by the governing body.
Vehicles must not be parked at any curb in such a position as to prevent
another vehicle already parked at the curb from moving away. (Neb. RS
60-6, 166)
§ 382-4.17. Painted curbs.371
It shall be the duty of the Street Superintendent to cause the curb space to
be painted and keep the same painted as provided in this article. No person,
firm, or corporation shall paint the curb of any street, or in any manner set
aside, or attempt to prevent the parking of vehicles in any street, or part
thereof, except at such places where the parking of vehicles is prohibited
by the provisions of this article. The marking or designating of portions of
streets or alleys where the parking of vehicles is prohibited or limited shall
be done only by the municipality through its proper officers, at the direction
of the governing body. (Neb. RS 60-680)
§ 382-4.18. Display or repair of vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon any street, alley, or public
place within this municipality any vehicle displayed for sale. No person
shall adjust or repair any automobile or motorcycle, or race the motor of
same, while standing on the public streets or alleys of this municipality,
except in case of breakdown or other emergency requiring same. No person
or employee connected with a garage or repair shop shall use sidewalks,
streets, or alleys in the vicinity of such garage or shop for the purpose of
working on automobiles or vehicles of any description. (Neb. RS 60-680)
371. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-4.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-4.19
1:639
§ 382-4.19. Sidewalk space. [Amended 12-6-1988 by Ord. No. 2788]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or place, or to cause to be
parked or placed, any motor vehicle upon the space between the curb and
the sidewalk of any street, as dedicated, in the City unless the owner or
occupant of the real estate abutting such space shall obtain a permit to use
that area for parking purposes.
§ 382-4.20. Permit to park in sidewalk space.
The Council may issue a permit upon application by the owner or occupant
of real property abutting the space between the sidewalk and the curb for
use of such space by the public for parking purposes, and such permit may
be issued within the discretion of the Council, taking into consideration
the character of the neighborhood, traffic conditions, and other matters
pertaining to the public health, welfare and safety. Vehicles may be parked
and displayed for sale in such spaces.
§ 382-4.21. Current license required.
Every vehicle parked or left standing upon any street, alley, public road or
public property shall have license plates attached thereto which are issued
to the vehicle to which said license plates are attached and registered in
the name of the owner of the vehicles in accordance with the laws of the
State of Nebraska, or the state wherein the license is issued. If any vehicle
is found upon any street or alley in violation of any of the provisions of the
ordinances and resolutions of the City regulating the stopping, standing or
parking of vehicles, and the identity of the driver cannot be determined,
the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be held
prima facie responsible for such violation.
§ 382-4.22. Time-limit parking.
The governing body may, by resolution, entirely prohibit or fix a time limit
for the parking and stopping of vehicles on any street, streets, or district
designated by such resolution, and the parking or stopping of any vehicle in
any such street, streets, or district for a period of time longer than fixed in
such resolution shall constitute a violation of this article. (Neb. RS 60-680)
§ 382-4.23. Maximum time limits. [Amended 12-5-1978 by Ord. No.
1152; 9-18-1984 by Ord. No. 31-84]
The parking of a motor vehicle or of a vehicle as defined by this chapter of
the Municipal Code, on a public street, alley, or on any off-street parking
areas located on City right-of-way for over 24 consecutive hours is unlawful,
except where a different maximum time limit is posted. (Neb. RS 60-6, 165;
60-680)372
372. Editor's Note: Original § 5-424 of the 1976 Code, Parking; Snow Removal and
Maintenance, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 6-7-1983 by Ord. No.
15-83.
§ 382-4.19 SEWARD CODE § 382-4.24
1:640
§ 382-4.24. Emergency vehicles.
The provisions of this article regulating the movement, parking, and
standing of vehicles shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles, while
the driver of such vehicle is operating the same in an emergency in the
necessary performance of public duties. (Neb. RS 60-6, 114)
§ 382-4.25. Bureau of Violations; collection and disposition of
parking fees. [Amended 7-21-1981 by Ord. No. 29-81; 11-21-2006 by
Ord. No. 28-06373]
There is hereby created the Bureau of Violations within the powers and
duties of the Office of the Police Department. A copy of each citation issued
for nonmoving traffic violations shall be deposited with the Municipal Police
Dispatcher, whose duty it shall be to collect all parking fees and to maintain
appropriate and accurate records of all such fees paid to him. Parking fees
shall be payable at the Police Department. Such fees shall be in amounts
set from time to time by the City Council. Should any fee not be paid
within 30 days from date of issuance, the Police Department shall ask the
Municipal Attorney to file a complaint in the appropriate court. All money
collected by the Police Department under this section shall be transferred
to the Municipal Treasurer, who shall in turn transfer said money to the
school district in which the municipality lies; provided a portion of each
parking fee collected shall be retained by the Treasurer and credited to the
Police Department to partially defray the costs of administration. (Neb. RS
18-1729)
§ 382-4.26. Tickets.
All tickets issued for violations of nonmoving traffic regulations contained in
this chapter shall, in addition to information normally stated on such tickets,
carry the following information:
§ 382-4.27. Destruction of or failure to comply with summons.
It shall be unlawful for any person to tear up, or destroy, a parking tag
placed upon any vehicle by the Municipal Police, or to disregard the
summons contained on such tag and fail to appear in court as directed by
said tag.
A. The amount of the fine if paid within five days;
B. The amount of the fine if not paid within five days;
C. The location where payment may be made; and
D. The fact that a complaint will be filed after 30 days if the fine is not paid
in that time.
(Neb. RS 18-1729)
373. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-4.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-4.28
1:641
§ 382-4.28. Private lots. [Amended 10-6-1981 by Ord. No. 33-81]
§ 382-4.29. Removal of illegally parked vehicles. [Amended
9-18-1984 by Ord. No. 30-84; 11-1-1988 by Ord. No. 25-88;
12-6-1988 by Ord. No. 26-88]
A. Any person parking a vehicle in a properly posted, restricted parking lot
without the consent of the owner or tenant authorized to give
permission shall be guilty of an infraction and the vehicle shall be
subject to being towed away at the request of such lot owner or tenant.
Any person found guilty under this section shall be subject to the
penalties provided for infractions. If the identity of the operator of a
vehicle in violation of this section cannot be determined, the owner or
person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be held prima
facie responsible for such infraction. When any law enforcement officer
observes or is advised that a vehicle may be in violation of this section,
he or she shall make a determination as to whether a violation has in
fact occurred and if so shall personally serve or attach to such vehicle a
citation directed to the owner or operator of such vehicle, which shall
set forth the nature of the violation. Any person who refuses to sign the
citation or otherwise comply with the command of the citation shall be
punished as provided by Neb. RS 29-426.374
B. Signs designating a restricted parking lot shall be readily visible and
shall state the purpose or purposes for parking on the restricted
parking lot, state the hours for restricted parking, and state whom to
contact for information regarding a towed vehicle.
(Neb. RS 60-2401.01, 60-2402)
A. Whenever any police officer shall find a vehicle standing upon a street
or alley or upon the space between the curb and sidewalk of any street
in the City, as dedicated, in violation of any of the provisions of this
article, such individual may remove or have such vehicle removed, or
require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move such
vehicle, to a position off the roadway of such street or alley or such
space between the curb and the sidewalk, from such street or alley or
location.
B. The owner or other person lawfully entitled to the possession of such
vehicle may be charged with the reasonable cost of such removal and
storage, payable before such vehicle is released. Any such towing or
storage fee shall become a lien in the vehicle prior to all other claims.
This fee shall be in addition to any other fees or penalties owed the
municipality for such vehicle. (Neb. RS 60-6, 165; 60-680)375
374. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
375. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-4.28 SEWARD CODE § 382-4.30
1:642
§ 382-4.30. Trailers. [Amended 2-15-2005 by Ord. No. 13-05;
6-21-2005 by Ord. No. 36-05376]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any trailer on any public street
within the City for any period of time longer than is reasonably necessary
to load or unload the contents of said trailer. This section shall not apply
to major recreational vehicles, which are defined and regulated by Chapter
410, Zoning and Subdivision, § 410-34.10.
§ 382-4.31. Driveways.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any residential property
within the City, or said owner's guests or invitees, to park any motor vehicle
on said residential property in a location other than a paved, graveled,
or rocked driveway located on said residential property. It shall not be a
violation of this section if the motor vehicle is parked in a location other
than a paved, graveled, or rocked driveway but is in the process of being
washed or said vehicle is in the process of being loaded or unloaded.
§ 382-4.32. Permits for residents of Central Business District.
[Amended 3-15-2005 by Ord. No. 17-05377]
The City Clerk shall issue a permit, upon application by any person residing
in an apartment in the Central Business District, authorizing the person
obtaining the permit to park the motor vehicle designated in the permit
within the Central Business District between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. The applicant for said permit shall pay a fee for the issuance of said
permit in an amount set from time to time by the City Council, which shall
be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. All such permits
shall be displayed by attaching the permit to the motor vehicle's rearview
mirror so as to be clearly visible through the front windshield. When there
is no rearview mirror, the permit shall be displayed on the dashboard. No
more than one permit shall be issued for each motor vehicle. Said permit
shall not authorize the holder to park said motor vehicle on the public
street during times when the City is conducting street cleaning and/or snow
removal operations, or at such other times as it is determined necessary to
clear the streets by the Mayor, City Administrator or appropriate authority.
376. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
377. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-4.30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-4.32
1:643

ARTICLE V
Parking for Handicapped or Disabled Persons
[Added 3-17-1992 by Ord. No. 9-92]
§ 382-5.1. Designation of on-street parking spaces; display of
permits. [Amended 9-6-1994 by Ord. No. 54-94; 1-16-1996 by Ord.
No. 4-96; 1-6-1998 by Ord. No. 2-98]
§ 382-5.2. Designation of off-street parking stalls or spaces.
[Amended 9-6-1994 by Ord. No. 55-94; 1-6-1998 by Ord. No. 3-98379]
The governing body and any person in lawful possession of any off-street
parking facility may designate stalls or spaces in such facility for the
exclusive use of: 1) handicapped or disabled persons whose vehicles display
the distinguishing license plates issued to such individuals pursuant to Neb.
RS 60-3, 113 through 60-3, 113.08; 2) such other handicapped or disabled
persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons, as certified by
the municipality, whose vehicles display the permit specified in Neb. RS
18-1741.01 through 18-1741.07; and 3) such other motor vehicles, as
certified by the municipality, which display such permit. Such designation
shall be made by posting above ground immediately adjacent to and visible
A. The governing body may designate parking spaces for the exclusive use
of: 1) handicapped or disabled persons whose motor vehicles display
the distinguishing license plates issued to handicapped or disabled
persons pursuant to Neb. RS 60-3, 113 through 60-3, 113.08; 2)
handicapped or disabled persons whose motor vehicles display a
distinguishing license plate issued to a handicapped or disabled person
by another state; 3) such other handicapped or disabled persons or
temporarily handicapped or disabled persons, as certified by the
municipality, whose motor vehicles display the permit specified in Neb.
RS 18-1741.01 through 18-1741.07; and 4) such other motor vehicles,
as certified by the municipality, which display such permit. All such
permits shall be displayed by attaching the permit to the motor
vehicle's rearview mirror so as to be clearly visible through the front
windshield. When there is no rearview mirror, the permit shall be
displayed on the dashboard.378
B. If the governing body so designates a parking space, it shall be
indicated by posting above ground and immediately adjacent to and
visible from each space a sign which is in conformance with the Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. In addition to such sign, the space
may also be indicated by blue paint on the curb or edge of the paved
portion of the street adjacent to the space.
(Neb. RS 18-1741.01 through 18-1741.07)
378. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
379. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-5.2
1:645
from each stall or space a sign which is in conformance with the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices. (Neb. RS 18-1741.01 through 18-1741.07)
§ 382-5.3. Definitions. [Amended 9-6-1994 by Ord. No. 52-94;
1-16-1996 by Ord. No. 5-96; 1-6-1998 by Ord. No. 4-98]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSON — Any individual with a severe
visual or physical impairment which limits personal mobility and results in
an inability to travel unassisted more than 200 feet without the use of a
wheelchair, crutch, walker, or prosthetic, orthotic, or other assistive device,
any individual whose personal mobility is limited as a result of respiratory
problems, any individual who has a cardiac condition to the extent that his
or her functional limitations are classified in severity as being Class III or
Class IV, according to standards set by the American Heart Association, and
any individual who has permanently lost all or substantially all the use of
one or more limbs.
HANDICAPPED PARKING INFRACTION — The violation of any section of
this article regulating:380
TEMPORARILY HANDICAPPED OR DISABLED PERSON — Any
handicapped or disabled person whose personal mobility is expected to be
limited in such a manner for no longer than one year.
(Neb. RS 18-1741.01 through 18-1741.07)
§ 382-5.4. Permit for handicapped or disabled person. [Amended
1-16-1996 by Ord. No. 6-96; 1-6-1998 by Ord. No. 6-98]
The use of parking spaces, including access aisles, designated for use
by handicapped or disabled persons; or
A.
The obstruction of any wheelchair ramps constructed or created in
accordance and in conformity with the federal Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990; or
B.
The unauthorized possession, use or display of handicapped or disabled
parking permits.
C.
A. The Municipal Clerk shall take an application from a handicapped or
disabled person or temporarily handicapped or disabled person or his
or her parent, legal guardian, or foster parent for a permit which will
entitle the holder thereof or a person driving a motor vehicle for the
purpose of transporting such holder to park in those spaces provided
for by this article when the holder of the permit will enter or exit the
motor vehicle while it is parked in such areas. For purposes of this
section, the handicapped or disabled person or temporarily
380. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-5.2 SEWARD CODE § 382-5.4
1:646
§ 382-5.5. Permit for motor vehicle. [Amended 1-16-1996 by Ord.
No. 7-96; 1-6-1998 by Ord. No. 6-98]
handicapped or disabled person shall be considered the holder of the
permit.
B. The Municipal Clerk shall not accept the application for a permit of any
person making application contrary to the provisions of Neb. RS
18-1741.01 through 18-1741.07.381
C. A person applying for a permit or for the renewal of a permit shall
complete an application, shall provide proof of identity, and shall submit
a completed medical form signed by a physician, physician assistant, or
nurse practitioner certifying that the person who will be the holder
meets the definition of "handicapped or disabled person" or
"temporarily handicapped or disabled person." In the case of a
temporarily handicapped or disabled person, the certifying physician,
physician assistant, or nurse practitioner shall indicate the estimated
date of recovery or that the temporary handicap or disability will
continue for a period of six months, whichever is less.
D. A person may hold only one permit under this section and may hold
either a permit under this section or a permit under § 382-5.5, but not
both.
E. The Municipal Clerk shall submit to the Department of Motor Vehicles
the name, address, and license number of all persons applying for a
permit pursuant to this section.
(Neb. RS 18-1741.01 through 18-1741.07)
A. The Municipal Clerk shall take an application from any person for a
motor vehicle permit which will entitle the holder thereof or a person
driving the motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting handicapped
or disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons to
park in those spaces provided by this article if the motor vehicle is used
primarily for the transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or
temporarily handicapped or disabled persons. Such parking permit
shall be used only when the motor vehicle for which it was issued is
being used for the transportation of a handicapped or disabled person
or temporarily handicapped or disabled person and such person will
enter or exit the motor vehicle while it is parked in such designated
spaces.
B. The Municipal Clerk shall not accept the application for a permit of any
person making application contrary to Neb. RS 18-1741.01 through
18-1741.07.382
381. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
382. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-5.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-5.5
1:647
§ 382-5.6. Permit specifications and limitations; duplicate permits.
[Amended 3-5-1996 by Ord. No. 14-96; 1-6-1998 by Ord. No. 7-98]
C. A person applying for a permit or for the renewal of a permit pursuant
to this section shall apply for a permit for each motor vehicle used for
the transportation of handicapped or disabled persons or temporarily
handicapped or disabled persons, shall complete such forms as are
provided to the Municipal Clerk by the Department of Motor Vehicles,
and shall demonstrate to the Municipal Clerk that each such motor
vehicle is used primarily for the transportation of handicapped or
disabled persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons. A
copy of the completed application form shall be given to each applicant.
D. No more than one such permit shall be issued for each motor vehicle. A
person may hold either a permit under this section or a permit under
§ 382-5.4, but not both.
E. The Municipal Clerk shall submit to the Department of Motor Vehicles
the name, address, and license number of all persons applying for a
permit pursuant to this section.
(Neb. RS 18-1741.01 through 18-1741.07)
A. The permit issued for handicapped or disabled parking shall be
constructed of a durable plastic designed to resist normal wear or
fading for the term of the permit's issuance and printed so as to
minimize the possibility of alteration following issuance. The permit
shall be of a design, size, configuration, color, and construction and
contain such information as specified in the rules and regulations
adopted and promulgated by the United States Department of
Transportation in the Uniform System for Parking for Persons with
Disabilities, 23 CFR Part 1235.
B. In addition to the requirements of Subsection A of this section, the
permit shall show such identifying information with regard to the
handicapped or disabled person or temporarily handicapped or
disabled person to whom it is issued as is necessary to the enforcement
of this article.
C. No permit shall be issued to any person or for any motor vehicle if any
parking permit has been issued to such person or for such motor
vehicle if such permit has been suspended pursuant to § 382-5.8. At the
expiration of such suspension, a permit may be renewed upon the
payment of the permit fee.
D. A duplicate permit may be provided without cost if the original permit is
destroyed, lost, or stolen. Such duplicate permit shall be issued in the
same manner as the original permit, except that a newly completed
medical form need not be provided if a completed medical form
submitted at the time of the most recent application for a permit or its
renewal is on file with the Municipal Clerk. A duplicate permit shall be
§ 382-5.5 SEWARD CODE § 382-5.6
1:648
§ 382-5.7. Term of permanent permits. [Amended 9-6-1994 by Ord.
No. 53-94; 3-5-1996 by Ord. No. 13-96; 1-6-1998 by Ord. No. 8-98;
8-7-2007 by Ord. No. 19-07383]
All permanently issued permits for handicapped or disabled parking issued
on or after August 1, 2005, shall be valid for a period ending on the last day
of the month of the applicant's birthday in the third year after issuance and
shall expire on that day. (Neb. RS 18-1741.01 through 18-1741.07)
§ 382-5.8. Permits nontransferable; violations; suspensions.
[Amended 1-6-1998 by Ord. No. 9-98]
A permit issued under this article shall not be transferable, and shall be
used only by the party to whom issued or for the motor vehicle for which
issued and only for the purpose for which it is issued. No person shall alter
or reproduce in any manner a permit issued pursuant to this article. No
person shall knowingly hold more than one permit or knowingly provide
false information on an application for a permit. Any violation of this section
shall be cause for suspension of such permit for a period of six months. In
addition, the trial court shall impose a fine of not more than $250, which
may be waived by the court if, at the time of sentencing, all handicapped
parking permits issued to or in the possession of the offender are returned
to the court. At the expiration of such six-month period, a suspended permit
may be renewed upon payment of the permit fee. (Neb. RS 18-1741.01
through 18-1741.07)
§ 382-5.9. Removal of unauthorized vehicles; penalty. [Amended
1-6-1998 by Ord. No. 11-98]
valid for the remainder of the period for which the original permit was
issued.
(Neb. RS 18-1741.01 through 18-1741.07)
A. The owner or person in lawful possession of an off-street parking
facility, after notifying the Police or Sheriff's Department, and the
municipality providing on-street parking or owning, operating, or
providing an off-street parking facility, may cause the removal from a
stall or space designated exclusively for handicapped or disabled
persons or temporarily handicapped or disabled persons, or motor
vehicles for the transportation of such persons, of any vehicle not
displaying the proper permit or the distinguishing license plates
specified in this article if there is posted above ground and immediately
adjacent to and visible from such stall or space a sign which clearly and
conspicuously states the area so designated is a tow-away zone.384
B. Anyone who parks a vehicle in any on-street parking space which has
been designated exclusively for handicapped or disabled persons or
383. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
384. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-5.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-5.9
1:649
§ 382-5.10. Citations and complaints; trial; affirmative defense.
[Amended 1-6-1998 by Ord. No. 10-98]
temporarily handicapped or disabled persons or motor vehicles for the
transportation of such persons, or in any so exclusively designated
parking space in any off-street parking facility, without properly
displaying the proper permit or when the handicapped or disabled
person to whom or for whom the license plate or permit is issued
will not enter or exit the vehicle while it is parked in the designated
space shall be guilty of a handicapped parking infraction as defined in
§ 382-5.3 and shall be subject to the procedures set forth in § 382-5.10
and the penalty provided for in this chapter. The display on a motor
vehicle of a distinguishing license plate or permit issued to a
handicapped or disabled person by and under the duly constituted
authority of another state shall constitute a full and complete defense
in any action for a handicapped parking infraction. If the identity of
the person who parked the vehicle in violation of this section cannot be
readily determined, the owner or person in whose name the vehicle is
registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation and
shall be guilty and subject to the penalty provided for in this chapter.
C. In the case of a privately owned off-street parking facility, the owner or
person in lawful possession of such facility shall not be required to
inform the municipality of a violation of this section prior to the
municipality issuing the violator a handicapped parking infraction
citation.
(Neb. RS 18-1741.01 through 18-1741.07)
A. For any offense classified as a handicapped parking infraction, a
handicapped parking citation may be issued by any peace officer or by
any person designated by ordinance by the governing body to exercise
the authority to issue a citation for any handicapped parking infraction.
B. When a handicapped parking citation is issued for a handicapped
parking infraction, the person issuing the handicapped parking citation
shall enter thereon all required information, including the name and
address of the cited person or, if not known, the license number and
description of the offending motor vehicle, the offense charged, and the
time and place the person cited is to appear in court. Unless the person
cited requests an earlier date, the time of appearance shall be at least
three days after the issuance of the handicapped parking citation. One
copy of the handicapped parking citation shall be delivered to the
person cited or attached to the offending motor vehicle.
C. At least 24 hours before the time set for the appearance of the cited
person, either the Municipal Attorney or other person authorized by law
to issue a complaint for the particular offense shall issue and file a
complaint charging such person with a handicapped parking infraction
or such person shall be released from the obligation to appear as
specified.
§ 382-5.9 SEWARD CODE § 382-5.10
1:650
D. The trial of any person for a handicapped parking infraction shall be by
the court without a jury. A person cited for a handicapped parking
violation may waive his or her right to trial.
E. For any handicapped parking citation issued for a handicapped parking
infraction by reason of the failure of a vehicle to display a handicapped
parking permit issued pursuant to Neb. RS 18-1741.01 through
18-1741.07, the complaint shall be dismissed if, within seven business
days after the date of issuance of the citation, the person cited files with
the court the affidavit included on the citation, signed by a peace officer
certifying that the recipient is the lawful possessor in his or her own
right of a handicapped parking permit issued under Neb. RS
18-1741.01 through 18-1741.07 and that the peace officer has
personally viewed the permit.385
(Neb. RS 18-1741.01 through 18-1741.07)
385. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-5.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-5.10
1:651

ARTICLE VI
Operator and Vehicle Requirements
§ 382-6.1. Registration of vehicle and operator's license required.
[Amended 8-2-1994 by Ord. No. 41-94; 1-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1-96]
§ 382-6.2. Registration of trailers. [Amended 8-2-1994 by Ord. No.
40-94; 1-16-1996 by Ord. No. 2-96387]
No trailer, semitrailer, or cabin trailer shall be operated or parked on
any street, alley, or public highway within the municipality without having
first registered the same in accordance with Neb. RS Chapter 60, Article
3, except as provided in this section. A person may pull such trailer,
semitrailer, or cabin trailer without registration for a period not to exceed
30 days from the date of purchase. Upon registration, such trailer,
semitrailer, or cabin trailer shall have the required number plate displayed
upon said trailer as provided for by Neb. RS 60-3, 150 and 60-3, 151. If
a citation is issued to an owner or operator of a vehicle for a violation of
this section and the owner properly registers and licenses the vehicle not
in compliance and pays all taxes and fees due and the owner or operator
provides proof of such registration to the prosecuting attorney within 10
days after the issuance of the citation, no prosecution for the offense cited
shall occur.
A. No person shall operate or park a motor vehicle upon any street, alley,
or public highway within the municipality without having first
registered the same in accordance with Neb. RS Chapter 60, Article 3,
except as provided in this subsection. A person may operate a motor
vehicle without registration for a period not to exceed 30 days from the
date of purchase. Upon registration, such vehicle shall have the
required number plates displayed upon said vehicle in the manner and
places provided for by Neb. RS 60-399. If a citation is issued to an
owner or operator of a vehicle for a violation of this subsection and the
owner properly registers and licenses the vehicle not in compliance and
pays all taxes and fees due and the owner or operator provides proof of
such registration to the prosecuting attorney within 10 days after the
issuance of the citation, no prosecution for the offense cited shall
occur.386
B. No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon any street, alley, or public
highway without having obtained a motor vehicle operator's license in
accordance with Neb. RS Chapter 60, Article 4. It shall be unlawful for
any person to operate a motor vehicle upon any street, alley, or public
highway during the period that his or her operator's license has been
revoked or canceled.
386. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
387. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-6.3
1:653
§ 382-6.3. License plates.
The license plates required on every motor vehicle by laws of the State
of Nebraska, or by laws of any other state, while such vehicle is operated
within the corporate limits, shall be kept clear and free from grease, dust,
or other blurring matter so they will be plainly visible at all times, and shall
be attached in such manner as to be clearly readable at a distance of 100
feet; and under no circumstances shall they be obstructed by any portion of
the vehicle. (Neb. RS 60-399)
§ 382-6.4. Vehicle equipment and maintenance. [Amended 8-2-1994
by Ord. No. 39-94; 1-16-1996 by Ord. No. 3-96]
A. Every motor vehicle, while in use on the streets, alleys, or highways of
the municipality, shall be equipped with efficient brakes adequate to
control the movement of, to stop, and to hold such vehicle, including
two separate means of applying the brakes, and shall be further
equipped with a good and sufficient horn in good working order, or
other efficient signal devices.
B. From sunset to sunrise, and any other time when there is not sufficient
light to render clearly discernible persons or vehicles upon a street,
alley, or highway at a distance of 500 feet, every motor vehicle shall be
equipped with lighted headlights, and every motor vehicle and trailer
shall be equipped with one or more taillights, at the rear of the motor
vehicle or trailer, exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the rear of such vehicle. No person shall operate any vehicle
which is equipped with an electric light or lights that confuse travelers
or pedestrians on streets or crosswalks within the municipality. Every
motor vehicle having a width of 80 inches or more shall display
clearance lights as required by state law.
C. All vehicle brakes shall be maintained in good working order; provided
that motorcycles need only be equipped with one brake.
D. All horns on motor vehicles shall be capable of emitting sound audible
under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 200 feet;
provided that no vehicle, except as herein provided, shall be equipped
with, nor shall any person use upon a vehicle, any siren or horn
otherwise than as reasonable warning; nor shall any person use any
horn or warning device upon a vehicle to make any unnecessary, loud,
or harsh sound; and provided, further, that, every Police and Fire
Department vehicle, ambulance, or other authorized emergency vehicle
used for emergency calls shall be equipped with a bell, siren, or whistle
of the type approved by the governing body.
(Neb. RS 60-6, 219; 60-6, 220; 60-6, 224; 60-6, 235; 60-6, 244; 60-6,
285)
§ 382-6.3 SEWARD CODE § 382-6.5
1:654
§ 382-6.5. Unobstructed view.
No person shall drive on a street any motor vehicle constructed or loaded in
such a way as to prevent the driver from obtaining a view of the street to the
rear unless such vehicle is equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to
the driver a view of the street for a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear
of such vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive upon a street any
vehicle with a sign, poster, or other nontransparent material upon the front
windshield, side windows, or rear windows of such motor vehicle other than
a certificate or paper required to be so displayed by law. Every windshield
on a motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device for removing rain, snow,
or other moisture from the windshield, which device shall be so constructed
as to be operated by the driver within the vehicle. (Neb. RS 60-6, 254; 60-6,
255; 60-6, 256)
§ 382-6.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-6.5
1:655

ARTICLE VII
Bicycles, Mopeds and Skateboards
§ 382-7.1. Bicycles.
A. License. Anyone wishing to operate a bicycle within the corporate limits
shall make an application to the Municipal Police before the first day of
August of every even-numbered year. Each application shall set forth
the name of the applicant, his address, a description of the bicycle and
such other information as the Police Department may require. A license
tag shall then be issued by the Municipal Police. Said tag shall then be
attached to the frame of the bicycle in a substantial manner. The
removal of such tag, except by the proper authorities, shall be unlawful.
[Neb. RS 60-6, 317; 60-680(h)]
B. Inspection. The Police Department shall inspect each bicycle presented
to it for licensing, and shall refuse to issue a license tag for any bicycle
found to be in an unsafe mechanical condition.
C. Operation.
(1) No person shall ride or propel a bicycle on a street or other public
highway of this municipality with another person on the handlebars
or in any position in front of the operator.
(2) No bicycle shall be ridden faster than is reasonable and proper, but
every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard to the safety
of the operator and any other persons upon the streets and public
highways.
(3) Persons riding bicycles shall observe all traffic signs and stop at all
stop signs.
(4) No bicycle shall be permitted on any street or other public highway
from 1/2 hour after sunset and 1/2 hour before sunrise without a
headlight, visible under normal atmospheric conditions, from the
front thereof, for not less than 500 feet indicating the approach or
presence of the bicycle, firmly attached to such bicycle, and
properly lighted, or without a yellow or red light reflector attached
to and visible 500 feet from the rear thereof. The headlight shall
give a clear, white light.
(5) No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any street or other
public highway abreast of more than one other person riding or
propelling a bicycle.
(6) Every person riding or propelling a bicycle upon any street or other
public highway shall observe all traffic rules and regulations
applicable thereto, and shall turn only at intersections, signal for
all turns, ride at the right-hand side of the street or highway, pass
to the left when passing overtaken vehicles and individuals that are
slower moving, and shall pass vehicles to the right when meeting.
§ 382-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-7.1
1:657
§ 382-7.2. Clinging to motor vehicles. [Amended 7-25-1994 by Ord.
No. 35-94]
No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, skis, or toy
vehicle shall attach himself or the bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, skis,
or toy vehicle to any vehicle upon a roadway, and it shall be unlawful for the
driver of any vehicle to suffer or permit any person riding upon any bicycle,
coaster, roller skates, sled, skis, or toy vehicle to cling or attach himself or
the bicycle to such vehicle driven and operated by him. (Neb. RS 60-6, 316)
§ 382-7.3. Mopeds. [Amended 9-18-1979 by Ord. No. 1195;
8-16-1994 by Ord. No. 46-94; 8-16-1994 by Ord. No. 47-94;
8-16-1994 by Ord. No. 48-94]
(7) No person shall ride a bicycle on the sidewalks within the Central
Business District.388
(Neb. RS 60-6, 315; 60-6, 317; 60-6, 318)
A. Defined. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
MOPED — A bicycle with fully operative pedals for propulsion by
human power, an automatic transmission, and a motor with a cylinder
capacity not exceeding 50 cubic centimeters, which produces no more
than two brake horsepower and is capable of propelling the bicycle at
a maximum design speed of no more than 30 miles per hour on level
ground. Mopeds, their owners, and their operators shall be subject to
Neb. RS Chapter 60, Article 4, and amendments thereto, but shall be
exempt from the requirements of Neb. RS Chapter 60, Articles 1, 3, and
5, and amendments thereto. (Neb. RS 60-6, 309)389
B. Operator's license required. No person shall operate a moped upon the
streets, alleys, or highways within the municipality unless such person
has a valid operator's license.390 (Neb. RS 60-6, 310)
C. Traffic regulations applicable. Any person who rides a moped upon a
roadway shall have all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to the driver of a motor vehicle under Chapter 382 of
this Municipal Code and Neb. RS 39-601 to 39-6,122, and amendments
thereto, except for those provisions of such sections which by their
nature can have no application. Such regulations applicable to mopeds
shall apply whenever a moped shall be operated upon any street, alley,
or public highway within the municipality or upon any path set aside by
the Department of Roads or local authority for the use of mopeds.
Notwithstanding any established maximum speed limits in excess of 25
388. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
389. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
390. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-7.1 SEWARD CODE § 382-7.3
1:658
miles per hour, no person shall operate any moped at a speed in excess
of 30 miles per hour. (Neb. RS 60-6, 311)
D. Operation.
(1) Any person who operates a moped shall ride only upon a permanent
and regular seat attached to the moped. A person operating a
moped shall not carry any other person, nor shall any other person
ride on a moped unless such moped is designed by the
manufacturer to carry more than one person.
(2) A person shall ride upon a moped only while sitting astride the seat,
facing forward.
(3) No person shall operate a moped while carrying any package,
bundle, or other article which prevents him or her from keeping
both hands on the handlebars.
(4) No operator shall carry any person, nor shall any person ride, in a
position that interferes with the operation or control of the moped
or the view of the operator.
(5) Any moped which carries a passenger shall be equipped with
footrests for such passenger.
(Neb. RS 60-6, 312)
E. Use of traffic lanes.
(1) A moped shall be entitled to full use of a traffic lane or any of any
highway with an authorized speed limit of 45 miles per hour or less,
and no vehicle shall be operated in such a manner as to deprive any
moped of the full use of such lane, except that mopeds and
motorcycles may be operated two abreast in a single lane.
(2) No person shall operate a moped between lanes of traffic or
between adjacent lines or rows of vehicles.
(3) Mopeds shall not be operated more than two abreast in a single
lane.
(4) Any person who operates a moped on a roadway with an authorized
speed limit of more than 45 miles per hour shall ride as near to the
right side of the roadway as practicable and shall not ride more
than single file.
(5) No person who rides upon a moped shall attach himself, herself, or
the moped to any other vehicle on a roadway.
(6) Mopeds shall not be operated on the sidewalks.
(Neb. RS 60-6, 313)
§ 382-7.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-7.3
1:659
§ 382-7.4. Skateboards. [Added 3-15-2005 by Ord. No. 15-05]
F. Equipment. Any moped which carries a passenger shall be equipped
with footrests for such passenger. No person shall operate any moped
with handlebars more than 15 inches above the mounting point of the
handlebars.
A. No person shall ride upon, or in any other manner use, a skateboard on
any sidewalk, parking lot, or driveway within 100 feet of any church or
school, or within 100 feet of any retail, professional, service, or
manufacturing business, or in the parking lot or within 100 feet of any
government-owned building in the City of Seward. No person shall ride
upon or in any other manner use a skateboard in any City park, except
in any areas of said City park specifically designed and/or approved for
the use of skateboards. The use of skateboards within the City of
Seward is hereby restricted to the following zoning districts within the
City:391
RR Rural Residential
R-1 Urban Residential Low-Density District
R-2 Urban Residential Moderate-Density District
R-3 Urban Residential Mixed-Density District
R-4 Urban Residential High-Density District
RM Mobile Home Residential District
B. Any person found violating the terms of this section shall, upon
conviction, have his or her skateboard confiscated for a period of one
week and be fined $25 for a first offense, $50 for a second offense, and
$100 for any third or subsequent offense.
391. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-7.3 SEWARD CODE § 382-7.4
1:660
ARTICLE VIII
Pedestrians
(Neb. RS 60-6, 152 through 60-6, 158)
§ 382-8.1. Rights and duties; right-of-way.
§ 382-8.2. Rights and duties at controlled intersections.
A. No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is
impossible for the driver to yield.
B. Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
C. The driver of any vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian
crossing the roadway within any crosswalk, except at intersections
where the movement of traffic is being regulated by police officers.
D. Whenever any vehicle has been stopped at a crosswalk or at an
intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear
to overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
E. It shall be unlawful for pedestrians to walk in the roadway of any street
or highway, except at crosswalks. Pedestrians shall use the sidewalk, if
one is provided, when walking between intersections. Where no
sidewalk is provided, pedestrians shall at all times walk on the left side
of the roadway facing oncoming traffic and shall yield the right-of-way
to oncoming vehicular traffic.
F. Pedestrians shall not stand, sit or otherwise place themselves in the
roadway except when making emergency repairs on a vehicle to render
it operable or when under the direction of a police officer.
G. Notwithstanding the provisions heretofore made in this chapter and
this section, every driver shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with
any pedestrian upon a roadway and shall give warning by sounding the
horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon
observing any child or any confused or handicapped person upon the
roadway.
A. Colored signals. At intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic
control signals, pedestrians shall not cross a street against a red signal
and shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk. A pedestrian
crossing or starting to cross any such crosswalk on a green signal shall
have the right-of-way over all vehicles, including those making turns,
until such pedestrian has reached the opposite curb or a safety zone. It
§ 382-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-8.2
1:661
§ 382-8.3. Use of crosswalks.
Pedestrians shall move whenever practicable upon the right half of a
crosswalk.
§ 382-8.4. Parades or marches. [Amended 10-7-2003 by Ord. No.
33-03]
It shall be unlawful to conduct a parade or march in or on any public street,
alley or other public way or place in the City unless a permit therefor is
first obtained from the Chief of Police. Application for such permit shall be
filed with the Clerk on forms provided for that purpose. Such application
shall set forth the suggested route, the date such parade or march is
to be conducted, the time such parade or march, including preparation
therefor, for which the street, alley, public way or other place may be
used shall begin, the approximate duration of such parade or march, the
name of the person or persons or organization or organizations sponsoring
or conducting such parade or march, any unusual equipment to be used,
and such other information as may be required. The application shall be
brought before the Chief of Police, who may grant or deny such application,
may alter or change the suggested route, may establish conditions and
restrictions as to time and any other matters relating thereto, and may,
in his discretion, require a bond of not more than $5,000, with good and
sufficient personal sureties, as a condition to the granting of such permit,
conditioned to indemnify the City for any loss, damage or liability incurred
or caused by the conduct of such parade or march. If the application is
approved by the Chief of Police, the Clerk shall issue a permit which shall
include the conditions or restrictions or alterations, if any, made by the
Chief of Police. In lieu of a personal surety bond, a corporate surety bond
may be furnished. If bond is required by the Chief of Police, such permits
shall not be issued until said bond and the sureties thereon are approved
by the Clerk. Such permit shall be valid only for the time and date set forth
therein. In the event that the Chief of Police denies said application, such
denial may be appealed to the City Council for further action.
shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail to yield the rightof-
way to any such pedestrian.
B. Pedestrian "Walk" and "Don't Walk" signals. Whenever special
pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Don't Walk"
are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows:
(1) "Walk": Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the
roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the rightof-
way by the drivers of all vehicles.
(2) "Don't Walk": No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the
direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially
completed his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a
sidewalk or safety zone while the "Don't Walk" signal is showing.
§ 382-8.2 SEWARD CODE § 382-8.5
1:662
§ 382-8.5. Parade or special event using state highway system.
[Amended 9-20-2011 by Ord. No. 23-11]
A. In addition to satisfying the requirements of § 382-8.4, any applicant for
parade or march permit which will involve the temporary use of any
portion of the state highway system, and any special event which will
involve the temporary use of any portion of the state highway system,
shall comply with the Neb. RS 39-1359.
B. Neb. RS 39-1359 provides that any parade, march, or special event
approved by the City which will involve the temporary use of any
portion of the state highway system shall require formal action by the
governing body of the City acknowledging that the City accepts any
statutory or common law duty of the state to protect the public from
damage, injury, or death and that the state shall not have such statutory
or common law duty during the time the City is in control of the portion
of the state highway system being used for the parade, march, or
special event. The City shall, by official governing body action,
acknowledge that it accepts the foregoing duties, and if a claim is made
against the state, the City shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless
the state from all claims, demands, actions, damages, and liability,
including reasonable attorney's fees, that may arise as a result of the
special event. The City shall further provide 30 days' advanced notice of
the parade, march, or special event to the Nebraska Department of
Roads (NDOR) prior to proceeding with the use of the state highway
system. The notice shall specify the date and time the City will assume
control of the state highway property and relinquish control of such
state highway property to the state, as well as the beginning and ending
locations for the highway closure, including sufficient area for the
placement of advance warning and/or detour signing.
C. In the event of failure to provide a specific acknowledgment as defined
above from the City's official governing body, as well as 30 days'
advance written notice now required by law, the state highway system
cannot be used for the event.
§ 382-8.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-8.5
1:663

ARTICLE IX
Snowmobiles and Minibikes
(Neb. RS 60-6, 320 through 60-6, 346)
§ 382-9.1. Definitions. [Amended 4-1-1980 by Ord. No. 7-80]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SNOWMOBILE — A self-propelled motor vehicle designed to travel on snow
or ice or natural terrain steered by wheels, skis or runners and propelled by
a belt-driven track with or without steel cleats.
§ 382-9.2. Operation on streets and highways prohibited; exception.
[Amended 4-1-1980 by Ord. No. 7-80; 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 3-10]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile upon any street
or highway within the corporate limits, or upon any public land owned by
the municipality, except in an emergency. An "emergency" is defined as an
unforeseen combination of circumstances and the resulting state that calls
for immediate action. (Neb. RS 60-6, 335)
§ 382-9.3. Unlawful operation. [Amended 4-1-1980 by Ord. No.
7-80]
It shall be deemed a misdemeanor for any person to allow a snowmobile,
either owned or operated by him, to be operated:
A. At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under the
surrounding circumstances.
B. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger persons
or property.
C. Without a lighted headlight and tail light when such would be required
by conditions.
D. In any tree nursery or planting in a manner which damages or destroys
growing stock.
E. Upon any private lands without first having obtained permission of the
owner, lessee or operator of such lands.
F. While under the influence of alcoholic liquor or of any drug.392
(Neb. RS 60-6, 335; 60-6, 337)
392. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-9.4
1:665
§ 382-9.4. Firearms prohibited. [Amended 4-1-1980 by Ord. No.
7-80]
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess any firearm, bow and
arrow, or projectile device while operating or riding a snowmobile, unless
such bow and arrow is enclosed in a carrying case, or such firearm or
projectile device is unloaded and enclosed in a carrying case; provided that
this provision shall not apply to law enforcement officers in the performance
of their duties. (Neb. RS 60-6, 342)
§ 382-9.5. Operation on public lands. [Amended 4-1-1980 by Ord.
No. 7-80]
Snowmobiles shall be prohibited from operation on the public lands owned
by the municipality, except where allowed by resolution of the governing
body. (Neb. RS 60-6, 338)
§ 382-9.6. Minibikes. [Amended 10-6-1981 by Ord. No. 34-81]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a minibike upon any street
or highway within the corporate limits of the municipality. For purposes of
this section, "minibike" shall mean a two-wheeled motor vehicle which has
a total wheel and tire diameter of less than 14 inches or an engine rated
capacity of less than 45 cubic centimeters displacement or any other twowheeled
motor vehicle primarily designed by the manufacturer for off-road
use only. (Neb. RS 60-121; 60-6, 347 through 60-6, 350)
§ 382-9.4 SEWARD CODE § 382-9.6
1:666
ARTICLE X
All-Terrain and Utility-Type Vehicles
[Added 10-6-1987 by Ord. No. 23-87]
§ 382-10.1. Definitions; registration exceptions. [Amended
3-30-2012 by Ord. No. 7-12393]
(Neb. RS 60-6, 355)
§ 382-10.2. Operation. [Amended 1-2-1990 by Ord. No. 2-90;
9-6-1994 by Ord. No. 51-94; 12-4-2007 by Ord. No. 41-07; 3-20-2012
by Ord. No. 8-12]
A. As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE — Any motorized off-highway vehicle which:
UTILITY-TYPE VEHICLE —
(1) Is 50 inches or less in width;
(2) Has a dry weight of 1,200 pounds or less;
(3) Travels on three or more non-highway tires; and
Is designed for operator use only with no passengers or is
specifically designed by the original manufacturer for the operator
and one passenger.
(4)
Any motorized off-highway vehicle which:
(a) Is 74 inches in width or less.
(b) Is not more than 180 inches, including the bumper, in length.
(c) Has a dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less.
(d) Travels on four or more non-highway tires.
(1)
"Utility-type vehicle" does not include all-terrain vehicles, golf cart
vehicles, or low-speed vehicles.
(2)
B. All-terrain vehicles and utility-type vehicles which have been modified
to include additional equipment not required by Neb. RS 60-6, 357 and
60-6, 358 shall not be required to be registered under the Motor Vehicle
Registration Act, nor shall such modified or retrofitted vehicles be
eligible for registration in any other category of vehicle defined in the
Act.
(Neb. RS 60-6, 355)
393. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-10.2
1:667
§ 382-10.3. Equipment requirements. [Amended 3-20-2012 by Ord.
No. 10-12]
Every all-terrain vehicle and utility-type vehicle shall be equipped with:
§ 382-10.4. Equipment modifications prohibited. [Amended
3-20-2012 by Ord. No. 11-12]
No person shall:
A. An all-terrain vehicle or a utility-type vehicle may be operated when
such operation occurs only between the hours of sunrise and sunset.
Any person operating an all-terrain vehicle or a utility-type vehicle shall
have a valid Class O operator's license or a farm permit as provided in
Neb. RS 60-4, 126, shall have liability insurance coverage for the allterrain
vehicle or utility-type vehicle while operating the vehicle on a
highway, and shall not operate such vehicle at a speed in excess of 30
miles per hour. The person operating the all-terrain vehicle or utilitytype
vehicle shall provide proof of such insurance coverage to any
peace officer requesting such proof within five days of such a request.
When operating an all-terrain vehicle or a utility-type vehicle, the
headlight and taillight of the vehicle shall be on and the vehicle shall be
equipped with a bicycle safety flag which extends not less than five feet
above ground attached to the rear of such vehicle. The bicycle safety
flag shall be triangular in shape with an area of not less than 30 square
inches and shall be day-glow in color.
B. All-terrain vehicles and utility-type vehicles may be operated without
complying with Subsection A of this section on highways in parades
which have been authorized by the State of Nebraska or any
department, board, commission, or political subdivision of the state.394
(Neb. RS 60-6, 356)
A. A brake system maintained in good operating condition;
B. An adequate muffler system in good working condition; and
C. A United States Forest Service qualified spark arrester.
(Neb. RS 60-6, 358)
A. Equip the exhaust system of an all-terrain vehicle or a utility-type
vehicle with a cutout, bypass, or similar device;
B. Operate an all-terrain vehicle or a utility-type vehicle with an exhaust
system so modified; or
394. Editor's Note: Original § 5-903 of the 1976 Code, Headlights, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed 3-20-2012 by Ord. No. 9-12.
§ 382-10.2 SEWARD CODE § 382-10.4
1:668
§ 382-10.5. Vehicles participating in competitions. [Amended
3-20-2012 by Ord. No. 12-12]
All-terrain and utility-type vehicles participating in competitive events may
be exempt from §§ 382-10.2 through 382-10.4 herein at the discretion of the
Director of Motor Vehicles. (Neb. RS 60-6, 360)
§ 382-10.6. Accident reports. [Amended 3-20-2012 by Ord. No.
13-12395]
If an accident results in the death of any person or in the injury of any
person which requires the treatment of the person by a physician, the
operator of each all-terrain or utility-type vehicle involved in the accident
shall give notice of the accident in the same manner as provided in Neb. RS
60-699. (Neb. RS 60-6, 361)
§ 382-10.7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-20-2012 by Ord.
No. 14-12396]
Any person who violates §§ 382-10.2 to 382-10.6 shall be guilty of a Class
III misdemeanor, except that if such person is convicted of a second or
subsequent offense within any period of one year, he or she shall be guilty
of a Class II misdemeanor. (Neb. RS 60-6, 362)
§ 382-10.8. Enforcement. [Amended 3-20-2012 by Ord. No. 15-12]
Any peace officer of the state or of any political subdivision, including
conservation officers of the Game and Parks Commission, shall be charged
with the enforcement of the provisions of §§ 382-10.2 through 382-10.6 of
this article.
C. Operate an all-terrain vehicle or a utility-type vehicle with the spark
arrester removed or modified except for use in closed-course
competition events.
(Neb. RS 60-6, 359)
395. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
396. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-10.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-10.8
1:669

ARTICLE XI
Parks and Bike Trails
§ 382-11.1. Golf carts. [Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2-10]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a golf cart upon any street or
highway within the corporate limits, or upon any public land owned by the
municipality, except as follows and under the following terms:
§ 382-11.2. Horses and motorized vehicles in City parks. [Added
8-15-2006 by Ord. No. 17-06]
A. The operator shall have a valid Class O operator's license issued by the
State of Nebraska;
B. The operator shall drive the golf cart only for the purpose of traveling to
and from a golf course located within the corporate limits of the City
and must use the most direct route to and from the location where the
golf cart is garaged or otherwise stored by its owner;
C. A golf cart may only be operated when such operation occurs between
the hours of sunrise and sunset, unless equipped with both operable
headlights and tail lights designed or authorized by the original
manufacturer;
D. A golf cart may not be driven on Highway 34 or Highway 15, except to
cross said highways; Highway 15 may only be crossed at the
intersection of North Avenue and Highway 15; and
E. The operator must obtain a special use permit to operate a golf cart on
the City streets.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, ride, or lead any horse in or
through any park except upon roadways or streets designated for motor
vehicle traffic. It shall also be unlawful for any person to drive any
motor vehicle upon any bicycle or hiking path within the City.
B. The following shall be permitted in the parks and on the bicycle or
hiking paths within the City:
(1) Motorized wheelchairs.
(2) Golf carts for use by the elderly or handicapped, with special
permission obtained from the Public Works Department of the City.
(3) The use of motor vehicles or horses in City parks, or on the bicycle
or hiking paths within the City, when such uses are necessary for
participation in events sanctioned or permitted by the City.
§ 382-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-11.2
1:671

ARTICLE XII
Enforcement397
§ 382-12.1. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who violates the
prohibitions or provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an amount not to exceed
$500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of said
payment the offender shall stand committed to the County Jail until such
fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on which a
violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
397. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-12.1
1:673
Chapter 390
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 225.
Sewers — See Ch. 325.
Streets, sidewalks and municipal
property — See Ch. 340.
Utilities — See Ch. 370.
Zoning and subdivision — See Ch. 410.
§ 382-12.1 SEWARD CODE § 382-12.1
1:674
ARTICLE I
Water Use
§ 390-1.1. System operation and funding.398
§ 390-1.2. Definitions. [Amended 11-6-1979 by Ord. No. 1200;
12-15-1981 by Ord. No. 45-81]
The following definitions shall be applied throughout this chapter. Where no
definition is specified, the normal dictionary usage of the word shall apply.
CONSUMER or USER —
A. The municipality owns and operates the Municipal Water/Wastewater
Department through the Water/Wastewater Director. The governing
body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the care, management,
and maintenance of the Municipal Water/Wastewater Department, may
each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by
state law on the actual valuation of all real estate and personal property
within the corporate limits that is subject to taxation. The revenue from
said tax shall be known as the "Water Fund" and shall remain in the
custody of the Municipal Treasurer.
B. The Water/Wastewater Director shall have the direct management and
control of the Municipal Water/Wastewater Department and shall
faithfully carry out the duties of his office. The Water/Wastewater
Director shall have the authority to adopt rules and regulations for the
sanitary and efficient management of the Water/Wastewater
Department, subject to the supervision and review of the governing
body.
C. The governing body shall set the rates to be charged for services
rendered by ordinance and shall file a copy of the rates in the office of
the Municipal Clerk for public inspection at any reasonable time.
All users of the municipal water system and the owners and tenants of
real estate and buildings connected with such water system.
A.
Users shall be classified as either "residential users," "commercial
users" or "rural users."
RESIDENTIAL USER — The owner or tenant of a dwelling used
exclusively for residential purposes and which is connected to said
water system and having a separate water meter; provided that any
property located in a Residential Zone of the City which conducts a
small business inside the home and which is in conformity with the
zoning ordinances of the City399 shall be considered "residential"
for the purpose of water classification; and provided, further, that
all churches, St. John's Elementary School, Seward Public Schools,
(1)
B.
398. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
399. Editor's Note: See Ch. 410, Zoning and Subdivision.
§ 390-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-1.2
1:675
MAIN — Any pipe other than a supply or service pipe that is used for the
purpose of carrying water to and dispersing the same in the municipality.
SERVICE PIPE — Any pipe extending from the shut-off, stop box, or curb
cock at or near the lot line to and beyond the property line of the consumer
to the location on the premises where the water is to be dispersed.
SUPPLY PIPE — Is hereby defined to be any pipe tapped into a main and
extending from there to a point at or near the lot line of the consumer's
premises where the shut-off, stop box, or curb cock is located.
§ 390-1.3. Consumer application for service; terms. [Amended
2-15-1983 by Ord. No. 6-83]
including the Senior High, Junior High and Elementary School
installation, shall be considered residential users of the water
system.
COMMERCIAL USER or RURAL USER — all other users of the
municipal water system are hereby defined to be commercial users,
other than those living outside the city limits, who shall be defined
as rural users.
(2)
A. Every person or persons desiring water service must make application
therefor at the Utility Office located in City Hall. The application must
state truly and fully all uses to which said water service is to be applied
and no additional use will be allowed.
B. For new consumers, blanks will be furnished for that purpose by the
Utility Office. All landlords shall make an application with the City to
receive water service for their rental properties. This application shall
be signed one time only and shall place the responsibility for payment
of all usage on the landlord when any of his rental properties are not
rented. It shall be the duty of the landlord to notify the Utility Office of
any changes of water usage by tenants on his properties. If the landlord
wishes to assume the responsibility for payment of water service on any
of his rented or leased properties when they are rented, he must so
notify the Utility Office in writing upon blanks furnished for that
purpose. Upon receiving such notification, all bills will be mailed
directly to the landlord and he will be held responsible for their
payment. Otherwise, all requirements for service deposits must be met.
C. Applications for water service are not transferable. Any person wishing
to change from one location to another shall make a new application. If
any consumer shall sell, dispose, or remove from the premises where
service is furnished in his name, or if the premises are destroyed by fire
or other casualty, he shall at once inform the Utility Office, which shall
cause the water service to be shut off from the premises. If the
consumer should fail to give such notice, he shall be charged for all
water used on the premises until the Utility Office is otherwise advised
of such circumstances.
§ 390-1.2 SEWARD CODE § 390-1.3
1:676
§ 390-1.4. Tap fees required with application. [Amended 10-19-1982
by Ord. No. 30-82401]
Every person hereinafter desiring a supply of water from the Water/
Wastewater Department of the City must make application therefor at the
City Building Inspection Department. The City shall require payment of tap
fees in advance from applicants for water service. The Council shall, by
resolution, classify and fix tap fees to be charged for water connection.
The applicant shall be furnished a receipt upon payment of tap fees. All
applications shall be made upon blanks to be supplied by the City for that
purpose. Tap fees shall be credited to the Water Fund.
§ 390-1.5. Installation procedure; deduct meters. [Amended
5-1-1979 by Ord. No. 1161; 2-19-2013 by Ord. No. 3-13]
D. The municipality, through its Water/Wastewater Department, shall
furnish water services to persons whose premises abut a street or alley
in which a commercial main is now or may hereafter be laid. The
municipality may also furnish water services to persons whose premises
are situated outside the corporate limits of the municipality, as and
when, according to law, the Council may see fit to do so. The rules,
regulations, and rates for water service, hereinafter named in this
article, shall be considered a part of every application hereafter made
for water service and shall be considered a part of the contract between
every consumer now served by the Water/Wastewater Department.
Without further formality, the making of application on the part of any
applicant or the use or consumption of water by present consumers and
the furnishing of water service to said applicant or consumer shall
constitute a contract between the applicant and the municipality, to
which both parties are bound. If a consumer should violate any of the
provisions of said contract or any reasonable rules and regulations that
the Council may hereafter adopt, the Utility Office shall cause the
service to be disconnected from the building or place of such violation
and no further connection of water service for such building or place
shall again be made except by order of the Utility Office.400
A. The City, by its Water/Wastewater Director or his agent, will, for the tap
fees charged as aforesaid, tap the commercial main to which applicant's
service pipe will be jointed and will furnish the ferrules or clamps and
corporation cocks and put the same in the commercial main. The
applicant, at his own expense, shall employ a licensed plumber or
drainlayer, who shall perform all excavation, including exposing the
main, build and keep in repair and replace water service from the main,
in and upon his own premises, and shall restore the same when ordered
out of service by the Water/Wastewater Director. Further, the City will
400. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Original §§ 3-104, Consumer's Ledger; Separate Accounts Kept in, and 3-105, Water
Service Accounts Not Transferable, of the 1976 Code, which immediately followed this
section, were repealed 2-15-1983 by Ord. No. 6-83.
401. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-1.5
1:677
§ 390-1.6. Tapping mains.404
No person except the Water/Wastewater Director or a plumber will be
permitted under any circumstances to tap the mains or distribution pipes or
insert stop boxes or ferrules therein. All taps shall be made between 8:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of the day, and pipes must be in all cases tapped on top,
and not in any case nearer than 10 inches to either end of the pipe, nor
nearer than 10 inches to any other tap.
§ 390-1.7. Connections made by plumbers.405
All connections and work done for consumers of, or applicants for water
service from the Waterworks of this City shall be done by licensed plumbers
and drain layers as provided in this Code.
make repair to services known at the effective date of this section to be
in need of repair between the main and up to and including the curb
stop.402
B. An applicant may request deduct meters from a master meter on a caseby-
case basis where it is the opinion of the Water/Wastewater Director
and City Clerk-Treasurer that it is in the best interest of the City. The
City will maintain up to and including: 1) the curb stop of the master
meter, 2) the master meter and 3) the deduct meters. All plumbing in a
master/deduct configuration must meet the City plumbing code and
specifications.403 Each new deduct meter will have a fee set to cover the
cost of the materials, including the meter and any required City labor.
Each new deduct meter must be installed by a licensed plumber. The
master meter owner may not shut off water to deduct meters except for
maintenance or repairs, which must be done as expediently as possible.
If any water on the master meter is discharged to the sewer system,
then the master meter will be billed for water and sewer rates for its
size and class. The owner of the master meter must maintain all
plumbing in good repair and keep accurate records of layout of all pipes
and fixtures. All deduct meters must be accessible and installed in a
location to prevent freezing. All piping and fixtures must be protected
from freezing. The master and deduct meter accounts will be set up
similar to other accounts for billing purposes, except the usage
calculated from the master meter will be subtracted from the deduct
meter's usage from actual master reading over the same time period.
402. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
403. Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Art. VIII, Plumbing Code.
404. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
405. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-1.5 SEWARD CODE § 390-1.8
1:678
§ 390-1.8. Licensed plumber required.406
It shall be unlawful for any master or journeyman plumber to do any
work upon any of the pipes or appurtenances of the Water/Wastewater
Department, or to make any connection with, or extension of, the supply
pipes of any consumer taking water from the City until such master or
journeyman plumber shall have first procured a license and permit.407
§ 390-1.9. Inspection of plumbing.408
All plumbing shall be skillfully done, and in a manner required by the Water/
Wastewater Director, and shall be subject to his inspection and approval.
The quality and pattern of all appurtenances shall in like manner be subject
to his approval; and no work shall be covered until examined by him.
§ 390-1.10. Service pipe and stop box installation and repair.
[Amended 5-1-1979 by Ord. No. 1162; 6-20-2000 by Ord. No. 28-00]
A. All service pipes hereafter installed from the point of union with the
commercial main to the stop box of the consumer shall be of one inch in
diameter unless a larger tap is applied for, necessary or required, and of
such strength and quality as prescribed by the Water/Wastewater
Director; provided that if pipe of a larger diameter is necessarily
installed, the tap fee provided in this article shall be increased to cover
the service pipe of larger diameter furnished by the City. The City will
hereafter replace and keep in repair all service pipe from the
commercial main to and including the stop box. The consumer, at his or
her own expense, will replace and keep in repair all service pipe from
the stop box to, in, or upon his or her premises. When leaks occur in the
service and supply piping of the consumer between the stop box and
meter, the Water/Wastewater Director shall shut off the water service of
the consumer until the leak is repaired at the expense of the consumer
to the satisfaction of the Water/Wastewater Director. There shall be a
stop box and a stop and waste box installed in connection with each
water service. If any water service shall have no stop box installed in
connection therewith, the Water/Wastewater Director shall forthwith
cause it to be installed. Stop boxes hereafter installed shall be placed
uniformly at right angles with the commercial main and seven feet
outside the property line in the street running parallel with the
commercial main on the same side of the street to the property line it is
to serve. All stop boxes shall be uniformly placed five feet under
ground.409
B. There shall be a stop and waste box attached to every supply pipe at a
point in the building so as to admit water being shut off in frosty
weather and pipes being emptied.
406. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
407. Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Art. VIII, Plumbing Code.
408. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
409. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-1.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-1.10
1:679
§ 390-1.11. Service pipe excavations.410
In making excavations in the streets or highways for the laying of service
pipe or making repairs, the planks, paving stones, pavement, and earth
removed must be deposited in a manner that will occasion the least
inconvenience to the public and provide for a passage of water along the
gutters. Excavations in the streets shall be made only in accordance with
the provisions of this Code relating thereto. No person shall make any
excavation on any street or highway within 10 feet of any laid water pipe
while ground is frozen, or dig up or uncover so as to expose to the frost any
pipe or sewer of the City except under direction of the Water/Wastewater
Director.
§ 390-1.12. Refilling excavations and restoring pavement; no
openings when ground is frozen.411
After service pipes are laid, in refilling the opening the earth must be laid
in layers of not more than nine inches in depth, with each layer thoroughly
tamped and settled with water. The streets, sidewalks, and pavements must
be restored to as good a condition as previous to making the excavation, and
all dirt, stones and rubbish must be removed immediately after completing
the work. Should any excavation in any street, alley, or highway be left open
or unfinished for the space of 24 hours, or should the work be improperly
done or the rubbish not removed, the Water/Wastewater Director shall have
the right to finish or correct the work, and the expense incurred shall be
charged to the plumber or to the drainlayer and shall be paid by him before
the water is turned on. No opening of the streets for the tapping of mains
will be permitted when the ground is frozen except by permission of the
Water/Wastewater Director.
§ 390-1.13. Protection of excavations.
No person shall leave an excavation made in the street or highways open at
any time without barricades, and during the night warning lights must be
maintained at such excavation.
§ 390-1.14. Protection of service pipe; limitations on City liability.
C. All service pipe must be laid to prevent rupture by freezing.
A. All house boilers shall be constructed with one or more air holes near
the top of the inlet pipe, and sufficiently strong to bear the pressure of
the atmosphere under the vacuum. The stop box and other
appurtenances must be sufficiently strong to bear pressure and run off
the water in the mains. All persons taking the water shall keep their
own service pipes, stop boxes and apparatus in good repair and protect
them from frost or freezing at their risk and expense and shall prevent
410. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
411. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-1.10 SEWARD CODE § 390-1.14
1:680
§ 390-1.15. Meters required; installation and repair; testing and
deposits required. [Amended 11-15-1977 by Ord. No. 1104;
12-15-1981 by Ord. No. 46-81; 8-3-1999 by Ord. No. 27-99413]
all unnecessary waste of water; and it is hereby expressly stipulated
by the Council and Water/Wastewater Director that no claim shall be
made against them or either of them by reason of breaking of any
service box or, if from any cause the supply of water should fail, damage
arising from shutting off water to repair mains, making connections or
extensions, or for any other purpose that may be deemed necessary,
and the right is hereby reserved to cut off the supply of water at any
time, any permit to the contrary notwithstanding.412
B. No reduction in rates will be made for the time any service pipe may be
frozen or out of use from any cause.
A. All water service hereafter connected with the water plant and system
of the City shall have placed thereon a water meter, set in place by the
City. All such water meters shall remain the property of the City. No
person other than the Water/Wastewater Director, his assistants, or a
plumber under the direction of the Water/Wastewater Director shall be
allowed to set meters. All meters so set and installed will be kept in
repair at the expense of the City unless the damage done was caused by
the negligence or willful conduct or act of the consumer; provided that
when water meters get out of repair on account of the consumer's
negligence or willful conduct, the Water/Wastewater Director shall
repair or replace said meter and the total expense thereof shall be paid
for by the consumer. When such meters are entirely worn out, they will
be replaced by the City. Hereafter, all meters shall be sealed in three
places: once on the burr connections, on each side, and on the cover of
the registering dial; and no person shall deface, injure or break said
seal unless authorized to do so by the Water/Wastewater Director. All
water meters will be tested for accuracy on a regular basis and changed
or calibrated as required. In addition, at a consumer's request, a field
test of meter accuracy may be accomplished by the Water/Wastewater
Director. If, after the accomplishment of a field test indicating accuracy
of a consumer's meter, said consumer is not satisfied with the field
results, the consumer may pay a deposit to the City in an amount set
from time to time by the City Council and request that a meter test be
performed by an outside meter testing facility. If the test results
indicate accuracy within published American Water Works Association
(AWWA) standards, the deposit will be forfeited by the consumer to
defray the expenses of testing. If the test indicates inaccuracy
according to AWWA standards, the deposit will be returned to the
consumer and adjustments will be made to the last billing, if deemed
necessary by the Water/Wastewater Director.
412. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
413. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-1.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-1.15
1:681
§ 390-1.16. Removal of meter or change of meter size. [Amended
12-15-1981 by Ord. No. 44-81; 8-3-1999 by Ord. No. 29-99414]
Water meters will be removed and service discontinued upon the request of
the consumer at no cost. If the same consumer at some future time requests
reinstallation of a meter to restore the same water service, a charge as
set from time to time by the City Council, payable in advance, will apply.
If a consumer requests a change in the meter size currently in place or
previously in place, a deposit in an amount set from time to time by the City
Council shall be paid by such consumer to defray the cost of installation
by the City for both parts and labor. The balance of the deposit, if any, will
be refunded to the consumer with an itemized statement of costs. Costs
in addition to the deposit will be billed after installation. If the Water/
Wastewater Director determines that extensive plumbing modification is
required, the consumer shall hire, at his own additional expense, a licensed
plumber to accomplish modifications prior to City installation of the meter.
§ 390-1.17. Meter location.415
All meter pits, if meters are not set in basements, shall be constructed by
an applicant or consumer at his own expense at such point near and inside
the lot line as shall be agreed upon by the City and consumer and shall
be of such design as sanctioned and approved by the Mayor and Council;
provided that all meters shall be set in a horizontal position so that the
same may be easily read by the Water/Wastewater Director, or his agents,
whether set in a meter pit or in a basement. The Water/Wastewater Director,
or his agent for reading meters, shall, whenever it is inconvenient to make
readings of any meter now set or hereafter to be set in meter pits or in
basements, be empowered to give the consumer 20 days' notice in writing
to reset said meter in a horizontal position, and if the consumer refuses or
neglects to do so, then the Water/Wastewater Director or his agent shall
reset said meter horizontally and the cost thereof shall be charged to and
paid by said consumer as water rent.
§ 390-1.18. Meter tampering prohibited.
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to tamper
with any water meter or by means of any contrivance or device to divert
the water from the service pipe so that the same will not pass through said
meter or while passing through said meter to cause the same to register
inaccurately.
B. The Water/Wastewater Director shall have the right to order a meter
applied to any service pipe whenever he may deem it advisable, and
collect meter rates for water. Meters shall be located on premises so
they will be conveniently accessible for inspection and reading strictly
in accordance with the provisions of this code.
414. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
415. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-1.15 SEWARD CODE § 390-1.19
1:682
§ 390-1.19. Separate stop boxes required.416
When a service pipe supplies two or more distinct premises or tenements,
there shall be provided, subject to the control of the Water/Wastewater
Director, a separate stop for each of such premises or tenements so the
water supply may be shut off from one without interfering with the supply
of the other.
§ 390-1.20. Turning water on.417
Water will not be turned into any house or private service pipe except on
order of the Water/Wastewater Director, or his duly authorized agent, and
plumbers are prohibited from turning the water into service pipe except on
permission of the Water/Wastewater Director or his duly authorized agent.
This rule shall not be construed to prevent any plumber from admitting
water to test the pipes, and for that purpose only.
§ 390-1.21. Waste and improper use of water.
All persons using water shall keep the fixtures using water closed except
when obtaining water for use, and shall be responsible for any damage or
injury that may result to others from the improper use of said water.
§ 390-1.22. Diversion of water prohibited.418
No consumer shall supply water to other families, or suffer them to take
water off his premises, nor, after water is introduced into any building or
upon any premises, shall any person make or employ any plumber or other
person to make any tap or connection with the pipe upon premises for
alteration, extension, or attachment without the permission of the Water/
Wastewater Director.
§ 390-1.23. Hydrants in streets; drinking fountains.
No hydrant, except for public drinking fountains, shall be placed within the
limits of any street, unless such hydrant is securely closed and protected
against general use. No drinking fountain which has openings by which it
can be used as a source of domestic supply shall be placed within the limits
of any street for public use.
§ 390-1.24. Right of entry for inspection. [Amended 4-3-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-10]
The Water/Wastewater Director, or his duly authorized agents, shall have
free access, at any reasonable time, to all parts of each premises and
building to or in which water is delivered for the purpose of examining the
416. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
417. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
418. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-1.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-1.24
1:683
pipes, fixtures, and other portions of the system to ascertain whether there
is any disrepair or unnecessary waste of water.
§ 390-1.25. Utility deposits. [Amended 9-2-1980 by Ord. No. 21-80;
5-16-1989 by Ord. No. 15-89; 4-17-1990 by Ord. No. 15-90; 9-5-1995
by Ord. No. 33-95; 8-17-1999 by Ord. No. 35-99; 4-19-2005 by Ord.
No. 24-05; 5-18-2010 by Ord. No. 9-10]
§ 390-1.26. Water rates. [Amended 1-20-1976 by Ord. No. 1040;
11-15-1977 by Ord. No. 1100; 2-19-1980 by Ord. No. 4-80;
9-23-1980 by Ord. No. 26-80; 12-15-1981 by Ord. No. 43-81;
12-7-1982 by Ord. No. 38-82; 12-6-1983 by Ord. No. 31-83; 3-5-1985
by Ord. No. 4-85; 3-1-1988 by Ord. No. 2-88; 5-6-2003 by Ord. No.
18-03; 8-21-2007 by Ord. No. 24-07; 6-3-2008 by Ord. No. 10-08;
5-18-2010 by Ord. No. 8-10; 4-19-2011 by Ord. No. 5-11; 5-6-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-12; 10-6-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-15; 9-19-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-20; 4-3-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-10; 12-18-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-24; 5-21-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-16]
A. All water service customers of the City to whom water is supplied,
whether tenants, occupants or owners of premises, shall deposit at the
City Utility Office a utility deposit in such amount as may be fixed from
time to time by resolution of the Council. All such funds shall be
retained by the City as a guarantee of payment of charges and service
fees incurred by the depositor. For deposits over $500, interest will be
payable for a one-year time period based on the average rate of interest
earned by the City on investments over the immediate past 12 months
preceding the return of the deposit. There will be no charge made for
water activation services. [Amended 4-3-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-10]
B. Utility deposits are in the nature of trust funds and shall be refunded to
consumers after two years of service and no delinquencies, audited and
allowed by the City Clerk-Treasurer and ordered paid out the Electric
Fund with proper deductions made for arrearages or delinquencies due
the City, if any. Said utility deposit funds shall be refunded only to the
original depositor, or his/her estate, and are not transferable unless
approved by the City Clerk-Treasurer. The City shall have the authority
to increase or decrease commercial utility deposits, based on the usage,
if it is determined necessary by order of the City Clerk-Treasurer. If a
commercial deposit is increased and the commercial consumer neglects
or refuses to pay the increase within 30 days, service shall be
discontinued by the procedure provided for in § 390-1.27 of this article.
C. All utility deposits heretofore or hereafter deposited with the City that
are not demanded by the depositor within four years after the
discontinuance of such water service shall be deemed forfeited and
shall be transferred to the Water Fund of the City.
A. A tariff of monthly water rates will be charged for each meter installed
in the water system of the City. The Water/Wastewater Director or his
§ 390-1.24 SEWARD CODE § 390-1.26
1:684
duly authorized agent may make a determination to forego the meter
charge on irrigation systems when the meter is winterized and shut off,
if it is in the best interest of the City to do so. The following rates are
hereby established:
Urban General Service Rates
Rates Effective with June 2019 Billing
Meter Size
(inches)
Customer
Charge Rate per Cubic Foot
1 or less $13.86 First 1,200 CF, $0.0379
Over 1,200 CF, $0.0451
1.5 $31.19 First 1,800 CF, $0.0379
Over 1,800 CF, $0.0451
2 $55.44 First 2,400 CF, $0.0379
Over 2,400 CF, $0.0451
3 $124.74 First 3,600 CF, $0.0379
Over 3,600 CF, $0.0451
4 $221.76 First 4,800 CF, $0.0379
Over 4,800 CF, $0.0451
6 $498.96 First 7,200 CF, $0.0379
Over 7,200 CF, $0.0451
8 $887.04 First 9,600 CF, $0.0379
Over 9,600 CF, $0.0451
Rural General Service Rates
Rates Effective with June 2019 Billing
Meter Size
(inches)
Customer
Charge. Rate per Cubic Foot
1 or less $18.15 First 1,200 CF, $0.0539
Over 1,200 CF, $0.0661
1.5 $37.74 First 1,800 CF, $0.0539
Over 1,800 CF, $0.0661
2 $65.17 First 2,400 CF, $0.0539
Over 2,400 CF, $0.0661
3 $143.54 First 3,600 CF, $0.0539
Over 3,600 CF, $0.0661
4 $253.26 First 4,800 CF, $0.0539
§ 390-1.26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-1.26
1:685
§ 390-1.27. Billing and collection procedure; delinquent bills.
[Amended 9-4-1979 by Ord. No. 1182; 3-20-1984 by Ord. No. 8-84;
3-5-1985 by Ord. No. 4-85; 8-17-1999 by Ord. No. 36-99; 10-5-1999
by Ord. No. 47-99; 8-17-2010 by Ord. No. 22-10]
Rural General Service Rates
Rates Effective with June 2019 Billing
Meter Size
(inches)
Customer
Charge. Rate per Cubic Foot
Over 4,800 CF, $0.0661
6 $566.76 First 7,200 CF, $0.0539
Over 7,200 CF, $0.0661
8 $1,005.64 First 9,600 CF, $0.0539
Over 9,600 CF, $0.0661
Urban Industrial Service Rates
Rates Effective with June 2019 Billing
(1) The Urban Industrial Service Rate is available to customers within
the City of Seward with an average monthly usage over 150,000
CF.
(2) Customer charges will be based upon the Urban General Service
Rate listed above.
(3) Rate per Cubic Foot:
(a) First 66,840 CF, $0.0449.
(b) Second 66,840 CF, $0.0337.
(c) Third 66,840 CF, $0.0262.
(d) Fourth 66,840 CF, $0.0150.
(e) Fifth 66,840 CF and over, $0.0097.
A. The Water/Wastewater Director shall monthly examine and read, or
have examined and read under his supervision, all meters of consumers
of water service from the water system of the City. The employees of the
Utility Office shall prepare and cause to be made bills for collection
from each consumer for the amounts of water consumed since the last
reading or examination of his meter or meters. The bills, so prepared,
shall be mailed to the consumers on or about the first day of the next
month. For recordkeeping purposes, bills shall be considered
delinquent if they are received by the Utility Office after the close of
business on the 15th day of the month. [Amended 4-3-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-10]
§ 390-1.26 SEWARD CODE § 390-1.27
1:686
§ 390-1.28. Resumption of water service. [Amended 12-20-1983 by
Ord. No. 41-83; 12-16-1997 by Ord. No. 54-97; 8-17-1999 by Ord.
No. 37-99; 4-3-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-10]
When the water has been turned off from any consumer, he shall not turn
on or permit it to be turned on without the consent of the Water/Wastewater
Department. If water service is turned back on by the Water/Wastewater
Department during regular working hours of the Water/Wastewater
Department employees, a charge as set from time to time by the City
Council shall be paid by the consumer. If water service is turned back on
and service resumed at any time other than regular hours of the Water/
Wastewater Department employees, the consumer shall be charged with a
labor charge as set from time to time by the City Council.
§ 390-1.29. Delinquent charges a lien.
§ 390-1.30. Responsibility for payment on rental properties.
[Amended 4-3-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-10]
The owner of rented premises will on all occasions be held primarily
responsible and will be required to pay for water used at such premises,
provided the City shall notify in writing nonoccupying owners of premises
or their agents whenever their tenants or lessees are 60 days delinquent in
the payment of water rent. Thereafter, if the owner of said real estate or
his agent within the City shall notify the Council in writing to discontinue
water service to said real estate or the occupant thereof, it shall be the
duty of the officer in charge of the Water/Wastewater Department promptly
B. If the consumer shall neglect or refuse to pay his bill on or before the
delinquent date, the amount due will be increased by a late payment
charge of 10%, not to exceed $50. Sales-tax-exempt consumers will be
exempt from the late payment charge. In addition, discontinuance of
service procedures will commence in accordance with Chapter 370,
Utilities, § 370-1.1, of the Seward Municipal Code.
A. If said consumer shall be indebted to the City for water service
furnished, such amount due under the terms of this article, together
with charges in arrears, shall be deemed delinquent and a lien upon the
premises or real estate for which or upon which the same was used or
supplied. Upon the refusal of said consumer to pay said water charges,
they shall be collected by being placed upon the assessment rolls and
tax books for collection, like other taxes.
B. Any delinquent water rentals which remain unpaid for a period of three
months after they become due may be, by resolution of the Council,
assessed against said real estate as a special assessment, which such
special assessments shall be certified by the Municipal Clerk to the
County Clerk of Seward County, Nebraska. The County Clerk shall
thereupon place the same on the tax rolls for collection, subject to the
same penalties and to be collected in like manner as other City taxes.
§ 390-1.27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-1.30
1:687
to discontinue said service; and rentals for any water furnished to the
occupant of said real estate in violation of said notice shall not be a lien
thereon.
§ 390-1.31. Rates for meters registering improperly. [Amended
8-3-1999 by Ord. No. 30-99; 10-18-2005 by Ord. No. 51-05; 4-3-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-10]
When for any reason a water meter is not registering accurately the volume
of water passing through it, the consumer shall be charged, for the month
or months in which the meter is inaccurate, a sum equal to the charge for
the preceding year; provided that if no basis for such comparison exists,
or in the opinion of the Water/Wastewater Director such basis is unfair, the
consumer shall pay such reasonable sum for the water rent during such
period as the Water/Wastewater Director shall fix. In no event shall either
the City be able make a claim for underpayment by the consumer or the
consumer be able to make a claim for overpayment to the City for any period
of time dating back more than one year from the date of discovery of a
meter out of repair or for any other reason causing a billing to the consumer
to be inaccurate.
§ 390-1.32. Destruction of property prohibited.419
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break, injure,
or deface any building, machinery, apparatus, fixture, attachment, or
appurtenance of the Municipal Water/Wastewater Department. No person
may deposit anything in a stop box or commit any act tending to obstruct or
impair the intended use of any of the above-mentioned property without the
written permission of the Water/Wastewater Director.
§ 390-1.33. Use of fire hydrants.420
All hydrants erected in the City for the purpose of extinguishing fire are
hereby declared to be public hydrants, and no person or persons other than
members of the Fire Department, and then only for the use and purposes
of said Department, or person specially authorized by the City or said
Water/Wastewater Director, and then only in the exercise of the authority
delegated by the City or Director, shall open any of the hydrants or attempt
to draw water from or in any manner interfere with the same. No person
authorized to open hydrants shall delegate his authority to another or let
out or suffer anyone to take the wrenches furnished him.
§ 390-1.34. Water extension districts.
Extension of commercial mains into unsupplied territory within the
corporate limits may be made by means of water extension districts, as
provided by law, by resolution of the Mayor and Council; provided that if
419. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
420. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-1.30 SEWARD CODE § 390-1.34
1:688
premises of any applicant do not abut a street where a commercial main
is laid or hereafter laid, and if the creation of a water extension district is
not feasible or practical, such applicant shall be supplied with service by
connecting with the nearest commercial main and at his own expense bring
the water service to his own premises from a point near the curbline on the
street in which said commercial main to be tapped is now laid or hereafter
laid.
§ 390-1.35. Water supplied outside City limits.
Applicants for water service whose property is situated outside the
corporate limits of the City shall pay tap and installation fees in such sums
as the Mayor and Council shall in each case fix; provided, however, that
nothing herein shall be construed to obligate the City to furnish water
service to nonresidents unless it is able to do so without curtailing the
demands of resident consumers or without overloading its pumps,
machinery or other equipment.
§ 390-1.36. Restrictions on water use. [Amended 3-17-1981 by Ord.
No. 7-81421]
During an alarm of fire, or during a fire, the use of water for all but
domestic purposes shall cease upon notice from the Mayor, and shall not be
resumed until notice or permission is given. In case of shortage or imminent
shortage of water, the use of water may be limited and restricted. A plan of
limiting and restricting water in case of shortage of water may be adopted
by the Council by resolution, and upon notice from the Water/Wastewater
Director that a shortage of water exists or is imminent, the Mayor shall
implement and enforce such plan. Such plan shall not limit the Mayor from
making further restrictions than those provided for in the plan, when the
determination of, and by notice from the Water/Wastewater Director, the
condition of shortage or emergency resulting therefrom requires further
restrictions and limitation of the use of water.422
§ 390-1.37. Violations and penalties.423
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
421. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
422. Editor's Note: Original § 3-138 of the 1976 Code, Complaints, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed 9-4-1979 by Ord. No. 1181. Original § 3-139 of the 1976 Code,
Franchise Fee, was repealed 4-19-2005 by Ord. No. 27-05. See now Ch. 350, Art. II,
Occupation Tax.
423. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-1.34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-1.37
1:689

ARTICLE II
Backflow and Cross-Connections
[Amended 4-17-1990 by Ord. No. 13-90]
§ 390-2.1. Purpose; enforcement; notification of consumer.
§ 390-2.2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIR-GAP — The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere
between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a
tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of said vessel.
An approved air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe,
A. Purpose. The purpose of this article is:
(1) To protect the public potable supply of the City of Seward,
Nebraska from the possibility of contamination or pollution by
isolating within the customer's internal distribution system(s) or by
the consumer's private water system(s) such contaminates or
pollutants which could backflow into the public water systems; and
(2) To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections,
actual or potential, between the consumer's in-plant potable water
system(s) and nonpotable water system(s), plumbing fixtures and
industrial piping systems; and
(3) To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of crossconnection
control which will systematically and effectively
prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems.
B. Responsibility. The Water/Wastewater Director shall be responsible for
the protection of the public potable water distribution system from
contamination or pollution due to the backflow of contaminants or
pollutants through the water service connections. If, in the judgment of
said Water/Wastewater Director, an approved backflow prevention
assembly is required (at the customer's water service connection; or
within the customer's private water system) for the safety of the water
system, the Water/Wastewater Director or his designated agent shall
give notice in writing to said customer to install such an approved
backflow prevention assembly(s) at a specific location(s) on his
premises. The consumer shall immediately install such approved
assembly(s) at the consumer's own expense; and failure, refusal or
inability on the part of the customer to install, have tested and maintain
said assembly(s) shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water
service to the premises until such requirements have been satisfactorily
met.424
424. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-2.2
1:691
measured vertically, above the overflow rim of the vessel; and in no case
less than one inch.
APPROVED — Accepted by the Director as meeting an applicable
specification stated or cited in this article, or as suitable for the proposed
use.425
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY — Any water supply on or available to the
premises other than the purveyor's approved public water supply will be
considered as an auxiliary water supply. These auxiliary waters may include
water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural
source(s) such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or "used waters"
or "industrial fluid." These waters may be contaminated or polluted as they
may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over
which the water purveyor does not have sanitary control.
BACKFLOW — The reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either
backpressure or backsiphonage.
BACKFLOW PREVENTER — An assembly or means designed to prevent
backflow.
BACKPRESSURE — The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or
substances under pressure into the distribution pipes of a potable water
supply system from any source or sources other than the intended source.
BACKSIPHONAGE — The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or
substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply from any
source other than its intended source, caused by the reduction of pressure
in the potable water supply system.
CONTAMINATION — An impairment of the quality of the potable water by
sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to
a degree which creates an actual or potential hazard to the public health
through poisoning or through the spread of disease.
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any physical connection or arrangement of piping
or fixtures between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which
contains potable water and the other nonpotable water or industrial fluids
of questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow may
occur into the potable water system. This would include any temporary
connections, such as swing connections, removable sections, four-way plug
valves, spools, dummy sections of pipe, swivel or change-over devices or
sliding multiport tubes.
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL BY CONTAINMENT —
The installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly at the
water service connection to any customer's premises where it is
physically and economically infeasible to find and permanently
eliminate or control all actual or potential cross-connections within the
customer's water system; or
A.
425. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-2.2 SEWARD CODE § 390-2.2
1:692
CROSS-CONNECTIONS, CONTROLLED — A connection between a potable
water system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow
prevention assembly properly installed and maintained so that it will
continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY — An assembly of two independently
operating approved check valves with tightly closing shut-off valves on
each end of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the
testing of each check valve. The entire assembly shall meet the design
and performance specifications as determined by a laboratory and field
evaluation program resulting in an approval by a recognized and approved
testing agency for backflow prevention assemblies. To be approved, these
assemblies must be readily accessible for in-line testing and maintenance.
HAZARD, DEGREE OF — The term is derived from an evaluation of the
potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the
potable water system.
HAZARD, HEALTH — Any condition, device, or practice in the water supply
system and its operation which could create or in the judgment of the Water/
Wastewater Director may create a danger to the health and well-being of
the water consumer.426
HAZARD, PLUMBING — A plumbing-type cross-connection in a consumer's
potable water system that has not been properly protected by an approved
air-gap or approved backflow prevention assembly.
HAZARD, POLLUTIONAL — An actual or potential threat to the physical
properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the
consumer's potable water system which would constitute a nuisance or
be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its
appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health.
HAZARD, SYSTEM — An actual or potential threat of severe damage to the
physical properties of the public potable water system or the consumer's
potable water system of a pollution or contamination which would have a
protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system.
INDUSTRIAL FLUIDS SYSTEM — Any system containing a fluid or solution
which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted
in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system,
pollutional or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply.
This may include, but not be limited to: polluted or contaminated waters;
all types of process waters and "used waters" originating from the public
potable water system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalines, circulating cooling
The installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly on the
service line leading to and supplying a portion of a customer's water
system where there are actual or potential cross-connections which
cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the crossconnection.
B.
426. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-2.2
1:693
waters connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling towers that
are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances;
contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers,
bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems, etc.; oils, gases, glycerine,
paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquid and gaseous fluids
used in industrial or other purposes or for fire-fighting purposes.
POLLUTION — The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
or biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute
a hazard or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree
which does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does
adversely and unreasonably affect such waters or domestic use.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE ASSEMBLY — An assembly of two
independently acting approved check valves together with an hydraulically
operating, mechanically independent differential pressure relief valve
located between the check valves and at the same time below the first
check valve. The unit shall include properly located test cocks and tightly
closing shut-off valves at each end of the assembly. The entire assembly
shall meet the design and performance specifications as determined by a
laboratory and a field-approved evaluation program resulting in an approval
by a recognized and approved testing agency for backflow prevention
assemblies. The assembly shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone
between the two check valves at an acceptable level less than the pressure
on the public water supply side of the assembly. At cessation of a normal
flow, the pressure between the two check valves shall be less than the
pressure on the public water supply side of the device. In case of leakage
of either of the check valves, the differential relief valve shall operate to
maintain the reduced pressure in the zone between the check valves by
discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is two pounds per
square inch or less, the relief valve shall open to the atmosphere. To be
approved, these assemblies must be readily accessible for in-line testing
and maintenance and be installed location where no part of the assembly
will be submerged.
WATER, NONPOTABLE — Water which is not safe for human consumption
or which is of questionable potability.
WATER, POTABLE — Any water which, according to recognized standards,
is safe for human consumption.
WATER SERVICE CONNECTION — The terminal end of a service
connection from the public potable water system; i.e., where the water
purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point
of delivery to the customer's water system. If a meter is installed at the
end of the service connection, then the "service connection" shall mean the
downstream end of the meter. There should be no unprotected takeoffs from
the service line ahead of any meter or any backflow prevention assembly
located at the point of delivery to the customer's water system. "Service
connection" shall also include water service connection from a fire hydrant
and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the
public potable water system.
§ 390-2.2 SEWARD CODE § 390-2.2
1:694
WATER, USED — Any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public
potable water system to a consumer's water system after it has passed
through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of
the water purveyor.
WATER/WASTEWATER DIRECTOR — The Director in charge of Water/
Wastewater Department of the City of Seward, who is invested with the
authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective crossconnection
control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of
this article.427
§ 390-2.3. Water system elements.
The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the utility
system and the customer system.
§ 390-2.4. Required cross-connection control.
A. The utility system shall consist of the source facilities and the
distribution system and shall include all those facilities of the water
system under the complete control of the utility, up to the point where
the customer's system begins.
(1) The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in
the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the
distribution system.
(2) The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used
for the delivery of water from the source to the customer's system.
B. The customer's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond
the termination of the utility distribution system which are utilized in
conveying utility-delivered domestic water to points of use.
A. No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or
maintained by the water purveyor unless the water supply is protected
as required by state laws and regulations and this Code. Service of
water to any premises shall be discontinued by the water purveyor if a
backflow prevention assembly required by this Code is not installed,
tested and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention
assembly has been removed, bypassed, or if an unprotected crossconnection
exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until
such conditions or defects are corrected.
B. The customer's system should be open for inspection at all reasonable
times to authorized representatives of the Water/Wastewater Director
to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary
hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. When such a
condition becomes known, the Water/Wastewater Director shall deny or
immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a
427. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-2.4
1:695
§ 390-2.5. Location.
An approved backflow prevention assembly shall also be installed on each
service line to a customer's water system at or near the property line
or immediately inside the building being served, but, in all cases, before
the first branch line leading off the service line, wherever the following
conditions exist:
§ 390-2.6. Type of protection required.
physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the
conditions in conformance with the state and City statutes relating
to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant
thereto.428
A. In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or
may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not
acceptable as an additional source by the Water/Wastewater Director,
the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the
premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the
service line appropriate to the degree of hazard.429
B. In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other
objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an
actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system
shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an
approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line appropriate
to the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process
waters and waters originating from the utility system which have been
subject to deterioration in quality.
C. In the case of premises having internal cross-connection that cannot be
permanently corrected or controlled, or intricate plumbing and piping
arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not
readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or
impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections
exist, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from
the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in
the service line.
A. The type of protective assembly required under § 390-2.5 shall depend
upon the degree of hazard which exists as follows:
(1) In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply
as stated in § 390-2.5A and it is not subject to any of the following
rules, the public water system shall be protected by an approved
air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle
backflow prevention assembly.
428. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
429. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-2.4 SEWARD CODE § 390-2.6
1:696
(2) In the case of any premises where there is water or a substance
that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if
introduced into the public water system, the public water system
shall be protected by an approved double check valve assembly.
(3) In the case of any premises where there is material dangerous to
health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or
potential hazard to the public water system, the public water
system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
assembly. Examples of premises where these conditions will exist
include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations,
chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating
plants.
(4) In the case of any premises where there are "uncontrolled" crossconnections,
either actual or potential, the public water system
shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
assembly at the service connection.
(5) In the case of any premises where, because of security
requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible
or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross-connection survey,
the public water system shall be protected against backflow from
the premises by either an approved air-gap separation or an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
assembly on each service to the premises.
B. Any backflow prevention assembly required herein shall be a model and
size approved by the Water/Wastewater Director. The term "approved
backflow prevention assembly" shall mean an assembly that has been
manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the
American Water Works Association entitled AWWA (American Water
Works Association) C506-84 Standards for Reduced Pressure Principle
and Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Devices; and have met
completely the laboratory and field performance specifications of the
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research
(FCCC & HR) of the University of Southern California established by
Specifications of Backflow Prevention Assemblies, Section 10 of the
most current issue of Manual of Cross-Connection Control.430
(1) Said AWWA and FCCC & HR standards and specifications have
been adopted by the Water/Wastewater Director and are hereby
adopted by this reference thereto by the City of Seward, Nebraska,
together with any future amendments thereto, and one copy of
each shall be placed on file and remain on file with the City Clerk of
the City of Seward, Nebraska. Final approval shall be evidenced by
a certificate of approval issued by an approved testing laboratory
430. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-2.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-2.6
1:697
§ 390-2.7. Tests and inspection.431
It shall be the duty of the customer-user at any premises where backflow
prevention assemblies are installed to have certified inspections and
operational tests made at least once per year. In those instances where the
Water/Wastewater Director deems the hazard to be great enough, he may
require certified inspections at more frequent intervals. These inspections
and tests shall be at the expense of the water user and shall be performed
by the assembly manufacturer's representative, Water/Wastewater
Department personnel or by a certified tester approved by the Water/
Wastewater Director. It shall be the duty of the Water/Wastewater Director
to see that these tests are made in a timely manner. The customer-user
shall notify the Water/Wastewater Director in advance when the tests are
to be undertaken so that an official representative may witness the tests if
so desired. These assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at
the expense of the customer-user whenever said assemblies are found to
be defective. Records of such tests, repairs and overhaul shall be kept and
made available to the Water/Wastewater Director.
§ 390-2.8. Existing installations.432
All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies which do not meet
the requirements of this article but were approved devices for the purposes
described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly
maintained shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements
under § 390-2.7, be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long
as the Water/Wastewater Director is assured that they will satisfactorily
protect the utility system. Whenever the existing device is moved from the
present location or requires more than minimum maintenance or when the
Water/Wastewater Director finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard
certifying full compliance with the AWWA Standards and FCCC &
HR Specifications as set forth above.
(2) The following testing laboratory has been qualified by the Water/
Wastewater Director to test and certify backflow preventers:
Foundation for Cross-connection Control and Hydraulic Research,
University of Southern California, University Park, Los Angeles,
California 90089-0231. Testing laboratories other than the
laboratory listed above will be added to an approved list as they are
qualified by the Water/Wastewater Director.
(3) Backflow preventers which may be subjected to backpressure or
backsiphonage that have been fully tested and have been granted a
certificate of approval by said qualified laboratory and are listed on
the laboratory's current list of "Approved Backflow Prevention
Assemblies" may be used without further test or qualification.
431. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
432. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-2.6 SEWARD CODE § 390-2.8
1:698
to health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention
assembly meeting the requirements of this article.
§ 390-2.9. Violations and penalties.433
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
433. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-2.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-2.9
1:699

ARTICLE III
Wells
[Amended 10-5-1976 by Ord. No. 1065; 9-2-1977 by Ord. No. 1099;
4-7-1981 by Ord. No. 11-81; 10-1-1985 by Ord. No. 11-85;
10-15-1985 by Ord. No. 17-85; 5-4-1993 by Ord. No. 15-93; 4-4-1995
by Ord. No. 22-95]
§ 390-3.1. Permit required.434
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dig, drill or construct a
well within the corporate limits of the City without first having obtained
a permit therefor from the City Council. The applications for private
well permits shall be obtained from the office of the Water/Wastewater
Director and shall set forth:
(1) Location of proposed well in conjunction with sewers. No well shall
be located within 25 feet of any sewer line, private or public. No
well shall be located within 50 feet of any septic tank or within 100
feet of any disposal field.
(2) Location of proposed well in conjunction with water lines. No well
shall be located within 25 feet of any water line, private or public.
(3) Minimum clearance from property line of five feet. No well shall be
installed in any easement on the property.
(4) Depth of proposed well.
(5) Size and type of casing to be installed.
(6) Pumping equipment to be used.
(7) Name and address of well driller.
(8) Assurance that no water from the private well shall be used for
domestic purposes, but shall be used solely for lawn irrigation and
garden irrigation or for water used in heating or cooling
equipment. Any permits required by the State of Nebraska and the
Upper Big Blue Natural Resources District shall be submitted prior
to issuance of a permit by the City. Disposal of water for heating or
cooling shall be through reinjection back to the same level of
aquifer, except that during the spring, summer and fall months
such water used for heating or cooling may be used for irrigation of
lawn or garden. No water from the private well shall be allowed to
run off into a City stormwater sewer. In addition, assurance shall be
given that water from the private well shall be used exclusively on
the property on which the well is located.
434. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-3.1
1:701
§ 390-3.2. Well drillers.435
(9) Assurance that the property owner will install and maintain proper
backflow prevention devices as prescribed in Article II of this
chapter.
(10) Assurance that a well log will be recorded by the well driller and
filed with the Water/Wastewater Director prior to use of said well.
(11) Assurance that the Water/Wastewater Director may inspect said
well during construction and any time thereafter; and that at least
24 hours prior to well drilling, the well driller shall contact the
Water/Wastewater Director for final site approval.
B. Such application shall be accompanied by an application fee as set from
time to time by the City Council, which shall cover the inspections, no
part of which is refunded if the application is denied.
A. Well drillers registration, bond and insurance.
(1) Every well driller, before doing business in the City, shall be
registered with the City. Registration forms may be obtained from
the City Building Inspector. A registration fee in an amount set
from time to time by the City Council shall be required. Each well
driller shall obtain and file with the City a personal surety bond in a
sum set from time to time by the City Council and signed by one or
more sufficient sureties or a bond in a like amount of some
approved corporate surety company doing business in the City to
be approved by the Mayor and Council, conditioned that the
licensee shall indemnify and hold harmless the City of and from all
accidents, damages, liability, claims, judgment, costs or expense
caused by any negligence arising from a failure to protect such
drilling work, or by any unfinished, unskilled and inadequate work
done in pursuance of his registration to drill wells, or using out of
furnishing defective material or from failure to execute and
perform any work during the period of such driller's registration.
The obligee of said bond shall be the City and action may be
maintained thereon by anyone injured by a breach of its conditions
for a period of one year after the completion of any drilling work.
All bonds tendered by drillers shall be approved in writing, as to
form and substance, by the City Attorney.
(2) The applicant shall also provide certificates of liability coverage
with bodily injury coverage and property damage coverage in
amounts set from time to time by the City Council.
B. Notification of Water/Wastewater Director prior to drilling well. Well
drillers shall contact the Water/Wastewater Director at least 24 hours in
advance of commencement of any work to advise him of the location
435. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-3.1 SEWARD CODE § 390-3.2
1:702
§ 390-3.3. Temporary well permits.436
The City may grant a temporary well permit when an emergency is
determined to exist for purposes other than lawn and garden irrigation. In
granting said permit, the City may establish conditions under which said
well is to be operated, including the purposes therefor, its location, the
period of time during which such well shall be operated, conditions for
the closing and capping of such well and such safety requirements as the
Council may provide and such other conditions as may protect the health
and welfare of the City. The application for a temporary well permit shall
give the same information as required for a regular well permit and shall
be accompanied by an application fee as set from time to time by the City
Council, no part of which shall be refunded if the application is denied.
§ 390-3.4. Abandoned wells.
§ 390-3.5. Cross-connections prohibited.438
No cross-connections shall be allowed from a private well to or from the
City water system. It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of the
property to give the Water/Wastewater Director free access to the property
at reasonable times for the purpose of making a cross-connection
inspection. If the Water/Wastewater Director is denied entry to make said
inspection, a judicial order for entry into and onto the property shall be
obtained. If the Water/Wastewater Director of the City finds that a crossconnection
exists, then he shall order the use of the private well to be
and time drilling is to take place in order that final site approval may be
given.
A. All abandoned wells shall be properly abandoned, closed up or
destroyed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Upper Big
Blue Natural Resources District and in accordance with Nebraska
Department of Health Title 178 NAC 12 and all amendments thereto
and amended editions and any supplements thereto.
B. Whenever the Water/Wastewater Director shall find a well which has
been improperly abandoned and discontinued for use, it shall be his/her
duty to notify or inform the owner of the property on which such well is
located, in writing, that such well must be abandoned in accordance
with this article within 30 days of the time of service of such notice.
Upon failure of the owner of the property upon which said well is
located to comply with such order, the Water/Wastewater Director shall
cause the well to be properly abandoned, assessing the costs and
expense to the property and the property owner upon which such well
is located.437
436. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
437. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
438. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-3.5
1:703
permanently discontinued. The owner, tenant and lessee shall be liable
severally and jointly for all damages to the City water system and users of
the City water system caused by such cross-connection.
§ 390-3.6. Refusal to issue drilling permit.
The City shall have power and authority to refuse to issue well drilling
permits if it appears that the plan of drilling and construction is not sound,
or the proposed driller does not have proper equipment, or if it appears that
such well may endanger, impair or in any way interfere with the municipal
public water system of the City.
§ 390-3.7. Nebraska Minimum Standards adopted.439
The standards for wells in Title 178 of the Nebraska Administrative Code
are hereby adopted, and such minimum standards, including all subsequent
additions, amendments, supplements or appendices thereto, are made a
part of this article as fully as if set forth at length herein. One copy of said
minimum standards shall be placed on file with the City Clerk, and any
and all subsequent additions, amendments or supplements or appendices
thereto shall be placed on file with the City Clerk.
§ 390-3.8. Notification sign required.
All spigots or other connections to or from a private well shall have a sign
thereon stating that water is not safe for drinking, and said sign shall be
continually maintained visibly upon said private well.
§ 390-3.9. Responsibility for water usage.
The owner or the occupant of the property upon which a private well is
located shall be responsible jointly and severally for all water usage from
said private well.
§ 390-3.10. Discontinuance.
The City Council may order the discontinuance of the use of a private well
or wells where it has reason and cause to believe that the public health is
endangered, and for that purpose may revoke and cancel any well permit
or renewal of such permit after notice and hearing. Such permit or renewal
thereof may be revoked and canceled by the City upon violation of any of the
terms and provisions of this article by the permittee or his successor in the
interest to the property upon which such well is located or its occupants, in
and to any private well, after notice and hearing.
439. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-3.5 SEWARD CODE § 390-3.11
1:704
§ 390-3.11. Right of entry.440
The granting of a well permit or the renewal thereof to a permittee or
its successors in interest shall constitute consent and shall grant consent
by the permittee or any tenant thereon to and for the Water/Wastewater
Director of the City or his agents or employees to enter upon the premises
upon which the well is located in order to take any action required by the
Water/Wastewater Director by this article and to determine whether or not
there is any violation of this article by said well or the use thereof.
§ 390-3.12. Violations and penalties.441
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
440. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
441. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-3.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-3.12
1:705

ARTICLE IV
Wellhead Protection Area
§ 390-4.1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA — The surface and subsurface area
surrounding a water well or well field, supplying a public water system,
through which contaminants are reasonably likely to move toward and
reach such water or well field.
§ 390-4.2. Designation of areas. [Amended 3-5-2002 by Ord. No.
1-02]
The City of Seward designates the Wellhead Protection Areas for the
purpose of protecting the public water supply system. The boundaries of the
Wellhead Protection Areas are as established based upon a map prepared
by the Nebraska Rural Water Association and adopted by the Nebraska
Department of Environmental Quality Wellhead Protection Program, dated
2001.
§ 390-4.3. Wellhead protection plan. [Amended 8-18-2009 by Ord.
No. 12-09; 10-20-2009 by Ord. No. 15-09]
The City Council hereby adopts and incorporates by reference the Wellhead
Protection Plan which is captioned "City of Seward Wellhead Protection
Plan 2009/Lathrop Edition" for the purpose of protecting the public water
supply system. The boundaries of the Wellhead Protection Area were
adopted by Ordinance No. 1-02 on March 5, 2002, based on Wellhead
Protection Area Map drawn by the Nebraska Department of Environmental
Quality in September 2001.
§ 390-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-4.3
1:707

ARTICLE V
Water Conservation
[Added 9-17-2002 by Ord. No. 33-02]
§ 390-5.1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "City of Seward Water Conservation Plan."
§ 390-5.2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
WATER — Water taken from the Seward public water system.
WATER SHORTAGE EMERGENCY — A declaration by the Mayor that a
water shortage exists.
§ 390-5.3. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all individuals, legal entities and
their agents who or which use water, as defined in this article, connected to
the City of Seward public water system.
§ 390-5.4. Implementation and duration of emergency restrictions.
The curtailments and restrictions of water uses provided for in this article
shall be implemented upon a declaration at any time of a water shortage
emergency by the Mayor and shall remain in effect until such time as the
Mayor or City Council shall declare such emergency to be at an end.
§ 390-5.5. Stage One Water Watch.
A. A Stage One Water Watch may take effect if one of the following
conditions exist:
(1) Major fire requiring extended use of water.
(2) Major main break or disabling of a major main due to construction.
(3) Water use for two consecutive days of over 2,100,000 gallons.
(4) Water level at the monitoring well at the south field indicates a
groundwater level of 63 feet.
(5) Water level at the monitoring well at the west field indicates a
groundwater level of 73 feet.
B. Actions available.
(1) The Mayor or designee requests voluntary reductions in water use.
§ 390-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-5.5
1:709
§ 390-5.6. Stage Two Water Warning.
(2) Accelerate public information efforts to teach and encourage
reduced water use.
(3) Notify major water users and work with them to achieve voluntary
water use reduction.
(4) Prohibit City government use of water for street washing, vehicle
washing, and all other nonessential use.
(5) Request a reduction in landscape watering by City government.
(6) Request that no new plantings and seeding be started during this
stage.
(7) Request no landscape watering between 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
(8) Determine effect on large customers and notify them of impact.
Advise customers of actions being taken within the City of Seward
and solicit implementation of voluntary reduction of water use.
A. A Stage Two Water Warning may take effect if one of the following
conditions exist:
(1) Loss of one or more wells due to low water table (drawing air into
pump).
(2) Water use for three consecutive days of over 2,500,000 gallons.
(3) Major equipment failure, overhead storage, river crossing, or loss
of well field(s) due to natural or man-made disaster.
(4) Water level at the monitoring well at the south field indicates a
groundwater level of 65 feet.
(5) Water level at the monitoring well at the west field indicates a
groundwater level of 76 feet.
B. Actions available.
(1) Landscaping irrigation restrictions, residential and commercial.
(a) Existing installations. Parcels with odd-numbered addresses
are only permitted to irrigate on Monday, Wednesday and
Saturday. Parcels with even-numbered addresses or no
addresses are only permitted to irrigate on Tuesday, Thursday
and Sunday. (Note: No watering on Friday.)
(b) New installations. Landscaping installations on residential or
commercial parcels that have been in place for 30 days or less
shall not be subject to the three-day-a-week limitation.
§ 390-5.5 SEWARD CODE § 390-5.6
1:710
§ 390-5.7. Exceptions.
The Mayor shall have the authority to permit a reasonable use of water in
any case necessary to maintain adequate health and sanitation standards
or when needed to perform maintenance and repair of the City of Seward
water system.
(2) Essential use restrictions. There shall be no restrictions on firefighting
or medical uses. Hydrant flushing shall be only on an
emergency basis.
(3) Use restrictions for public facilities. Custodians of publicly owned
facilities and large private facilities, including Concordia
University, may submit a water use plan to the Mayor which, while
considering the manpower restraints of the entity, balances the
same against the policies of water conservation such as
evaporation avoidance and spreading out the times and days of
irrigation. The Mayor may approve or reject said plan, or approve
the same with modifications.
(4) Water-based recreation restriction use. Filling is permitted for new
and existing recreational facilities and pools.
C. Enforcement and penalties. The penalty for violation of any of the
foregoing water restrictions is $100 for a first offense, $200 for a
second offense, and $500 for a third offense. The City may install a
water flow restrictor in the case of two or more offenses or may
disconnect the violator from the City water system. A new violation
shall be deemed to have been committed on each day that a violation
occurs.
§ 390-5.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-5.7
1:711
Chapter 394
WEEDS AND VEGETATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 225.
Nuisances — See Ch. 284.
Solid waste — See Ch. 335.
Trees — See Ch. 364.
§ 390-5.7 SEWARD CODE § 390-5.7
1:712
ARTICLE I
Property Maintenance
[Amended 6-21-1988 by Ord. No. 14-88; 9-3-1991 by Ord. No. 25-91;
4-5-2005 by Ord. No. 20-05; 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 26-06;
6-15-2010 by Ord. No. 12-10]
§ 394-1.1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LITTER — Includes, but is not limited to:
WEEDS — Includes, but is not limited to, bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis),
puncture vine (Tribulus terrestris), leafy spurge (Euphorbia esula), Canada
thistle (Cirsium arvense), perennial pepper grass (Lepidium draba), Russian
knapweed (Centaurea picris), Johnson grass (Sorghum halepense), nodding
or musk thistle, quack grass (Agropyron repens), perennial sow thistle
(Sonchus arvensis), horse nettle (Solanum carolinense), bull thistle (Cirsium
lanceolatum), buckthorn (Rhamnus sp.) (tourn), hemp plant (Cannabis
sativa), and ragweed (Ambrosiaceae). (Neb. RS 16-230, 18-1719)
§ 394-1.2. Required maintenance.
A. Trash, rubbish, refuse, garbage, paper, rags, and ashes;
B. Wood, plaster, cement, brick, or stone building rubble;
C. Grass, leaves, and worthless vegetation;
D. Offal and dead animals; and
Any machine or machines, vehicle or vehicles, or parts of a machine or
vehicle which have lost their identity, character, utility, or serviceability
as such through deterioration, dismantling, or the ravages of time, are
inoperative or unable to perform their intended functions, or are cast
off, discarded, or thrown away or left as waste, wreckage, or junk.
E.
A. Lots or pieces of ground within the City shall be drained or filled so as
to prevent stagnant water or any other nuisance accumulating thereon.
B. The owner or occupant of any lot or piece of ground within the City
shall keep the lot or piece of ground and the adjoining streets and alleys
free of any growth of 12 inches or more in height of weeds, grasses, or
worthless vegetation.
C. The throwing, depositing, or accumulation of litter on any lot or piece of
ground within the City is prohibited, except that grass, leaves, and
worthless vegetation may be used as a ground mulch or in a compost
pile.
D. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance to permit or maintain any growth
of 12 inches or more in height of weeds, grasses, or worthless
§ 394-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-1.2
1:713
§ 394-1.3. Abatement of nuisances.442
§ 394-1.4. Repeat violations.
It is hereby determined to be a public nuisance to permit or maintain any
growth of eight inches or more in height of weeds, grasses, or worthless
vegetation on any lot or piece of ground located within the corporate
limits during any calendar year, if, within the same calendar year, the City
has previously acted to remove weeds, grasses, or worthless vegetation
exceeding 12 inches in height on the same lot or piece of ground and had to
seek recovery of the costs and expenses of such work from the owner.
§ 394-1.5. Violations and penalties.443
Any person who violates the prohibitions or provisions of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a violation. The penalty for such violation shall be an
amount not to exceed $500 for any one offense, recoverable with costs, and
in default of said payment the offender shall stand committed to the County
Jail until such fine and costs are paid. Each period of 24 hours during or on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
vegetation or to litter or cause litter to be deposited or remain thereon
except in proper receptacles.
E. Any owner or occupant of a lot or piece of ground shall, upon conviction
of violating this section, be guilty of an offense.
A. Notice to abate and remove such nuisance shall be given to each owner
or owner's duly authorized agent or to the occupant, if any, by personal
service or certified mail. If notice by personal service or certified mail is
unsuccessful, notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City or by conspicuously posting the notice on
the lot or ground upon which the nuisance is to be abated and removed.
An administrative fee shall be charged based on the time expended
(minimum fee: one hour) and material(s) for the notice. Within five days
after receipt of such notice or publication or posting, whichever is
applicable, if the owner or occupant of the lot or piece of ground does
not request a hearing with the City or fails to comply with the order to
abate and remove the nuisance, the City may have such work done. The
cost and expenses of any such work shall be paid by the owner.
B. If unpaid for two months after such work is done, the City may either:
(1) Levy and assess the costs and expenses of the work upon the lot or
piece of ground so benefitted as a special assessment; or
(2) Recover in a civil action the costs and expenses of the work upon
the lot or piece of ground and the adjoining streets and alleys.
442. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
443. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 394-1.2 SEWARD CODE § 394-1.5
1:714
Chapter 410
ZONING AND SUBDIVISION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 225.
Fair housing — See Ch. 244.
Sewers — See Ch. 325.
Sexually oriented businesses — See Ch. 329.
Streets, sidewalks and municipal
property — See Ch. 340.
Annexations — See Ch. 344, Art. I.
Trailer courts — See Ch. 360.
Trees — See Ch. 364.
Utilities — See Ch. 370.
Water — See Ch. 390.
§ 394-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 394-1.5
1:715

Part 1
General Provisions, Definitions And Use Types
ARTICLE 1
General Provisions
§ 410-1.1. Title.
This chapter of the Seward, Nebraska Municipal Code shall be known as the
"Unified Land Development Ordinance of the City of Seward."
§ 410-1.2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all property within
the corporate limits of the City of Seward and its two-mile extraterritorial
jurisdiction as provided by Neb. RS Chapter 19, Article 9, §§ 19-901 through
19-929, and Neb. RS Chapter 16, Article 9, §§ 16-901 through 16-904,
with the exception of those properties owned or acquired by municipal,
county, or state government for the advancement of government projects or
purposes.
§ 410-1.3. Purpose.
The purposes of the Unified Land Development Ordinance of the City of
Seward are to:
§ 410-1.4. Consistency with Comprehensive Development Plan.
The City of Seward intends that this Unified Land Development Ordinance
and any amendments to it shall be consistent with the City's Comprehensive
Development Plan. It is the City's intent to amend this chapter whenever
such action is deemed necessary to keep regulatory provisions in
conformance with the Comprehensive Development Plan.
A. Serve the public health, safety, and general welfare of the City and its
jurisdiction.
B. Classify property in a manner that reflects its suitability for specific
uses.
C. Provide for sound, attractive development within the City and its
jurisdiction.
D. Encourage compatibility of adjacent land uses.
E. Protect environmentally sensitive areas.
F. Further the objectives of the Comprehensive Development Plan of the
City of Seward.
§ 410-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-1.5
1:717
§ 410-1.5. Conflicting provisions.
The Unified Land Development Ordinance shall be held to provide the
minimum requirements necessary for the promotion of the public health,
safety, and welfare. If any provision of the Unified Land Development
Ordinance conflicts with any other provision of the Unified Land
Development Ordinance, any other ordinance of the City of Seward, or any
applicable state or federal law, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
§ 410-1.6. Relief from other provisions.444
Nothing in these provisions shall relieve any property owner or user from
satisfying any condition or requirement associated with a previous
approval, conditional use permit, variance, development permit, or other
permit issued under any local, state, or federal ordinance or statute.
§ 410-1.7. Severability.
If any chapter, section, clause, or phrase of this Unified Land Development
Ordinance is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 410-1.8. Publication and filing.
This chapter shall be published in book or pamphlet form and shall, together
with the maps being a part hereof, be filed with the City Clerk of the City of
Seward, Nebraska.
444. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-1.5 SEWARD CODE § 410-1.8
1:718
ARTICLE 2
Definitions
§ 410-2.1. Purpose.
Article 2 shall be known as the definitions. The purpose of these provisions
is to promote consistency and precision in the interpretation of the Unified
Land Development Ordinance. The meaning and construction of words as
set forth shall apply throughout the Unified Land Development Ordinance,
unless where modified in a specific section or where the context of such
words or phrases clearly indicates a different meaning or construction.
§ 410-2.2. Rules of construction.
The following general rules of construction apply to the text of the Unified
Land Development Ordinance:
§ 410-2.3. Terms defined.
For the purposes of this Unified Land Development Ordinance, certain
terms and words are hereby defined. Certain sections contain definitions
that are additional to those listed here. Where terms are not specifically
A. Headings. Section and subsection headings contained herein are
provided for illustrative purposes only and shall not be deemed to limit,
govern, modify, or otherwise affect the scope, meaning, or intent of any
provision of the Unified Land Development Ordinance.
B. Illustration. In the case of any real or apparent conflict between the text
of the ordinance and any illustration explaining the text, the text shall
apply.
C. Shall, must, and may. "Shall" and "must" are always mandatory; "may"
is discretionary.
D. Tenses and numbers. Words used in the present tense include the
future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the
plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
E. Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the
following conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) "And" indicates that all connected items or provisions apply.
(2) "Or" indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply
singly or in any combination.
(3) "Either . . . or" indicates that the connected items or provisions
shall apply singly but not in combination.
F. Referenced agencies. Unless otherwise indicated, all public officials,
bodies, and agencies referred to in this chapter are those of the City of
Seward.
§ 410-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-2.3
1:719
defined, their ordinarily accepted meaning or meanings implied by their
context shall apply.
ABUTTING — Having lot lines or district boundaries in common. Used
interchangeably with "adjacent."
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure that is incidental to and
customarily associated with a specific principal use or building on the same
site.
ACCESSORY USE — A use that is incidental to and customarily associated
with a specific principal use on the same site.
ADDITION — Any construction that increases the size of a building or
structure in terms of site coverage, height, length, width, or gross floor
area.
ADT or AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC — The average number of motor vehicles
per day that pass over a given point or segment of street.
AGENT OF OWNER — Any person showing written verification that he/she
is acting for, and with the knowledge and consent of, a property owner.
ALLEY — A public right-of-way other than a street and 20 feet or less in
width which is used as a secondary means of access to abutting property.
ALTERATION — Any construction or physical change in the internal
arrangement of spaces, the supporting members, the positioning on a site,
or the appearance of a building or structure.
APARTMENT — A housing unit within a building designed for and suitable
for occupancy by only one family. Apartments are generally located within
multifamily residential buildings.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The City Council of the City of Seward or its
designee.
ASCE — The American Society of Civil Engineers.
ATTACHED — Having one or more walls in common with a principal
building or connected to a principal building by an integral architectural
element, such as a covered passageway, facade wall extension, or archway.
BASE ZONING DISTRICT — A district established by this chapter that
prescribes basic regulations governing land use and site development
standards. No more than one base zoning district shall apply to any
individually platted lot or parcel unless the lot or parcel is part of a planned
unit development.
BASEMENT — A level of a building below street level that has at least 1/2
of its height below the surface of the adjacent ground. A basement used for
independent dwelling or business purposes shall be considered a story for
the purposes of height measurement.
BEGINNING OF CONSTRUCTION — The initial incorporation of labor and
materials within the foundation of a building or structure.
§ 410-2.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-2.3
1:720
BICYCLE LANE AND PATH — A designated lane on a roadway or an
exclusive path separated from a roadway, designed specifically to
accommodate the physical requirements of bicycling. Bicycle paths are
ordinarily designed to accommodate other forms of nonmotorized
transportation or recreational movement, but will also accommodate
motorized vehicles, such as motorized wheelchairs, designed specifically to
provide access to people with disabilities.
BLOCK — An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded
by streets and/or the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, or by a
combination of the above with a watercourse, lake, railroad, or other
significant natural or man-made barrier, and which has been designated as
such on a plat for the purposes of legal description of a property.
BLOCK FACE — The property abutting one side of a street and lying
between the two nearest intersection streets, or between the one nearest
intersecting street and a major physical barrier, including, but not limited
to, railroads, streams, lakes, or the corporate limits of the City of Seward.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — A body established by the City expressly
for the purpose of granting relief from situations of hardship and to hear
appeals as provided by this chapter.
BOULEVARD — A public street generally characterized by a wider-thannormal
right-of-way and extensive green space in relation to pavement
surface. Boulevards may either include dual street channels separated by
a landscaped median; or by a single street channel with wider-than-normal
greenway setbacks behind the curb.
BUFFERYARD — A landscaped area around the perimeter of a tract of land,
usually intended to separate and partially obstruct the view of two adjacent
land uses or properties from one another.
BUILDING — A structure entirely separated from any other structure by
space or by walls and having a roof and built to provide shelter, support, or
enclosure for persons or property.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The at-grade area of a site covered by buildings
or roofed areas, excluding allowed projecting eaves, balconies, and similar
features; also referred to as the "building footprint."
BUILDING ELEVATION — An exterior wall of a building exposed to public
view.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — The three-dimensional space within which a
structure is permitted to be built on a lot after all zoning and other
applicable municipal requirements have been met.
BUILDING LINE — The outer boundary of a building established by the
location of its exterior walls.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The City official, designated by the City Council,
who is responsible for the enforcement of the applicable building code and
conditional use permits.445
§ 410-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-2.3
1:721
BUILDING PERMIT — A document that must be issued by the Building
Official prior to erecting, constructing, enlarging, altering, moving,
improving, removing, converting, or demolishing any building or structure
on a platted lot(s) or a parcel exceeding 10 acres in size as regulated by
this chapter or by the applicable building codes of the City of Seward.446
Issuance of a building permit follows review of plans by the Building Official
to determine that the proposed use of building or land complies with the
provisions of the Unified Land Development Ordinance.
BUSINESS — Activities that include the exchange or manufacture of goods
or services on a site.
BUSINESS CENTER — A building containing more than one commercial
business, or any group of nonresidential buildings within a common
development, characterized by shared parking and access.
CARTWAY (or ROAD OR STREET CHANNEL) — The actual surface area
of a road used to accommodate motor vehicles, including moving traffic
lanes, acceleration and deceleration lanes, and parking lanes. On a street
with curbs, the cartway is measured from back to back of curbs. On streets
without curbs, the cartway is measured between the outer edges of the
pavement.
CENTER-LINE OFFSET — The distance between the center line of roads
intersecting a common road from the same or opposite sides.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — An official certificate issued by the
Building Official or his/her designee prior to occupancy of a completed
building or structure, upon a finding of conformance with the applicable
building code and this Unified Land Development Ordinance.447
CHANGE OF USE — The replacement of an existing use type by a new use
type.
CHANNEL — The bed or banks of a natural stream or drainageway that
convey the constant or intermittent flow of water, including storm run-off.
CITY — The City of Seward, Nebraska.
CITY COUNCIL — The City Council of Seward, Nebraska.
COMMON AREA — An area held, designed, and designated for common or
cooperative use within a development.
COMMON DEVELOPMENT — A development proposed and planned as one
unified project not separated by a public street or alley.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — Land within or related to a development that is
not individually owned or dedicated for public use, designed and generally
intended for the common use of the residents of the development.
445. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
446. Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Building Construction.
447. Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Building Construction.
§ 410-2.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-2.3
1:722
COMPATIBILITY — The degree to which two or more different land use
types are able to exist together in close proximity, with no one use having
significant negative effects on any other use.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The duly adopted Comprehensive Development
Plan of the City of Seward.
CONCEPT PLAN — A preliminary presentation that includes the minimum
information necessary, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, to be
used for the purpose of discussion or classification of a proposed plat prior
to formal application.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT — An approval of a use with operating and/
or physical characteristics different from those of permitted uses in a given
zoning district which may, nonetheless, be compatible with those uses under
special conditions and with adequate public review. Conditional uses are
allowed in a zoning district only at the discretion of and with the explicit
permission of the Planning Commission and City Council, as provided by
§ 410-44.3 of this chapter.448
CONDOMINIUM — An ownership regime whereby the title to each unit
of occupancy is held in separate ownership, and the real estate on which
the units are located is held in common ownership solely by the owners
of the units with each owner having an undivided interest in the common
real estate. Condominiums may include residential, commercial, office, or
industrial uses.
CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT — A development design technique that
concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow remaining land
to be used for recreation, common open space, or the preservation of
historically or environmentally sensitive features.
CONSERVATION (OR CLUSTER) SUBDIVISION — Wholly or in majority, a
residential subdivision that permits a reduction in lot area, setback, or other
site development regulations, provided:449
CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISION — A subdivision which literally meets all
nominal standards of the Unified Land Development Ordinance for lot
dimensions, setbacks, street frontage, and other site development
regulations.
COUNTY — Seward County, Nebraska.
COURTYARD — An open, unoccupied space, bounded on two or more sides
by the walls of the building.
There is no increase in the overall density permitted for a conventional
subdivision in a given zoning district; and
A.
B. The remaining land area is used for common open space.
448. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
449. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-2.3
1:723
CREATIVE (OR INNOVATIVE) DEVELOPMENT OR SUBDIVISION — A
subdivision that, while complying with the Subdivision Ordinance,450
diverges from nominal compliance with site development regulations in the
Unified Land Development Ordinance. Creative subdivisions imply a higher
level of pre-planning than conventional subdivisions. They may be employed
for the purpose of environmental protection or the creation of superior
community design. Types of creative subdivisions include conservation
subdivisions and traditional neighborhood districts.
CUL-DE-SAC — A local street with only one outlet and with an opposite end
providing for the reversal of traffic.
CURB — A vertical or sloping edge of a roadway, intended to define the edge
of the cartway and to channel or control drainage.
DEDICATION — A grant of land to the City or another public agency for a
public purpose.
DENSITY — The amount of development per specific unit of a site.
DESIGN STANDARDS — Standards that set forth specific improvement
requirements.
DETACHED — Fully separated from any other building or not jointed to
another building in such a manner as to constitute an enclosed or covered
connection.
DETENTION BASIN — An artificial or natural water collection facility,
designed to collect surface or subsurface water and to control its rate of
discharge, in order to prevent a net increase in the rate of water flow that
existed prior to a development.
DEVELOPER — The legal owner(s) or authorized agent of any land engaged
in a proposed development.
DEVELOPMENT — A planning or construction project involving substantial
improvement or change in the character and/or land use of a property.
DIVIDED STREET — A street with opposing lanes separated by a median
strip, center island, or other form of physical barrier, which cannot be
crossed except at designated locations.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading, or other means.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — The system through which water flows from the
land.
DRIVE-IN SERVICES — Uses that involve the sale of products or provision
of services to occupants in vehicles.
DRIVEWAY — A permanently paved, surfaced area providing vehicular
access between a street and an off-street parking or loading area.
450. Editor's Note: See Part 8, Subdivision Regulations, of this chapter.
§ 410-2.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-2.3
1:724
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended
for occupancy as a separate place of residence, with cooking, sleeping, and
sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of
one family, as defined in this section, maintaining a household.
EASEMENT — A privilege or right of use granted on, above, under, or
across a particular tract of land for a specific purpose by one owner to
another owner, public or private agency, or utility, where fee simple title
remains with the property owner.
ENCLOSED — A roofed or covered space fully surrounded by walls.
EXISTING USE — The use of a lot or structure at the time of the effective
date of this chapter.
EXPRESSWAY — A major street with limited access for high traffic speeds
and volumes designed to move traffic around the City rather than through
it.
FAMILY — One or more persons, related or unrelated, living together as
a single housekeeping unit with or without domestic servants, caregivers,
foster children, and supervisory personnel in a group living arrangement.
The term "family" shall not include occupancy of a residence by persons
living in fraternities, sororities, clubs, or transient or permanent
commercial residential facilities catering to the general public. The term
"family" also excludes the occupancy of nursing and convalescent homes.
FASCIA — A parapet-type wall used as part of the facade of a flat-roofed
building and projecting no more than six feet from the immediately adjacent
building face. Such a wall shall enclose at least three sides of the projecting
flat roof and return to the parapet wall or the building.
FEDERAL — Pertaining to the government of the United States of America.
FINAL PLAT APPROVAL — The final official action of the City Council, upon
a recommendation by the Planning Commission, permitting the filing of a
subdivision with the Seward County Register of Deeds and the conveyance
of individual parcels and lots to subsequent owners.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The quotient of gross floor area of all
buildings on a site divided by the gross site area of the site.
§ 410-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-2.3
1:725
FRONTAGE — The length of a property line of any one premises abutting
and parallel to a public street, private way, or court from which access is
permitted.
GARAGE — An accessory building or portion of a main building used
primarily for storage of motor vehicles.
GRADE — The elevation of the finished surface of ground, paving, or
sidewalk adjacent to any building line.
GROSS FLOOR AREA (GFA) — The total enclosed horizontal area of all
floors of a building, measured to the inside surfaces of the exterior walls.
This definition excludes the areas of mechanical equipment rooms, elevator
shafts, airspaces above atriums, and enclosed off-street parking and loading
areas serving a principal use.
HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the established grade to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof, the deck line of a mansard roof, or to
the average height between eaves and the ridge for gable, hip, shed, or
gambrel roofs. For other cases, height shall be measured as the vertical
distance from the established grade to the highest point of a structure as
herein defined. Where a building or structure is located on a slope, height
shall be measured from the average grade level adjacent to the building or
structure.
For buildings having walls facing one street only, the grade shall be the
elevation of the ground at the center of the wall facing the street.
A.
For buildings having walls facing more than one street, the grade shall
be the average elevation of the grades of all walls facing each street.
B.
For buildings having no walls facing a street, the grade shall be the
average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the
exterior walls of the building.
C.
§ 410-2.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-2.3
1:726
HOME-BASED BUSINESS; HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory
occupational use conducted within a dwelling unit or accessory structure
by its inhabitants, which is clearly incidental to the residential use of the
dwelling unit or residential structure and does not change the residential
character of its site.
HOUSING UNIT — A building or portion of a building arranged for and
intended for occupancy as an independent living facility for one family,
including permanent provisions for cooking.451
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — The total horizontal area of all buildings,
roofed or covered spaces, paved surface areas, walkways and driveways,
and any other site improvements that decrease the ability of the surface of
the site to absorb water, expressed as a percent of site area. The surface
water area of swimming pools is excluded from this definition.
LANDSCAPED AREA — The area within the boundaries of a given lot, site
or common development consisting primarily of plant material, including
but not limited to grass, trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover, and other
organic plant materials; or grass paver masonry units installed such that
the appearance of the area is primarily landscaped.
LANE — An approved private right-of-way that provides access to
residential properties and meets at least three of the following conditions:
LOADING AREA — An off-street area used for the loading or unloading of
goods from a vehicle in connection with the use of the site on which such
area is located.
LOT — A platted parcel of property with a separate and distinct number
or other identifying designation which has been created, assigned and
recorded in the office of the Seward County Register of Deeds. Each
individual lot is subject to the provisions of a particular base zoning district,
and shall have a minimum frontage of 20 feet, except as provided in an
approved planned unit development, conservation development, or
traditional neighborhood development.
PERIMETER LANDSCAPED AREA — Any required landscaped area
that adjoins the exterior boundary of a lot, site or common
development.
A.
INTERIOR LANDSCAPED AREA — Any landscaped area within a site,
exclusive of required perimeter landscaping.
B.
A. Serves 12 or fewer housing units or platted lots.
Does not function as a local street because of its alignment, design, or
location.
B.
C. Is completely internal to a development.
D. Does not exceed 600 feet in length.
451. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-2.3
1:727
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance measured between the front
and rear lot lines.
LOT LINE — A property boundary line(s) of record that divides one lot
from another lot or a lot from the public or private street right-of-way or
easement.
CORNER LOT — A lot located at the junction of at least two streets,
private ways or courts or at least two segments of a curved street,
private way or court, at which the angle of intersection is no greater
than 135°.
A.
DOUBLE-FRONTAGE LOT — A lot, other than a corner lot, having
frontage on two nonintersecting streets, private ways or courts.
Primary access shall be restricted on a double-frontage lot to the minor
of the two streets or to the front line as determined at time of platting
or as defined by this chapter; also known as a "through lot."
B.
INTERIOR LOT — A lot other than a corner lot whose sides do not abut
a street.
C.
COMMON DEVELOPMENT LOT — When two or more contiguous lots
are developed as part of a single development, these lots may be
considered a single lot for purposes of this chapter.
D.
FRONT LOT LINE — The lot line separating a lot and a public or private
street right-of-way or easement.
For an interior lot, the lot line separating the lot from the right-ofway
or easement.
(1)
For a corner lot, the shorter lot line abutting a public or private
street or easement. In instances of equal line dimension, the front
lot line shall be determined by the Building Official, or as may be
noted on the final plat.
(2)
For a double-frontage lot, the lot lines separating the lot from the
right-of-way or easement of the more minor street. In cases where
each street has the same classification, the front lot line shall be
determined by the Building Official at the time of application for
(3)
A.
§ 410-2.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-2.3
1:728
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance measured between the side lot lines
of a lot, at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the front
lot line at the minimum required building setback line.
MAIN — The principal artery of a system of continuous piping which
conveys fluids and to which branches may be connected.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not defined and approved as a
minor subdivision.
MANUFACTURED HOME DWELLING — A dwelling unit built in compliance
with National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards
Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 to 5426 et seq., and the regulations promulgated
by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, and
when constructed shall bear the seal of the Department of Health and
Human Services Regulation and Licensure as required by Neb. RS 71-1559.
the original building permit for the lot, or as may be noted on the
final plat.
REAR LOT LINE — The lot line that is opposite and most distant from
the front line.
B.
SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot line that is neither a front nor rear lot line.
A side lot line separating a lot from a street, private way or court is a
street side lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or
lots is an interior side lot line.
C.
Dwelling units built in compliance with the above may be placed in any
zoning district where single-family dwelling units are permitted when
the following additional requirements are met:
Any dwelling unit shall have no less than 900 square feet of floor
area.
(1)
(2) Any dwelling shall have no less than 18 feet exterior width.
The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of 2 1/2
inches for each 12 inches of horizontal run.
(3)
The exterior shall be of a color, material and scale comparable with
existing residential site-built single-family dwellings. The home
shall have a nonreflective roof material which is or simulates
asphalt or wood shingles, tile or rock.
(4)
The dwellings shall have wheels, axles, transporting lights, and
removable towing apparatus removed if present.
(5)
The dwelling shall be placed upon a permanent foundation
approved by the City of Seward.
(6)
(7) All utility services shall be directly connected to the structure.
A.
Manufactured homes which do not meet all of the standards in
Subsection A above may be placed in a manufactured home park or as
B.
§ 410-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-2.3
1:729
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land which creates no more
than four lots from any single parcel of land; requires no extension of
streets, sewers, utilities, or other municipal facilities; no dedication of
easements or rights-of-way or annexation; complies with all preexisting
zoning requirements; and has not been subject to a previous administrative
or minor subdivision.
MIXED-USE BUILDING — A building or structure that incorporates two or
more use types within a single building or structure, provided that each
use type is permitted within the individual base zoning district in which the
building or structure is to be located.
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT — A single development that incorporates
complementary land use types into a single development.
MOBILE HOME — A building type designed to be transportable in one
or more sections, constructed on a permanent chassis or undercarriage,
and designed to be used as a dwelling unit or other use with or without
a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, but not
bearing a seal attesting to the approval and issuance of the Nebraska
Department of Health or conformance to the manufactured home
procedural and enforcement regulations, as adopted by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development; or not otherwise satisfying
the definition of "manufactured home dwellings."
MOBILE HOME PARK — A unified development under single ownership,
developed, subdivided, planned, and improved for the placement of mobile
home units for nontransient use. Mobile home parks include common areas
and facilities for management, recreation, laundry, utility services, storage,
and other services; but do not include mobile home sales lots on which
unoccupied mobile homes are parked for the purposes of display, inspection,
sale, or storage.
MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION — A development subdivided, planned, and
improved for the placement of mobile home units on lots for uses by
the individual owners of such lots. Mobile home subdivisions may include
common areas and facilities for management, recreation, laundry, utility
services, storage, and other services; but do not include mobile home sales
lots on which unoccupied mobile homes are parked for the purpose of
display, inspection, sale, or storage.
MONUMENT — An identification marker established by a registered land
surveyor at each section corner, block corner, lot corner, or other point as
required by this chapter.
permitted by code, provided the structure is transportable in one or
more sections which in the traveling mode are eight body feet or more
in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, are
320 or more square feet and which are built on a permanent chassis
and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the
plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained
therein.
§ 410-2.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-2.3
1:730
MOVING LANE — Any traffic lane within a cartway where traffic movement
is the primary or sole function.
NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT — A building, structure, or
improvement which does not comply with the regulations for its zoning
district set forth by this Unified Land Development Ordinance but which
complied with applicable regulations at the time of construction.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot which was lawful prior to the adoption,
revision, or amendment of this Unified Land Development Ordinance but
that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform
to the present requirements of the Unified Land Development Ordinance.
No action can be taken which would increase the nonconforming
characteristics of the lot.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign that was legally erected prior to the
adoption, revision, or amendment of this Unified Land Development
Ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment
to conform to the present requirements of this Unified Land Development
Ordinance.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure which was lawful prior to
the adoption, revision, or amendment of this Unified Land Development
Ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment
to conform to the present requirements of the Unified Land Development
Ordinance. No action can be taken which would increase the nonconforming
characteristics of the structure.
NONCONFORMING USE — A land use which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision, or amendment of this Unified Land Development
Ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment
to conform to the present requirements of the Unified Land Development
Ordinance. No action can be taken which would increase the nonconforming
characteristics of the land use.
NUISANCE — An unreasonable and continuous invasion of the use and
enjoyment of a property right which a reasonable person would find
annoying, unpleasant, obnoxious, or offensive.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the boundaries of the parcel that is the subject
of an application.
OPEN SPACE — Area included on any site or lot that is open and
unobstructed to the sky, except for allowed projections of cornices,
overhangs, porches, balconies, or plant materials.
OUTDOOR STORAGE — The outdoor storage of materials, parts, or
products that are related to the primary use of a site for a period exceeding
three days.452
OVERLAY DISTRICT — A district established by this chapter that prescribes
special regulations to be applied to a site only in combination with a base
district.
452. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-2.3
1:731
OWNER — An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, or
corporation having sufficient proprietary interest to seek development of
land.
PARKING FACILITY — An area on a lot and/or within a building, including
one or more parking spaces, along with provision for access, circulation,
maneuvering, and landscaping, meeting the requirements of this Unified
Land Development Ordinance. Parking facilities include parking lots,
private garages, and parking structures. Vehicle storage is a use distinct
from parking. Vehicle storage is also governed by applicable provisions of
Article 34, Off-Street Parking.
PARKING LANE — A lane located on the sides of streets, designated or
allowing on-street parking of motor vehicles.
PARKING SPACE — An area on a lot and/or within a building, intended
for the use of temporary parking of a personal vehicle. This term is used
interchangeably with "parking stall." Each parking space must have a
means of access to a public street. Tandem parking stalls in single-family
detached, single-family attached, and townhouse residential uses shall be
considered to have a means of access to a public street.
PAVED — Permanently surfaced with poured concrete, concrete pavers, or
asphalt.
PERFORMANCE BOND — A surety bond or cash deposit posted by a
contractor or developer made out to the City in an amount equal to the full
cost of the improvements. The bond amount shall be that of the contract
price and shall be legally sufficient to secure to the City that said
improvements will be constructed in accordance with the terms of the
contract documents within a period specified by this chapter.
PERMITTED USE — A land use type allowed as a matter of right in a
zoning district, subject only to special requirements of this Unified Land
Development Ordinance.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — A development of land which is under
unified control and is planned and developed as a whole in a single
development operation or programmed series of development stages. The
development may include streets, circulation ways, utilities, buildings, open
spaces, and other site features and improvements.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the City of
Seward.
PLAT — A document, usually a map or maps, expressing the designation or
division of land into one or more lots or parcels, any one of which is 10 acres
or less. Plats include preliminary and final plats.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — A plat indicating the proposed layout of a
development and related information, intended for the purpose of
preliminary approval by approving authorities but not for filing with the
Seward County Register of Deeds.
A.
§ 410-2.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-2.3
1:732
PORCH, UNENCLOSED — A roofed or unroofed open structure projecting
from an exterior wall of a building and having no enclosed features more
than 30 inches above its floor other than wire screening and a roof with
supporting structure.
PREMISES — A lot, parcel, tract or plot of land, contiguous and under
common ownership or control, together with the buildings and structure
thereon.
PRINCIPAL USE — The main use of land or structures, as distinguished
from an accessory use.
PRIVATE GARAGE — A building for the storage of motor vehicles where
no repair service facilities are maintained and where no motor vehicles are
kept for rental or sale.
PROPERTY LINE — The boundary between separate property ownerships,
as recorded by the legal description of a parcel and defined by the Seward
County Register of Deeds. In subdivisions, property lines are usually but not
in every case coincident with lot lines.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle towed or self-propelled on its own
chassis or attached to the chassis of another vehicle and designed or used
for temporary dwelling, recreational, or sporting purposes. Recreational
vehicles include, but are not limited to, travel trailers; campers; motor
coach homes; converted buses; and trucks, boats, and boat trailers.
REGULATION — A specific requirement set forth by this Unified Land
Development Ordinance that must be followed.
REMOTE PARKING — A supply of off-street parking at a location not on the
site of a given development.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land, generally linear, occupied or intended
to be occupied by a system that conveys people, traffic, fluids, utilities,
or energy from one point to another. Rights-of-way may include streets
and roads, crosswalks, bicycle paths, recreational trails, railroads or fixed
guideway transit, electric transmission lines, gas pipelines, water mains, or
sewer mains.
RURAL SUBDIVISION — A residential subdivision located more than onehalf
mile past the corporate limits but within the two-mile planning
jurisdiction of the City; or outside of areas designated for future urban
development by the Comprehensive Plan.
SALVAGE YARD (or SALVAGE SERVICES) — Places of business engaged
in the storage, sale, dismantling or other processing of used or waste
materials that are not intended for reuse in their original forms, including
automotive wrecking yards, junkyards, or paper salvage yards.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of the subdivision which is presented
for final approval. The final plat contains detailed information and
documentation and is designed to be filed with the Register of Deeds.
B.
§ 410-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-2.3
1:733
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that conducts sanitary wastes from a point
of origin to a treatment or disposal facility. In developing areas, sanitary
sewers normally include interceptor, outfall, local, and lateral sewers.
SCREENING — The method by which a view of one site from another
adjacent site is shielded, concealed, or hidden. Screening techniques
include fences, walls, hedges, berms, or other features as may be permitted
by the landscape provisions of this chapter.
SEPTIC SYSTEM — An underground system, utilizing a watertight
receptacle to receive the discharge of sewage and a soil absorption leach
field, which provides for the decomposition of wastes produced by
development on a single lot.
SETBACK — The distance as required by the minimum setback(s) which
establishes the horizontal component(s) of the building envelope.
SHIPPING CONTAINER — Include standardized reusable vessels that were
originally designed for or capable of being mounted or moved by rail, truck
or ship by means of being mounted on a chassis or similar transport device.
This definition includes the terms "transport containers" and "portable
site storage containers" having a similar appearance to and similar
characteristics of shipping containers.[Added 11-20-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-19]
SIDEWALK — A paved path provided for pedestrian use, usually located at
the side of and detached from a road, but within the right-of-way.
SIGN — A symbolic, visual device fixed upon a building, vehicle, structure,
or parcel of land, which is intended to convey information about a product,
business, activity, place, person, institution, candidate, or political idea.
SITE — The parcel of land to be developed or built upon. A site may
encompass a single lot; or a group of lots developed as a common
development under the special and overlay districts provisions of this
chapter.
SITE PLAN — A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with
complete dimensioning the boundaries of a site and the location of all
buildings, structures, uses, and principal site development features
proposed for a specific parcel of land; and any other information that may
be reasonably requested by the City in order that an informed decision can
be made on the associated request.
INTERCEPTOR — A sanitary sewer that serves as a trunk, collecting
sewage generated by a number of individual developments.
A.
OUTFALL — A sanitary sewer that may be developed to connect an
individual subdivision or development to an interceptor sewer.
B.
LOCAL — A pipe that connects lateral sewers to an outfall or
interceptor sewer.
C.
D. LATERAL — A private service line connecting buildings to local sewers.
§ 410-2.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-2.3
1:734
STATE — The State of Nebraska.
STORM SEWER — A conduit that conducts storm drainage from a
development or subdivision, ultimately to a drainageway or stream.
STORY — The portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the next floor above it; if there is no floor above it,
the space between such floor and the next ceiling above it. A half story is a
story under a sloped roof, the wall heights of which on at least two opposite,
exterior walls are less than four feet.
STREET — Land dedicated for public use, from right-of-way line to rightof-
way, which affords a primary means of access to the abutting property.
Streets may be categorized in a hierarchy or conceptual arrangement of
streets based on function. The hierarchical approach classifies streets from
courts or lanes, which provide private access to a limited number of lots, to
arterials, which accommodate large volumes of high-speed, regional traffic.
Street types contained within the hierarchy include:
STREET, ARTERIAL — Streets or highways intended to provide for through
traffic movement between areas of the City or across the City. Major
arterials usually imply relatively high speeds and traffic volumes, and are
often subject to control of access to individual properties. Minor arterials
are generally intended to provide trips of moderate lengths and imply
lower operating speeds and more frequent points of local access than major
arterial streets.
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street connecting neighborhoods within the
same communities, designed to carry traffic from local to arterial streets.
STREET, DESIGNED — A future street designated on the Comprehensive
Development Plan to ensure traffic-carrying capacity between
neighborhoods, connections between neighborhoods and major activity
centers and accommodation of major through traffic. Such streets may be
designated as "collectors," "arterials" or "expressways," with the tentative
location of the street shown on the Transportation Plan.
STREET, INTERSECTING AND PRINCIPAL — In regard to a site, the
principal street shall be the street to which the majority of lots on a
blockface are oriented; the intersecting street shall be a street other than a
principal street.
STREET, LOCAL — A street which is used primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
A. Court or lane.
B. Local.
C. Collector.
D. Expressway.
E. Minor arterial.
F. Major arterial.
§ 410-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-2.3
1:735
STREET, MAJOR — A street carrying traffic between neighborhoods,
connecting neighborhoods with major activity centers, or accommodating
major through traffic. Major streets are designated as collectors, arterials,
or expressways by the Comprehensive Development Plan.
STREET YARD — The distance between a lot line adjacent to a public
street and the wall or facade of a building parallel to such lot line. If the
building wall is not parallel to the lot line, the street yard depth shall be
the distance between the street lot line and a parallel line that equals the
average distance of the building wall or facade from the street lot line.
STRUCTURE — Any object constructed or built and attached or anchored
permanently or semi-permanently to the ground in such a way as to prevent
routine movement.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract, or parcel into two or more lots,
tracts, parcels, or other units of land for title transfer or development, when
one of the resultant lots is equal to 10 acres or less.
TOWNHOUSE — A dwelling unit having a common wall with or abutting
one or more adjacent dwelling units in a townhouse structure, with its own
front and rear access to the outside, and neither above nor below any other
dwelling unit.
TOWNHOUSE STRUCTURE — A building formed by at least two contiguous
townhouses and not more than 12 contiguous townhouses with common or
abutting walls.
URBAN SUBDIVISION — A residential subdivision generally located within
the corporate limits of the City of Seward or within less than 1/2 mile
of such corporate limits; or within an area designated for future urban
development by the Comprehensive Development Plan.
USE — The conduct of an activity, or the performance of a function or
operation, on a site or in a building or facility.
UTILITIES — Installations, either above ground or below ground, necessary
for the production, generation, transmission, delivery, collection, treatment,
or storage of water, solid or fluid wastes, stormwater, energy media, gas,
electronic or electromagnetic signals, or other services which are precedent
to development and use of land.
VACATION — The official abandonment of a public right-of-way or easement
by the City in accordance with state law.
VARIANCE — A modification of the application of certain regulations or
provisions of this chapter by the Board of Adjustment, under the authority
provided by this chapter and state statutes.
VEHICLE, MOTOR — Any passenger vehicle, motorcycle, recreational
vehicle, or truck that is propelled or drawn by mechanical power.
YARD, REQUIRED — That portion of a lot that lies between a lot line and the
corresponding building setback line or the required landscape area. This
area shall be unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except
as may be specifically provided for or required by this chapter.
§ 410-2.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-2.3
1:736
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR — The City official authorized by the City
Council to administer this Unified Land Development Ordinance.
ZONING DISTRICT — A designated specified land classification, within
which all sites are subject to a unified group of use and site development
regulations set forth in this Unified Land Development Ordinance.
FRONT YARD — The space extending the full width of a lot, lying
between the front lot line and the front setback line. For a corner lot,
the front yard shall normally be defined as that yard along a street
which meets one of the following two criteria:
The yard along the blockface to which a greater number of
structures are oriented; or
(1)
(2) The yard along a street that has the smaller horizontal dimension.
A.
REAR YARD — The space extending the full width of a lot, lying between
the rear lot line and the rear setback line.
B.
SIDE YARD — The space extending the depth of a lot from the front lot
line to the rear lot line, lying between the side yard setback line and the
interior lot line.
C.
STREET SIDE YARD — On a corner lot, the space extending from the
front yard to the rear yard, between the street side yard setback line
and the street side lot line.
D.
§ 410-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-2.3
1:737

ARTICLE 3
Use Types
§ 410-3.1. Purpose.
Article 3 shall be known as the "Use Types." The purpose of the use types
is to establish a classification system for land uses and a consistent set
of terms defining uses permitted or conditionally permitted within various
zoning districts. The use types article also provides a procedure for
determining the applicable use type of any activity not clearly within any
defined use type.
§ 410-3.2. Classification of uses; records.
§ 410-3.3. Agricultural use types.453
Agricultural use types include the planting, cultivating, harvesting, and
storage of grains, hay, or plants commonly grown in Seward County; or the
raising and feeding of livestock or poultry.
A. Classification of uses. In the event of any question as to the appropriate
use types of any existing or proposed use or activity, the Zoning
Administrator of the City of Seward shall have the authority to
determine the appropriate use type. A determination of the Zoning
Administrator may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment. In making
such determinations, the Zoning Administrator and Board of
Adjustment shall consider such characteristics or specific requirements
of the use in common with those included as examples of use types.
Those examples, when included in use type descriptions, are intended
to be illustrative, as opposed to exclusive lists.
B. Records. The Zoning Administrator shall make all such determinations
of appropriate use types in writing. The record of the determination
shall contain a report explaining the reasons for the determination.
A. Horticulture: the growing of horticultural and floricultural specialties,
such as flowers, shrubs, or trees intended for ornamental or
landscaping purposes. This definition may include accessory retail sales
under certain conditions. Typical uses include wholesale plant
nurseries and greenhouses.
B. Crop production: the raising and harvesting of tree crops, row crops or
field crops on an agricultural or commercial basis. This definition may
include accessory retail sales under certain conditions.
C. Animal production: the raising of animals or production of animal
products, such as eggs or dairy products, on an agricultural or
commercial basis on a site which is also used for crop production or
where grazing of natural vegetation is the major feed source; or the
453. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-3.3
1:739
§ 410-3.4. Residential use types.
Residential use types include uses providing wholly or primarily
nontransient living accommodations. They exclude institutional living
arrangements providing twenty-four-hour skilled nursing or medical care,
forced residence, or therapeutic settings.
raising of animals for recreational or educational use. Typical uses
include grazing, ranching, free-range dairy farming, and poultry
farming.
D. Confined animal feeding operation (CAFO): the use of a site of any size
for the confined feeding or holding of 1,000 or more animal units of
livestock or poultry, or of a site with a gross density of two or more
animal units per acre, within buildings, lots, pens, or other close
quarters which are not used for crop production or where grazing of
natural vegetation is not the major feed source. Livestock and poultry
shall include any animal or fowl that is used primarily for use as food or
food products for human consumption, or for laboratory or testing
purposes. A CAFO does not include areas which are used for the raising
of crops or other vegetation, and upon which livestock are allowed to
graze or feed. For the purpose of calculating animal units, the animal
unit equivalents for each type of livestock are established as follows:
Type of Livestock Equivalent Animal Units Per Acre
Slaughter and feed cattle 1.00
Mature dairy cattle 1.40
Swine 0.75
Sheep 0.20
Horses 2.00
Turkeys 0.20
Ducks 0.20
Chickens 0.10
E. Livestock sales: the use of a site for the temporary confinement and
exchange or sale of livestock. Typical uses include sales barns.
A. Single-family residential: the use of a site for one dwelling unit,
occupied by one family. Mobile home units, as defined by this section,
are not a single-family residential use type.
(1) Single-family residential (detached): a single-family residential use
in which one dwelling unit is located on a single lot, with no
physical or structural connection to any other dwelling unit.
(2) Single-family residential (attached): a single-family residential use
in which one dwelling unit is located on a single lot and is attached
by a common vertical wall to only one other adjacent dwelling unit
on another single lot.
§ 410-3.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-3.4
1:740
B. Duplex residential: the use of a legally described lot for two dwelling
units, each occupied by one family within a single building, excluding
manufactured or mobile home units, but including modular housing
units.
C. Two-family residential: the use of a site for two dwelling units, each
occupied by one family, each in a separate building, excluding a mobile
home unit.
D. Townhouse residential: the use of a site for three or more attached
dwelling units, each occupied by one family and separated by vertical
side walls extending from foundation through roof without openings.
Each townhouse unit must have at least two exposed exterior walls.
E. Multiple-family residential: the use of a site for three or more dwelling
units within one building not otherwise defined as townhouse units.
F. Downtown residential: the use of upper levels above street level of a
building within the Central Business District of the City of Seward for
single- or multiple-family residential uses.
G. Group residential: the use of a site for the residence of more than three
unrelated persons, not otherwise defined as a family, in which
occupants are accommodated in rooms not defined as dwelling units.
Group residential uses are limited to facilities that are officially
recognized or operated by a college or university, government agency,
or nonprofit organization. Typical uses include fraternity or sorority
houses and dormitories not incorporated into a college and university
use type.
H. Lodging house: the use of a site for the residence of more than four
unrelated persons, not otherwise defined as a family, in which
occupants are accommodated in rooms not defined as dwelling units.
I. Manufactured home residential: use of a site for one or more
manufactured home dwellings, as defined in § 410-2.3.
J. Mobile home park: use of a site under single ownership for one or more
mobile home units. Generally, the land on which mobile homes are
placed in a mobile home park is leased from the owner of the facility.
K. Mobile home subdivision: division of a tract of land into lots that meet
all the requirements of the City of Seward's subdivision ordinance for
the location of mobile homes.454 Generally, a lot within a mobile home
subdivision is owned by the owner of the mobile home placed upon such
lot.
L. Retirement residence: a building or group of buildings which provides
residential facilities, provided that 75% of the residents are at least 60
years of age, or households headed by a householder of at least 60
454. Editor's Note: See Part 8, Subdivision Regulations, of this chapter.
§ 410-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-3.4
1:741
§ 410-3.5. Civic use types.
Civic use types include the performance of utility, educational, recreational,
cultural, medical, protective, governmental, and other uses that are
strongly vested with social importance.
years of age. A retirement residence may provide a range of residential
building types and may also provide support services to residents,
including but not limited to food service, general health supervision,
medication services, housekeeping services, personal services,
recreation facilities, and transportation services. The retirement
residence may accommodate food preparation in independent units or
meal service in one or more common areas. Retirement residences may
include additional health care supervision or nursing care.
A. Administration: governmental offices providing administrative, clerical
or public contact services that deal directly with the citizen, together
with incidental storage and maintenance of necessary vehicles. Typical
uses include federal, state, county, and City offices.
B. Cemetery: land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead
and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbariums,
crematoria, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction
with and within the boundary of such cemetery.
C. Clubs: uses providing meeting, recreational, or social facilities for a
private, nonprofit or noncommercial association, primarily for use by
members and guests.
(1) Clubs (recreational): clubs that provide indoor and/or outdoor
athletic facilities, with or without social or meeting facilities.
Typical uses include country clubs, private or nonprofit community
or recreation centers, and private golf courses and driving ranges.
(2) Clubs (social): clubs that provide primarily social or meeting
facilities. Typical uses include private social clubs and fraternal
organizations.
D. College and university facilities: an educational institution of higher
learning that offers a course of study designed to culminate in the
issuance of a degree certified by a generally recognized accrediting
organization.
E. Convalescent services: a use providing bed care and inpatient services
for persons requiring regular medical attention, but excluding a facility
providing surgical or emergency medical services and excluding a
facility providing care for alcoholism, drug addiction, mental disease, or
communicable disease. Typical uses include nursing homes.
F. Cultural services: a library, museum, or similar registered nonprofit
organizational use displaying, preserving and exhibiting objects of
community and cultural interest in one or more of the arts and sciences.
§ 410-3.4 SEWARD CODE § 410-3.5
1:742
G. Day-care services (limited): includes all classifications of day-care
facilities regulated by the State of Nebraska that operate providing
care for not more than six persons. This term includes nursery schools,
preschools, day-care centers for children or adults, and similar uses,
but excludes public and private primary and secondary educational
facilities.
H. Day-care services (general): includes all classifications of day-care
facilities regulated by the State of Nebraska that operate providing
care for more than six persons. This term includes nursery schools,
preschools, day-care centers for children or adults, and similar uses,
but excludes public and private primary and secondary educational
facilities.
I. Detention facilities: a publicly operated or contracted use providing
housing and care for individuals legally confined, designed to isolate
those individuals from the community.
J. Emergency residential services: a facility or use of a building to provide
a protective sanctuary for victims of crime or abuse, including
emergency housing during crisis intervention for victims of rape, abuse,
or physical beatings.
K. Group-care facility: a facility licensed or approved by the State of
Nebraska or other appropriate agency, which provides for the care and
short- or long-term, continuous multi-day occupancy of more than four
unrelated persons who require and receive therapy or counseling on
site as part of an organized and therapeutic ongoing program for any of
the purposes listed below. Such facilities shall exclude those uses
defined as "group homes." Group-care facilities include facilities which
provide for the:
(1) Adaptation to living with, or rehabilitation from, the handicaps of
physical disability.
(2) Adaptation to living with, or rehabilitation from, the handicaps of
emotional or mental disorder; or of mental retardation if such
facility has an overnight occupancy of more than eight persons.
(3) Rehabilitation from the effects of drug or alcohol abuse.
(4) Supervision while under a program alternative to imprisonment,
including but not limited to pre-release, work-release, and
probationary programs.
L. Group home: a facility licensed by the State of Nebraska in which no
more than eight persons, not including resident managers or house
parents, who are unrelated by blood, marriage, or adoption reside while
receiving therapy, training, or counseling for the purpose of adaptation
to living with or rehabilitation from cerebral palsy, autism, or mental
retardation.
§ 410-3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-3.5
1:743
M. Guidance services: a use providing counseling, guidance, recuperative,
or similar services to persons requiring rehabilitation assistance as a
result of mental illness, alcoholism, detention, drug addiction, or similar
condition on a daytime care basis.
N. Health care: a facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical service
for sick or injured persons exclusively on an outpatient basis, including
emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, administration and
services to outpatients, employees, or visitors.
O. Hospital: a facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical service
for sick or injured persons primarily on an inpatient basis, including
emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, administration, and
services to patients, employees, or visitors.
P. Maintenance facilities: a public facility supporting maintenance, repair,
vehicle or equipment servicing, material storage, and similar activities,
including street or sewer yards, equipment service centers, and similar
uses having characteristics of commercial services or contracting or
industrial activities.
Q. Park and recreation services: publicly owned and operated parks,
playgrounds, and recreation facilities, including publicly owned
community centers, and open spaces.
R. Postal facilities: postal services, including post offices, bulk mail
processing or sorting centers operated by the United States Postal
Service.
S. Primary educational facilities: a public, private, or parochial school
offering instruction at the elementary school level in the branches of
learning study required to be taught in schools within the State of
Nebraska.
T. Public assembly: facilities owned and operated by a public agency,
charitable nonprofit, or private organization accommodating major
public assembly for recreation, sports, amusement, or entertainment
purposes. Typical uses include civic or community auditoriums, sports
stadiums and arenas, convention facilities, fairgrounds, incidental
sales, and exhibition facilities.
U. Religious assembly: a use located in a permanent building and
providing regular organized religious worship and religious education
incidental thereto (excluding private primary or private secondary
educational facilities, community recreational facilities, day-care
facilities, and incidental parking facilities). A property tax exemption
obtained pursuant to the Property Tax Code of the State of Nebraska
shall constitute prima facie evidence of religious assembly use.
V. Safety services: facilities for conduct of public safety and emergency
services, including police and fire protection services and emergency
medical and ambulance services.
§ 410-3.5 SEWARD CODE § 410-3.5
1:744
§ 410-3.6. Office use types.
Office use types include uses providing for administration, professional
services, and allied activities. These uses often invite public clientele but
are more limited in external effects than commercial uses.
W. Secondary educational facilities: a public, private, or parochial school
offering instruction at the junior high or high school level in the
branches of learning and study required to be taught in the schools of
the State of Nebraska.
X. Utilities: any aboveground structures or facilities, other than lines,
poles, and other incidental facilities, used for the production,
generation, transmission, delivery, collection, or storage of water,
sewage, electricity, gas, oil, energy media, communications, electronic
or electromagnetic signals, or other services which are precedent to
development and/or use of land.
A. Corporate offices: use of a site for administrative, processing, or
research offices, which generally does not provide service to clientele
from Seward and the surrounding region. Corporate offices are
destinations for commuters drawn from a relatively wide region around
Seward, as well as from the community itself. Typical uses include
corporate headquarters offices, telemarketing, or information
processing offices.
B. General offices: use of a site for business, professional, or
administrative offices which may invite clients from both local and
regional areas. Typical uses include real estate, insurance,
management, travel, or other business offices; organization and
association offices; or professional offices.
C. Financial services: provision of financial and banking services to
consumers or clients. Walk-in and drive-in services to consumers are
provided on site. Typical uses include banks, savings and loan
associations, credit unions, savings banks, and loan companies. An ATM
(automatic teller machine) that is not accompanied on-site by an office
of its primary financial institution is considered within the personal
services use type. The financial services use type is divided into two
categories:
(1) Financial Services A includes less than 4,000 square feet of floor
area and has no more than two drive-up lanes (including ATM
lanes).
(2) Financial Services B includes 4,000 square feet or more of floor
area and/or has more than two drive-up lanes.
D. Medical offices: use of a site for facilities which provide diagnoses and
outpatient care on a routine basis, but which do not provide prolonged,
in-house medical or surgical care. Medical offices are operated by
doctors, dentists, or similar medical practitioners licensed for practice
§ 410-3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-3.6
1:745
§ 410-3.7. Commercial use types.
Commercial uses include the sale, rental, service, and distribution of goods;
and the provision of services other than those classified under other use
types.
in the State of Nebraska. The medical offices use type is divided into
two categories:
(1) Medical Offices A includes less than 3,000 square feet of floor area.
(2) Medical Offices B includes 3,000 square feet or more of floor area.
A. Agricultural sales and service: establishments or places of business
engaged in sale from the premises of feed, grain, fertilizers, farm
equipment, pesticides and similar goods or in the provision of
agriculturally related services with incidental storage on lots other than
where the service is rendered. Typical uses include nurseries, hay, farm
implement dealerships, feed and grain stores, and tree service firms.
B. Automotive and equipment services: establishments or places of
business primarily engaged in sale and/or service of automobiles,
trucks, or heavy equipment. The following are considered automotive
and equipment use types:
(1) Automobile auction lots: sale of motor vehicles through a process of
periodic auctions or bid procedures. Automobile auction lots
usually include large on-site storage areas of motor vehicles and
lack showrooms, auto repair facilities and other structures and
facilities that are typical of new car dealerships.
(2) Automotive rental and sales: sale or rental of automobiles,
noncommercial trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational
vehicles or boats, including incidental storage, maintenance, and
servicing. Typical uses include new and used car dealerships;
motorcycle dealerships; and boat, trailer, and recreational vehicle
dealerships.
(3) Auto services: provision of fuel, lubricants, parts and accessories,
and incidental services to motor vehicles; and washing and
cleaning and/or repair of automobiles, noncommercial trucks,
motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles, or boats,
including the sale, installation, and servicing of equipment and
parts. Typical uses include service stations, car washes, muffler
shops, auto repair garages, tire sales and installation, wheel and
brake shops, and similar repair and service activities, but exclude
dismantling, salvage, or body and fender repair services.
(4) Body repair: repair, painting, or refinishing of the body, fender, or
frame of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motor homes,
recreational vehicles, boats, tractors, construction equipment,
agricultural implements, and similar vehicles or equipment. Typical
§ 410-3.6 SEWARD CODE § 410-3.7
1:746
uses include body and fender shops, painting shops, and other
similar repair or refinishing garages.
(5) Equipment rental and sales: sale or rental of trucks, tractors,
construction equipment, agricultural implements, mobile homes,
and similar heavy equipment, including incidental storage,
maintenance, and servicing. Typical uses include truck dealerships,
construction equipment dealerships, and mobile home sales
establishments.
(6) Equipment repair services: repair of trucks, tractors, construction
equipment, agricultural implements, and similar heavy equipment.
Typical uses include truck repair garages, tractor and farm
implement repair services, and machine shops, but exclude
dismantling, salvage, or body and fender repair services.
C. Bed-and-breakfast: a lodging service that provides overnight or shortterm
accommodations to guests or visitors, usually including provision
of breakfast. Bed-and-breakfasts are usually located in large residential
structures that have been adapted for this use. For the purpose of this
definition, bed-and-breakfasts are always owned and operated by the
resident owner or resident manager of the structure, include no more
than four units, and accommodate each guest or visitor for no more
than 14 consecutive days during any one-month period.
D. Business support services: establishments or places of business
primarily engaged in the sale, rental or repair of equipment, supplies
and materials or the provision of services used by office, professional
and service establishments to the firms themselves, but excluding
automotive, construction and farm equipment. Typical uses include
office equipment and supply firms, small business machine repair shops
or hotel equipment and supply firms, messenger and delivery services,
custodial or maintenance services, and convenience printing and
copying.
E. Business or trade schools: a use providing education or training in
business, commerce, language, or other similar activity or occupational
pursuit, and not otherwise defined as a home occupation, college or
university, or public or private educational facility.
F. Campground: facilities providing camping or parking areas and
incidental services for travelers in recreational vehicles or tents, which
accommodate each guest or visitor for no more than 14 consecutive
days during any one-month period.
G. Cocktail lounge: a use engaged in the preparation and retail sale of
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, including
taverns, bars, cocktail lounges, and similar uses other than a restaurant
as that term is defined in this section.
H. Commercial recreation (controlled-impact): private businesses, or other
organizations which may or may not be commercial by structure or by
§ 410-3.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-3.7
1:747
nature, which are primarily engaged in the provision or sponsorship
of sports, entertainment, or recreation for participants or spectators.
Controlled-impact commercial recreation uses typically take place
entirely within enclosed buildings or, when outdoors, have limited
effects related to lighting, hours of operation, or noise. Typical uses
include theaters, private dance halls, billiard or bowling centers, game
arcades, indoor skating facilities, miniature golf courses, and private
golf courses.
I. Commercial recreation (high-impact): private businesses, or other
organizations which may or may not be commercial by structure or by
nature, which are primarily engaged in the provision or sponsorship of
sports, entertainment, or recreation for participants or spectators.
High-impact commercial recreation uses are typically located outdoors
and have operating effects caused by lighting, noise, traffic, or hours of
operation that create substantial environmental impacts. Typical uses
include shooting ranges, lighted driving ranges, go-kart tracks,
amusement parks, race tracks, and private baseball complexes.
J. Communications services: establishments primarily engaged in the
provision of broadcasting and other information relay services
accomplished through the use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms
but excludes those classified as "utilities." Typical uses include
television studios, telecommunications service centers, telegraph
service offices, or film and sound recording facilities. Broadcast and
communications towers, and their minor ancillary ground structures,
are classified as "miscellaneous use types."
K. Construction sales and services: establishments or places of business
primarily engaged in the retail or wholesale sale, from the premises, of
materials used in the construction of buildings or other structures other
than retail sale of paint, fixtures and hardware. This use type excludes
those uses classified under "automotive and equipment services."
Typical uses include building materials sales, or tool and equipment
rental or sales.
L. Consumer services: establishments that provide services, primarily to
individuals and households, but excluding automotive use types.
Typical uses include automated banking machines, appliance repair
shops, watch or jewelry repair shops, or musical instrument repair
shops.
M. Convenience storage: storage services primarily for personal effects
and household goods within enclosed storage areas having individual
access, but excluding use of such areas as workshops, hobby shops,
manufacturing, or commercial activity. Typical uses include miniwarehousing.
N. Food sales: establishments or places of business primarily engaged in
the retail sale of food or household products for home consumption.
Food sales establishments may include the sale of non-food items.
§ 410-3.7 SEWARD CODE § 410-3.7
1:748
Typical uses include groceries, delicatessens, meat markets, retail
bakeries, and candy shops.455
(1) Convenience food sales: establishments occupying facilities of less
than 10,000 square feet; and characterized by sales of specialty
foods or a limited variety of general items, and the sale of fuel for
motor vehicles.
(2) Limited food sales: establishments occupying facilities of less than
10,000 square feet; and characterized by sales of specialty foods or
a limited variety of general items, but excluding the accessory sale
of fuel for motor vehicles. Typical uses include delicatessens, meat
markets, retail bakeries, candy shops, and small grocery stores.
(3) General food sales: establishments selling a wide variety of food
commodities and related items, using facilities 10,000 square feet
or larger but less than 40,000 square feet. Typical uses include
grocery stores and locker plants.
(4) Supermarkets: establishments selling a wide variety of food
commodities, related items, and often providing a variety of nonfood
goods and services, using facilities 40,000 square feet or
larger. Typical uses include large grocery stores.
O. Funeral services: establishments engaged in undertaking services such
as preparing the human dead for burial, and arranging and managing
funerals. Typical uses include funeral homes or mortuaries.
P. Gaming facilities: establishments engaged in the lawful, on-site
operation of games of chance that involve the risk of money for financial
gain by patrons. Gaming facilities shall include the accessory sale of
liquor and food, pursuant to regulations of the City of Seward and/or
the State of Nebraska.
Q. Kennels: boarding and care services for dogs, cats and similar small
mammals or large birds; or any premises on which more than three
animals included under this definition over four months of age are kept
and maintained. Typical uses include boarding kennels, ostrich-raising
facilities; pet motels, or dog training centers.456
R. Laundry services: establishments primarily engaged in the provision of
laundering, cleaning or dyeing services other than those classified as
"personal services." Typical uses include bulk laundry and cleaning
plants, diaper services, or linen supply services.
S. Liquor sales: establishments or places of business engaged in retail sale
of alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption. Typical uses
include liquor stores, bottle shops, or any licensed sales of liquor, beer
or wine for off-site consumption.
455. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
456. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-3.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-3.7
1:749
T. Lodging: lodging services involving the provision of room and/or board,
but not meeting the classification criteria of bed-and-breakfasts.
Typical uses include hotels, apartment hotels, and motels.
U. Personal improvement services: establishments primarily engaged in
the provision of informational, instructional, personal improvements
and similar services of a nonprofessional nature. Typical uses include
driving schools, health or physical fitness studios, music schools,
reducing salons, dance studios, handicraft and hobby instruction.
V. Personal services: establishments or places of business primarily
engaged in the provision of services of a personal nature. Typical uses
include beauty and barber shops; seamstress, tailor, or shoe repair
shops; photography studios; television or electronics repair; or drycleaning
stations serving individuals and households. Personal services
include establishments providing for the administration of massage or
massage therapy carried out by persons licensed by the State of
Nebraska when performing massage services as a part of the profession
or trade for which licensed or persons performing massage services
under the direction of a person so licensed; or persons performing
massage services or therapy pursuant to the written direction of a
licensed physician.
W. Pet services: retail sales, incidental pet health services, and grooming
and boarding, when totally within a building, of dogs, cats, birds, fish,
and similar small animals customarily used as household pets. Typical
uses include pet stores, small animal clinics, dog bathing and clipping
salons, and pet grooming shops, but exclude uses for livestock and
large animals.
X. 457Research services: establishments primarily engaged in research of
an industrial or scientific nature. Typical uses include electronics
research laboratories, space research and development firms, testing
laboratories, or pharmaceutical research labs.
Y. Restaurants: a use engaged in the preparation and retail sale of food
and beverages; including the sale of alcoholic beverages when
conducted as a secondary feature of the use.
(1) Restaurant (drive-in or fast-food): an establishment that principally
supplies food and beverages in disposable containers and is
characterized by high automobile accessibility and on-site
accommodations, self-service, and short stays by customers.
(2) Restaurant (general): an establishment characterized by table
service to customers and/or accommodation to walk-in clientele, as
opposed to drive-in or fast-food restaurants. Typical uses include
cafes, coffee shops, and restaurants.
457. Editor's Note: Former Subsection X, regarding RV storage, was repealed 2-8-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-05. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of subsequent
subsections.
§ 410-3.7 SEWARD CODE § 410-3.7
1:750
Z. Restricted (or adult) businesses: any business activity that offers the
opportunity to view specified sexual activities or view and touch
specified anatomical areas in a manner that lacks serious literary,
artistic, political, or scientific value. This category includes the sale or
viewing of visual or print materials that meet this criteria if the sale of
such material constitutes more than 20% of the sales or retail floor area
of the establishment. Typical uses include retail services or stores
which are distinguished by an emphasis on activities or materials that
emphasize primarily sexual content in their inventory and marketing
practices; businesses which offer live performances characterized by
exposure of specified anatomical areas; and adult theaters. Businesses
may be classified as adult entertainment businesses without regard to
service of alcoholic beverages.
(1) For the purposes of this definition, "specified anatomical areas"
include the following if less than opaquely covered: human
genitals, the pubic region, pubic hair, or the female breast below a
point immediately above the top of the areola.
(2) "Specified sexual activities" include any of the following conditions:
(a) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
(b) Acts or representations of acts of human masturbation, sexual
intercourse with humans or animals, oral sex, or flagellation.
(c) Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock, or female breast.
(d) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any
activities set forth in (a) through (c) above.
AA. Retail services: sale or rental with incidental service of commonly used
goods and merchandise for personal or household use, but excludes
those classified more specifically by these use type classifications.
Typical uses include department stores, apparel stores, furniture
stores, or establishments providing the following products or services:
(1) Household cleaning and maintenance products; drugs, cards,
stationery, notions, books, tobacco products, cosmetics, and
specialty items; flowers, plants, hobby materials, toys, and
handcrafted items; apparel, jewelry, fabrics and like items;
cameras, photograph services, household electronic equipment,
records, sporting equipment, kitchen utensils, home furnishing and
appliances, art supplies and framing, arts and antiques, paint and
wallpaper, hardware, carpeting and floor covering; interior
decorating services; office supplies; mail order or catalog sales;
bicycles; and automotive parts and accessories (excluding service
and installation).
(2) General retail services include:
§ 410-3.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-3.7
1:751
(a) Limited retail services: establishments providing retail
services, occupying facilities of 3,000 square feet or less.
Typical establishments provide for specialty retailing or
retailing oriented to Seward and its surrounding vicinity.
(b) Medium retail services: establishments providing retail
services, occupying facilities between 3,001 square feet and
10,000 square feet in a single establishment or multi-tenant
facility. Typical establishments provide for specialty retailing
or general-purpose retailing oriented to Seward and its
surrounding vicinity.
(c) Large retail services: establishments providing retail services,
occupying facilities between 10,001 square feet and 40,000
square feet in a single establishment or multi-tenant facility.
Typical establishments provide for specialty retailing or
general retailing oriented to Seward and its surrounding
vicinity.
(d) Mass retail services: establishments providing retail services,
occupying facilities over 40,000 square feet in a single
establishment or multi-tenant facility. Typical establishments
provide for general retailing oriented to Seward and the
surrounding region.
BB. Stables and/or riding academies: the buildings, pens and pasture areas
used for the boarding and feeding of horses, llamas, or other equine not
owned by the occupants of the premises. This use includes instruction
in riding, jumping, and showing or the riding of horses/equines for hire.
CC. Surplus sales: businesses engaged in the sale, including sale by auction,
of used items or new items which are primarily composed of factory
surplus or discontinued items. Surplus sales uses sometimes include
regular outdoor display of merchandise. Typical uses include flea
markets, auction houses, factory outlets, or merchandise liquidators.
DD. Trade services: establishments or places of business primarily engaged
in the provision of services that are not retail or primarily dedicated to
walk-in clientele. These services often involve services to construction
or building trades and may involve a small amount of screened, outdoor
storage in appropriate zoning districts. Typical uses include shops or
operating bases for plumbers, electricians, or HVAC (heating,
ventilating, and air conditioning) contractors.
EE. Travel centers: facilities that provide for the sale of fuel, provisions, and
supplies to motorists, including operators of over-the-road trucks, in
which less than 30% of the total site area is devoted to the servicing,
accommodation, parking, or storage of over-the-road trucks. The
calculation of these areas includes but is not limited to fuel islands for
diesel fuel, truck washing facilities, truck parking areas, and associated
maneuvering areas. Travel centers include a mix of uses, including food
sales, general retail services, auto and equipment services, and
§ 410-3.7 SEWARD CODE § 410-3.7
1:752
§ 410-3.8. Parking use types.
§ 410-3.9. Industrial use types.
Industrial use types include the on-site extraction or production of goods by
nonagricultural methods, and the storage and distribution of products.
restaurants, and are typically located along or near interstate highways
or other principal state and federal designated highway routes.
FF. Truck stops: facilities that provide for the sale of fuel, provisions, and
supplies to motorists, including operators of over-the-road trucks, in
which 30% or more of the total site area is devoted to the servicing,
accommodation, parking, or storage of over-the-road trucks. The
calculation of these areas includes but is not limited to fuel islands for
diesel fuel, truck washing facilities, truck parking areas, and associated
maneuvering areas. Travel centers include a mix of uses, including food
sales, general retail services, auto and equipment services, and
restaurants, and are typically located along or near interstate highways
or other principal state and federal designated highway routes.
GG. Veterinary services (general): veterinary services and hospitals for
small animals. Typical uses include pet clinics, dog and cat hospitals,
pet cemeteries and crematoriums, and veterinary hospitals for livestock
and large animals.
HH. 458Veterinary services (large animal): veterinary services and hospitals
for large animals such as cows, bulls, horses, and other livestock.
Typical uses include veterinary hospitals for livestock and large
animals.
A. Off-street parking: Parking use types include surface parking of motor
vehicles on a temporary basis within a privately or publicly owned offstreet
parking facility.
B. Parking structure: the use of a site for a multilevel building which
provides for the parking of motor vehicles on a temporary basis, other
than as an accessory to a principal use on the same site.
A. Agricultural industry: establishments which include the storage,
manufacture, sale, or distribution of agricultural supplies or products
that create major external effects, including substantial truck or rail
traffic and/or significant potential for hazard. Typical uses include grain
elevators and storage of agricultural chemicals such as anhydrous
ammonia. Agricultural industries do not include retailers of farm
equipment or other, generally nonhazardous agricultural supplies.
458. Editor's Note: Former Subsection HH, regarding short-term vehicle storage, was repealed
2-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of
subsequent subsections.
§ 410-3.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-3.9
1:753
B. Construction yards: establishments housing facilities of businesses
primarily engaged in construction activities, including incidental
storage of materials and equipment on lots other than construction
sites. Typical uses are building contractor's yards.
C. Custom manufacturing:
(1) Establishments primarily engaged in the on-site production of
goods by hand manufacturing, within enclosed structures,
involving:
(a) The use of hand tools; or
(b) The use of domestic mechanical equipment not exceeding two
horsepower; or
(c) A single kiln not exceeding 8 KW or equivalent.
(2) This category also includes the incidental direct sale to consumers
of only those goods produced on site. Typical uses include ceramic
studios, custom jewelry manufacturing, and candle-making shops.
D. Light industry: establishments engaged in the manufacture or
processing of finished products from previously prepared materials,
including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging
of such products, and incidental storage, sales, and distribution. These
establishments are characterized by having no major external
environmental effects across property lines and include no unscreened
or unenclosed outdoor storage. Typical uses include commercial
bakeries, dressed beef processing plants, soft drink bottling, apparel
assembly from fabrics, electronics, manufacturing, print shops and
publishing houses.
E. General industry: enterprises engaged in the processing,
manufacturing, compounding, assembly, packaging, treatment or
fabrication of materials and products from prepared materials or from
raw materials without noticeable noise, odor, vibration, or air pollution
effects across property lines, but often including outdoor storage of
materials or products.
F. Heavy industry: enterprises involved in the basic processing and
manufacturing of products, predominately from raw materials, with
noticeable noise, odor, vibration, or air pollution effects across property
lines; or a use or process engaged in the storage of or processes
involving potentially or actually hazardous, explosive, flammable,
radioactive, or other commonly recognized hazardous materials.
G. Recycling collection: any site which is used in whole or part for the
receiving or collection of any post-consumer, nondurable goods,
including, but not limited to, glass, plastic, paper, cardboard,
aluminum, tin, or other recyclable commodities.
§ 410-3.9 SEWARD CODE § 410-3.9
1:754
§ 410-3.10. Transportation use types.
Transportation use types include the use of land for the purpose of
providing facilities supporting the movement of passengers and freight from
one point to another.
H. Recycling processing: any site which is used for the processing of any
post-consumer, nondurable goods, including, but not limited to, glass,
plastic, paper, cardboard, aluminum, tin, or other recyclable
commodities.
I. Resource extraction: a use involving on-site extraction of surface or
subsurface mineral products or natural resources, excluding site
grading for a specific construction project or preparation of a site for
subsequent development. Typical uses are quarries, borrow pits, sand
and gravel operations, mining, and removal of dirt for off-site use.
J. Salvage services: places of business engaged in the storage, sale,
dismantling or other processing of used or waste materials that are not
intended for reuse in their original forms. Typical uses include
automotive wrecking yards, junkyards, or paper salvage yards.
K. Vehicle storage: storage of operating or nonoperating vehicles. Typical
uses include storage of private parking tow-aways, impound yards, and
personal RV and vehicle storage facilities but exclude dismantling,
salvage, and individual storage or parking vehicles on primary
residence property per ULDO Article 34. [Amended 2-8-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-05]
L. Warehousing (enclosed): uses including storage, distribution, and
handling of goods and materials within enclosed structures. Typical
uses include wholesale distributors, storage warehouses, and van and
storage companies.
M. Warehousing (open): uses including open-air storage, distribution, and
handling of goods and materials. Typical uses include monument yards,
grain elevators, and open storage.
A. Aviation (general): airports, including take-off and landing fields,
aircraft parking and service facilities, and related facilities for
operation, service, fueling, repair, storage, charter, sales, and rental of
aircraft, and including activities directly associated with the operation
and maintenance of airport facilities and the provision of safety and
security. Typical uses include private or municipal airports.
B. Aviation (private): take-off or landing strips or fields within a parcel
generally put to other uses and primarily used for the convenience of
the owner of the parcel. Typical uses include private airstrips within a
large property.
§ 410-3.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-3.10
1:755
§ 410-3.11. Miscellaneous use types.
C. Railroad facility: fixed railroad facilities, including switching yards,
equipment servicing facilities, and freight terminal facilities, but not
including normal rights-of-way.
D. Transportation terminal: facility for loading, unloading, and
interchange of passengers, baggage, and incidental freight or package
express, including bus terminals, railroad stations, and public transit
facilities.
E. Truck terminal: a facility for the receipt, transfer, short-term storage,
and dispatching of goods transported by truck.
A. Alternative energy production devices: the use of a site for the
production of energy utilizing methods that do not involve the
oxidation, combustion, or fission of primary materials. Typical uses
include solar collector fields, geothermal energy installations, or waterpowered
mills or generating facilities.
B. Amateur radio tower: a structure(s) for the transmission or
broadcasting of electromagnetic signals by FCC-licensed amateur radio
operators.
C. Communications tower: a structure(s) for the transmission or
broadcasting of radio, television, radar, or microwaves, ordinarily
exceeding the maximum height permitted in its zoning district. Typical
uses include broadcasting towers and cellular communications towers.
D. Construction batch plant: a temporary demountable facility used for the
manufacturing of cement, concrete, asphalt, or other paving materials
intended for specific construction projects.
E. Landfill A (nonputrescible solid waste disposal): the use of a site as a
depository for solid wastes that do not readily undergo chemical or
biological breakdown under conditions normally associated with land
disposal operations. Typical disposal material would include ashes,
concrete, paving wastes, rock, brick, lumber, roofing materials and
ceramic tile.
F. Landfill B (putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste disposal): the use
of a site as a depository for any solid waste except hazardous and toxic
waste as defined by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency and/
or the State of Nebraska. Typical disposal material would include
nonputrescible wastes; and putrescible wastes such as vegetation, tree
parts, agricultural wastes (garbage) and manure.
G. Shipping containers: Include standardized reusable vessels that were
originally designed for or capable of being mounted or moved by rail,
truck or ship by means of being mounted on a chassis or similar
transport device. This definition includes the terms "transport
containers" and "portable site storage containers" having a similar
§ 410-3.10 SEWARD CODE § 410-3.11
1:756
appearance to and similar characteristics of shipping containers.
[Added 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-19459]
H. Wind energy conservation system (WECS): any device that converts
wind energy to a form of usable energy, including wind charges,
windmills, or wind turbines.
459. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection G
as Subsection H.
§ 410-3.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-3.11
1:757

Part 2
Zoning Districts
ARTICLE 4
Zoning District Regulations
§ 410-4.1. Purpose.
Zoning districts are established in the zoning regulations to promote
compatible land use patterns and to establish site development regulations
appropriate to the purposes and specific nature of each district.
§ 410-4.2. Establishment of districts.
The following base districts and overlay districts are hereby established:
Base Zoning Districts District Name
AG Agricultural/Urban Reserve District
RR Rural Residential District
R-1 Urban Residential Low-Density District
R-2 Urban Residential Moderate-Density District
R-3 Urban Residential Mixed-Density District
R-4 Urban Residential High-Density District
RM Mobile Home Residential District
UC Urban Corridor Mixed Use District
C-1 Community Commercial District
C-2 Highway Commercial District
CBD Downtown Seward Mixed Use District
BP Business Park District
I-1 Limited Industrial District
I-2 General Industrial District
Special Districts District Name
MU Mixed Use Special District
U/MU University Mixed Use District
C/OS Conservation/Open Space District
Overlay Districts District Name
PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District
TND Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay
District
RC Rural Conservation Development Overlay
District
§ 410-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-4.2
1:759
Overlay Districts District Name
ND Historic and Neighborhood Conservation
Overlay District
FP/FW Floodplain Overlay District
AV Aviation Overlay District
§ 410-4.3. Application of districts.
§ 410-4.4. Hierarchy.
References in the Unified Land Development Ordinance to less intensive
or more intensively urbanized districts shall be deemed to refer to those
agricultural, residential, commercial, and industrial base zoning districts
established in § 410-4.2, and shall represent a progression from the AG
Agricultural District as the least intensively urbanized to the I-2 General
Industrial District as the most intensively urbanized.
§ 410-4.5. Development regulations.
For each zoning district, permitted uses are set forth in the Use Matrix.
Individual sections describe the purpose and specific development
regulations for each zoning district. Supplemental regulations may affect
specific land uses or development regulations in each zoning district. The
applicable supplemental regulations are noted in Use Matrix.460
§ 410-4.6. Zoning Map.
A. A base district designation shall apply to each lot or site within the City
and its planning jurisdiction. A site must be in one base district.
B. Overlay districts may be applied to any lot or site or any portion thereof,
in addition to a base district designation.
C. Special districts stand alone as a base district.
A. Adoption of Zoning Map. Boundaries of zoning districts established by
these zoning regulations shall be shown on the Zoning Map maintained
by the City Clerk. This map shall bear the signature of the Mayor
attested by the City Clerk under the certification that this is the Official
Zoning Map referred to by this chapter. This map, together with all
legends, references, symbols, boundaries, and other information, shall
be adopted as a part of and concurrent with these regulations. Said
Zoning Map shall be on file with the City Clerk and shall be readily
accessible to the public at Seward City Hall.
B. Changes to Zoning Map. The City Council may from time to time adopt
a new Official Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior Official
Zoning Map, in the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes
460. Editor's Note: The Use Matrix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 410-4.2 SEWARD CODE § 410-4.6
1:760
§ 410-4.7. Interpretation of district boundaries.
The following rules shall apply in determining the boundaries of any zoning
district shown on the Zoning Map:
§ 410-4.8. Vacation of streets and alleys.
Whenever a public street or alley is vacated, the zoning district adjoining
each side of such right-of-way shall be extended out to the former center
line.
§ 410-4.9. Annexation of territory.
All unimproved or agricultural territory that may hereafter be annexed
to the City shall be considered as lying in the AG Agricultural District
until such classification shall be changed as provided by this chapter. Any
improved property that is annexed into the City shall be zoned according to
the zoning district that most nearly describes either its present use or the
use proposed by Seward's Comprehensive Development Plan. This zoning
shall be established by the Planning Commission and the City Council at the
time of annexation.
damaged or destroyed, or for purposes of clarity due to a number of
boundary changes, or to correct drafting errors or omissions; provided,
however, that any such adoption shall not have the effect of amending
the original Unified Land Development Ordinance or any subsequent
amendment thereof.
A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot
lines, such lot lines shall be considered the district boundaries.
B. Where district boundaries are indicated as within a street or alley,
railroad, streams or creeks, or other identifiable rights-of-way, the
center line of such rights-of-way shall be deemed the district boundary.
C. Where a district boundary divides a property, the location of the
boundary shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the
Zoning Map.
D. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following
corporate limits, such corporate limits shall be considered the district
boundaries.
E. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following
section lines, quarter-section lines, or quarter-quarter-section lines,
such lines shall be considered the district boundaries.
F. Boundaries not capable of being determined as set forth in Subsections
A through E shall be as dimensioned on the Official Zoning Map or if not
dimensioned shall be determined by the scale shown on the map.
§ 410-4.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-4.10
1:761
§ 410-4.10. Required conformance.
Except as specified in this chapter, no building or structure shall be erected,
converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any
building or land be used, which does not comply with all of the district
regulations established by this chapter for the district in which the building
or land is located.
§ 410-4.11. Required frontage.
No lot shall contain any building used in whole or in part for residence
purposes unless such lot abuts for at least 20 feet on at least one public
street, or unless it has an exclusive unobstructed private easement of access
or right-of-way of at least 20 feet wide to a street; and there shall be not
more than one single-family dwelling for such frontage or easement, except
that a common easement of access at least 50 feet wide may be provided
for two or more such single-family dwellings or for one or more two-family
or multiple dwellings.
§ 410-4.12. Use Matrix; levels of permitted uses.
Within zoning districts in Seward, different uses are permitted with
different conditions. These are displayed in the Use Matrix.461 Levels of
permission include:
§ 410-4.13. Guide to site development regulators.
The regulators set forth in the tables in Articles 5 through 19 establish the
limits and requirements for most development in the City of Seward and its
A. Uses which are permitted by right. These uses are permitted subject to
issuance of a building permit by the Building Official, subject only to
compliance with all regulations of this chapter. Uses permitted by right
might be subject to supplemental regulations contained in this chapter.
These uses are indicated in the Use Matrix by a "P" in the applicable
cell.
B. Conditional uses. These uses are subject to approval of a conditional
use permit by the Planning Commission, following the procedure set
forth in § 410-44.3. These uses are indicated in the Use Matrix by an "S"
in the applicable cell.462
C. Site plan approval. Some use types require an additional site plan
approval by the Zoning Administrator/Building Official, based on
specific criteria for review. This procedure is set forth in § 410-44.2.
These uses are indicated in the Use Matrix by an asterisk (*) following
the citing of a specific use type.
461. Editor's Note: The Use Matrix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
462. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-4.10 SEWARD CODE § 410-4.13
1:762
extraterritorial jurisdiction. This section is intended to provide guidance for
applying the regulators contained in these tables.
A. Site area per housing unit. This indicates the gross land area per unit
within a residential development. For example, a forty-lot subdivision
on a ten-acre (435,600 square foot) tract will have a site area per unit of
10,890 square feet. Site area per unit, which measures gross density,
may differ from minimum lot size. In conservation development, the site
area per unit will be larger than minimum lot size, permitting the
clustering of lots in exchange for common open space. In multifamily
development, the site area per unit will usually be smaller than
minimum lot size, because the lot is the legal parcel on which a
multiple-unit building is built.
B. Minimum lot area. This indicates the minimum size of a legally
described and recorded parcel upon which development can take place.
As noted above, minimum lot area and site area per unit may not be the
same.
C. Minimum lot width. This is the required minimum distance connecting
at points along opposite side lot lines, measured at the required front
yard setback. For example, the lot width of an irregular lot in a district
requiring a twenty-five-foot front yard setback is determined by:
(1) Locating the points along each side lot line at a distance of 25 feet
back from the front property line.
(2) Drawing a line connecting these two points.
(3) Measuring the length of this line. The length is the lot width.
D. Minimum yards. These define the required setbacks of buildings from
front, side, and rear property lines. While the yard requirements apply
to a majority of development, this chapter provides for a number of
exceptions. Some of these include:
(1) Planned developments. Front yard setbacks can be varied within
planned developments, which are reviewed and approved by the
City Council after a recommendation from the Planning
Commission.
(2) Major streets. The City may require greater than normal setbacks
along segments of the City's arterial street system, as defined in
the Comprehensive Development Plan.
(3) Flexibility provided by supplemental development regulations.
Article 32 establishes supplemental regulations, many of which
provide flexibility or variations in setback regulations for specific
contexts.
(4) Maximum setbacks. Some specific zoning districts provide
maximum as well as minimum setbacks. These setbacks establish
§ 410-4.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-4.13
1:763
"build-to" lines that may be necessary to protect the appearance
and character of special urban districts.
E. Maximum height. Height normally measures the vertical distance from
the established grade to the highest point of a building. However, as
established by the definition of "height,"463 the point of measurement
may vary for different types of buildings and roof slopes.
F. Maximum building coverage. This measures the percentage of a site
that may be covered by the footprint of buildings. Thus, a 20,000 square
foot building on a 40,000 square foot site has a building coverage of
50%. This is a method of regulating the scale of buildings in an area.
G. Maximum impervious coverage. This measures the percentage of a site
that may be covered by buildings and other surfaces and development
features which prevent the penetration of water into the ground (such
as driveways, porches, parking lots, and other features). Limits on
impervious coverage help control the velocity and quantity of
stormwater runoff and provide for groundwater recharge.
H. Floor area ratio. Just as site area per unit controls the density of
residential development, floor area ratio (FAR) controls the density of
nonresidential development. FAR is the ratio of gross floor area of a
building to total site area. Thus, in an area with a maximum permitted
FAR of 1.0, a 40,000 square foot building may be located on a 40,000
square foot site. Naturally, because of coverage ratios, landscaping, and
parking requirements, such a building will be multi-story.
I. Maximum amount of total parking located in street yard. This controls
the maximum amount of parking that can be located in the area
between a building facade and the street. When applied in certain
zoning districts, it is intended to reduce the number of cars seen from
the street, encourage site planning which locates parking in rear and
side yards, and produce a stronger relationship between buildings and
streets. For example, a project with 100 parking stalls and a fiftypercent
limit on the amount of parking located in street yards must
locate 50 of its stalls in rear or side yards without street exposure.
J. Minimum depth of landscaping adjacent to street rights-of-way. This
establishes the depth of landscaping that must be provided on private
property adjacent and in from the right-of-way line. Thus, if the
required minimum depth is 15 feet, a project must landscape the first
15 feet of its site back from the right-of-way line. All landscaping must
be done in accordance with Article 33, establishing landscaping
standards.
K. Minimum bufferyard requirements. This establishes the depth of a
bufferyard that must be provided by intensive land uses adjacent to
primarily residential land uses in residential zoning districts. All
463. Editor's Note: See § 410-2.3.
§ 410-4.13 SEWARD CODE § 410-4.13
1:764
landscaping must be done in accordance with Article 33, establishing
landscaping standards.
L. Supplemental use regulations. Certain permitted uses require
satisfaction of specific requirements in order to function successfully in
their urban or rural contexts. These supplemental requirements are set
forth in Article 31. These requirements are cross-referenced in the
"Supplemental Regulations" column of the Use Matrix.464
464. Editor's Note: The Use Matrix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 410-4.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-4.13
1:765

ARTICLE 5
AG Agricultural District
§ 410-5.1. Purpose.
The AG District provides for and preserves the agricultural and rural use of
land, while accommodating extremely low-density residential development
generally associated with agricultural uses. This district is designed to
maintain permanent and comprehensive agricultural uses within the
Seward extraterritorial jurisdiction. It recognizes that major agriculture
has industrial aspects and negative effects on nearby neighborhoods that
often create conflicts between agricultural and residential uses. In addition,
land included in the Urban Reserve in the Comprehensive Plan should
be retained in the AG District to prevent premature or inappropriate
development.
§ 410-5.2. Site development regulations.
Regulator 1-Family Units Other Permitted Uses
Site area per housing unit 20 acres NA
Minimum lot area 20 acres 20 acres
Minimum lot width (feet) 200 200
Minimum yards (feet)
Front yard 50 (Note 1) 50
Side yard 25 25
Street side yard 50 50
Rear yard 50 50
Maximum height (feet) 35 35; 50 for farm
buildings; 100 for grain
storage structures
Maximum building
coverage
NA NA
Maximum impervious
coverage
NA NA
Floor area ratio NA NA
Maximum amount of total
parking located in street
yard
NA NA
§ 410-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-5.2
1:767
Note 1: Front yard setback is measured from property line of platted lots.
For unplatted lots along roads, residential structures shall be set back
sufficiently to allow for future right-of-way dedications. This setback is
typically 75 feet from the center line of the adjacent road. The Building
Official may establish a different setback requirement based on the specific
context of a parcel. The reason for any such variation shall be documented
in writing by the Building Official.
§ 410-5.3. Special regulations for agricultural uses.
A. Individual waste lagoons. The edge of the highest water level of a waste
lagoon shall be at least 100 feet from the owner's residence, 200 feet
from any adjacent owner's residence, 50 feet from a side or rear lot line,
and 100 feet from any public right-of-way or easement.
B. Animal waste holding facilities. All animal waste holding facilities shall
meet the current minimum requirements of the Nebraska Department
of Environmental Quality, Title 130, Chapter 10, Livestock Waste
Control Facilities. Approval of any such facility shall be subject to the
conditional permit use approval process. The facility shall meet at least
the minimum setback and separation standards for waste lagoons. The
Planning Commission and the City Council shall establish additional
setback requirements based on the location of private wells, public
water supply, residences, property lines, and public rights-of-way and
easements.465
465. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-5.2 SEWARD CODE § 410-5.3
1:768
ARTICLE 6
RR Rural Residential District
[Amended 6-5-2007 by Ord. No. 9-07]
§ 410-6.1. Purpose.
The RR District provides for the rural residential use of land,
accommodating agriculture and very-low-density residential environments.
It is designed for permanent development of relatively remote areas that
are beyond the reach of Seward's foreseeable urban development pattern,
making eventual extension of urban services extremely unlikely. RR
Districts do not permit comprehensive agriculture, and are intended for
areas where farming is not a primary, permanent land use. Subdivisions
in RR Districts generally will be developed to rural standards, with gravel
roads, surface drainage, and individual water and wastewater management
systems. In parts of the Seward jurisdiction with distinctive landforms,
conservation development design is required to maintain the character
of the land. These areas are designated by the RC Rural Conservation
Development Overlay District and are subject to special standards and
planning procedures set forth in Article 27 of the Unified Land Development
Ordinance. These standards encourage the preservation of important open
space resources without reducing the density permitted the developer or
property owner.
§ 410-6.2. Site development regulations.
Regulator 1-Family Units Other Permitted Uses
Site area per housing
unit
5 acres NA
Site area per housing
unit - Note 1 (RPD)
3 acres NA
Minimum lot area - Note
2 (RCD)
1.5 acres 3 acres
Minimum lot width (feet) 200 200
Minimum yards (feet)
Front yard 50 50
Side yard 25 25
Street side yard 50 50
Rear yard 50 100
Maximum height (feet) 35 35
Maximum building
coverage
NA NA
Maximum impervious
coverage
NA NA
§ 410-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-6.2
1:769
Regulator 1-Family Units Other Permitted Uses
Floor area ratio NA NA
Maximum amount of
total parking located in
street yard
NA NA
Project size requiring
Planned Development
District (PD)
NA NA
Note 1: Rural Preservation Development (RPD)
The purpose of this regulator exception is to permit the creative design of
alternate living areas, as distinguished from subdivisions of standard lot
sizes and standard street systems with the intention of preserving the rural
character of the agricultural land use, including open fields, pastures, and
natural wooded areas.
The Planning Commission and City Council may permit the site area per
housing unit utilizing the designated regulator of three acres per housing
unit, provided that there is sufficient evidence and facts showing that the
proposed Rural Preservation Development meets the following conditions:
1. That the surrounding tracts for the proposed Rural Preservation
Development will not be adversely affected;
2. That the proposed Rural Preservation Development is consistent with
the intent and purpose of this section;
3. That the average allocated site area housing unit within the Rural
Preservation Development will not be less than the minimum site area
housing unit per parcel required in the Rural Residential District in
which the parcels of the proposed Rural Preservation Development
is located, except that the land appropriation will meet the following
criteria:
a. Each individual parcel plotted for sale must have an allocated
equivalence of five total acres, with three of the acres being retained
to the site area facilitating the residence for private ownership. The
remaining two acres shall be designated as permanent undivided
open space;
b. All undivided land including any lot capable of further subdivision
shall be designated as permanent open space and shall be restricted
from further subdivision and protected through a conservation
easement, or a restrictive protective covenant presented in a form
acceptable to the City and duly recorded in the Seward County
Register of Deeds Office. In the event that the City's growth extends
to a point where the designated open area tract of land becomes
contiguous or adjacent to the City limits, the controlling ownership
of said land may appeal to the City Council for the repeal of the
protected easement for further subdivision;
§ 410-6.2 SEWARD CODE § 410-6.2
1:770
4. Undivided open space shall be directly accessible to the largest
practicable number of lots within a Rural Preservation Subdivision. To
achieve this, the majority of the house lots should abut undivided open
space in order to provide direct views and access.
Note 2: Rural Community District (RCD)
The purpose of this regulator exception is to produce a more attractive and
functional rural neighborhood and permit more usable open space, protect
build-through land for future annexation, and protect the environmental
features by preserving the rural character of the agricultural land use.
The Planning Commission and City Council may permit the site area per
housing unit utilizing the designated regulator of 1.5 acre lots per housing
unit, provided that there is sufficient evidence and facts showing that the
proposed Rural Community District meets the following conditions:
1. That the surrounding tracts for the proposed Rural Community District
will not be adversely affected;
2. That the proposed Rural Community District is consistent with the
intent and purpose of this section;
3. That the average allocated site area housing unit within the Rural
Community District will not be less than the minimum site area housing
unit per parcel required in the Rural Residential District in which the
parcels of the proposed Rural Community District is located, except that
the land appropriation will meet the following criteria:
a. Each individual parcel plotted for sale must have an allocated
equivalence of five total acres, with 1.5 of the acres being retained
to the lot site area facilitating the residence for private ownership.
The remaining 3.5 acres shall be designated as permanent undivided
open space;
b. All undivided land including any lot capable of further subdivision
shall be designated as permanent open space and shall be restricted
from further subdivision and protected through a conservation
easement, a restrictive protective covenant presented in a form
acceptable to the City and duly recorded in the Seward County
Register of Deeds Office. In the event that the City's growth extends
to a point where the designated open area tract of land becomes
contiguous or adjacent to the City limits, the controlling ownership
of said land may appeal to the City Council for the repeal of the
protected easement for further subdivision;
4. Undivided open space shall be directly accessible to the largest
practicable number of lots within a Rural Preservation Subdivision. To
achieve this, the majority of the house lots should abut undivided open
space in order to provide direct views and access;
§ 410-6.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-6.2
1:771
5. The proposed method of providing sanitary sewer service to the area
shall be a public or community sewage system that complies with any
and all of the regulations set forth by the regulating state agency.
Therefore, the developer shall indicate the size and location of all
proposed sanitary sewers, manhole locations, and sewage treatment
facility shown on the plot documents;
6. The proposed method of providing an adequate water supply shall be
public or community water system or rural water district, that complies
with any and all of the regulations set forth by the regulating state
agency. Therefore, the developer shall indicate the size and location of
the proposed water mains, hydrants and the location of the community
well, including the type of water treatment to be used on the plot
documents.
Note:
Floodway - This land is not considered buildable due to flood zone
regulations. Therefore, since there is no preservation being deemed from
this regulator it should not be allowed to be calculated for use as open land.
Floodplain - This land could be considered as buildable if the floor level
is one foot above the base flood elevation (BFE). This would provide an
element of land preservation as detailed in the regulators. Therefore, it
should be allowed to be calculated into the open land designation.
§ 410-6.2 SEWARD CODE § 410-6.2
1:772
ARTICLE 7
R-1 Urban Residential Single-Family District (Low-Density)
§ 410-7.1. Purpose.
The R-1 District is intended to provide for urban residential development,
with gross densities generally below six units per acre. These areas
generally include single-family detached and attached dwellings on
relatively large lots with supporting community facilities and urban
services, including City water and sanitary sewer service. The R-1 District
may also be used as a "holding zone" prior to subdivision for areas
designated in the Comprehensive Plan for residential development. The use
of the R-1 District for development using wells and individual septic systems
should be discouraged, although it is not prohibited.
§ 410-7.2. Site development regulations.
Regulator
1-Family
Detached
1-Family
Attached
and Duplex
Other
Permitted
Use
Site area per housing unit
Lots with individual
wastewater systems
1.5 acres NA
Lots with sanitary sewer 7,200 square
feet
3,600 square
feet
Minimum lot area
Lots with individual
wastewater systems
1.5 acres NA 1.5 acres
Lots with sanitary sewer 7,200 square
feet
3,600 per
unit
1.0 acres
Minimum lot width (feet) 75 37.5 per unit 100
Minimum yards (feet)
Front yard 30 30 30
Side yard 7.5 7.5 7.5
Street side yard 30 30 30
Rear yard area* 20% of lot
depth
20% of lot
depth
25
Maximum height (feet) 35 35 35
Floor area ratio NA NA NA
Maximum amount of total
parking located in street
yard
NA NA NA
§ 410-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-7.2
1:773
* The required rear yard area is calculated as 20% of the lot depth times
the lot width. Provided that this minimum area is maintained, a portion
of a residential structure may come as close as 10 feet to a rear lot line.
Note 1: Zero Lot Line or Single-Family Attached Development.
Within a common development, one interior side yard may be equal to zero
for single-family detached residential use if:
1. The normal side yard setback requirement must be maintained adjacent
to any lot with an existing structure not within the common development;
or not otherwise designated for zero lot line use.
2. An easement for maintenance of the zero lot line facade is prepared
by the developer and filed with the Seward County Register of Deeds,
the City Clerk, and the Building Official at the time of application for a
building permit.
§ 410-7.2 SEWARD CODE § 410-7.2
1:774
ARTICLE 8
R-2 Urban Residential Moderate-Density District
§ 410-8.1. Purpose.
The R-2 District is intended to provide for moderate -density residential
development, with gross densities generally between six units and 12 units
per acre. These developments include single-family dwellings on moderatesized
lots along with low-density multi-unit residential structures such as
duplexes and townhouses. It provides regulations to encourage innovative
forms of housing development. It adapts to both established and developing
neighborhoods, as well as transitions between single-family and multifamily
areas.
§ 410-8.2. Site development regulations.
Regulator
1-Family
Detached
1-Family
Attached Duplex
Townhouse
(Note 1)
Other
Permitted
Uses
Site area per
housing unit
(square feet)
In conventional
development
6,000 3,000 3,000 3,000
In planned unit
developments
5,000 2,500 3,000 2,500
Minimum lot area
In conventional
development
6,000 3,000 6,000 3,000 6,000
In planned unit
developments
4,000 2,500 6,000 2,500 6,000
Minimum lot
width (feet)
In conventional
development
60 30 per
unit
70 30 60
In planned unit
developments
45 25 per
unit
60 25 60
Minimum yards
(feet) (Note 3)
Front yard 30 30 30 30 30
Side yard (Note
2)
7.5 7.5 7.5 7.5 7.5
Street side
yard
30 30 30 30 30
§ 410-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-8.2
1:775
Regulator
1-Family
Detached
1-Family
Attached Duplex
Townhouse
(Note 1)
Other
Permitted
Uses
Rear yard* 20% of lot
depth
20% of lot
depth
20% of
lot
depth
20% of lot
depth
25 feet
Maximum height
(feet)
35 35 35 35 35
Floor area ratio NA NA NA NA 0.50
Maximum
amount of total
parking located
in street yard
NA NA NA NA 50%
* The required rear yard area is calculated as 20% of the lot depth times
the lot width. Provided that this minimum area is maintained, a portion
of a residential structure may come as close as 10 feet to a rear lot line.
Note 1: Townhouse Development
No more than four units may be attached in a single townhouse structure
within an R-2 District. Regulators are shown on a per-unit basis.
Note 2: Zero Lot Line or Single-Family Attached Development.
Within a common development, one interior side yard may be equal to zero
for single-family detached residential use if:
1. The normal side yard setback requirement must be maintained adjacent
to any lot with an existing structure not within the common development;
or not otherwise designated for zero lot line use.
2. An easement for maintenance of the zero lot line facade is prepared
by the developer and filed with the Seward County Register of Deeds,
the City Clerk, and the Building Official at the time of application for a
building permit.
Note 3: Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Unit Developments.
The Planning Commission and City Council may vary required minimum
setbacks in planned districts. However, the setback from the front facade
of a garage to any public or private street right-of-way (including the
boundary of sidewalks) must be at least 20 feet.
§ 410-8.2 SEWARD CODE § 410-8.2
1:776
ARTICLE 9
R-3 Urban Residential Mixed-Density District
§ 410-9.1. Purpose.
The R-3 District is intended to provide for mixed-density development,
including small-lot single-family development and limited multifamily
residential development, with gross densities up to 18 units per acre. These
developments often are characterized by low-rise buildings in multiple
structure configurations, with an emphasis on open space, convenient
parking, and, in many cases, common community facilities such as
clubhouses and swimming pools. This district is also appropriate for larger
townhouse complexes, while still accommodating lower-density forms of
development.
§ 410-9.2. Site development regulations.
Regulator
1-Family
Detached
1-Family
Attached
(Note 1) Duplex
Townhouse
(Note 1)
Multifamily
(Note
2)
Other
Permitted
Uses
Site area per
housing unit
(square feet)
In
conventional
development
5,000 3,000 2,500 3,000 2,500
In planned
developments
4,000 2,500 2,000 2,500 2,000
Minimum lot
area
In
conventional
development
5,000 3,000 5,000 3,000 10,000 5,000
In planned
developments
4,000 2,500 4,000 2,500 10,000 5,000
Minimum lot
width (feet)
In
conventional
development
55 27.5 55 30 100 55
In planned
unit
developments
45 22.5 45 25 100 55
§ 410-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-9.2
1:777
Regulator
1-Family
Detached
1-Family
Attached
(Note 1) Duplex
Townhouse
(Note 1)
Multifamily
(Note
2)
Other
Permitted
Uses
Minimum
yards (feet)
(Note 3)
Front yard 25 25 25 25 25 25
Side yard 5 5 5 5 10 10
Street side
yard
25 25 25 25 25 25
Rear yard* 20% of
lot
depth
20% of
lot depth
20% of
lot
depth
20% of lot
depth
25 25
Maximum
height (feet)
35 35 35 35 45 35
Floor area
ratio
NA NA NA NA 0.50 0.50
Maximum
amount of
total parking
located in
street yard
NA NA NA NA 50% 50%
* The required rear yard area is calculated as 20% of the lot depth times
the lot width. Provided that this minimum area is maintained, a portion
of a residential structure may come as close as 10 feet to a rear lot line.
Note 1: One-Family Attached and Townhouse Development.
Regulators are shown on a per-unit basis. Side yard setbacks are indicated
for detached building walls.
Note 2: Multifamily Development.
No more than 12 units are permitted in any single multifamily development
in the R-3 District. The minimum side yard setback increases by 1.5 feet for
each one foot in height above 35 feet, up to a maximum height of 45 feet.
Note 3: Zero Lot Line and Single-Family Attached Development.
Within a common development, one interior side yard may be equal to zero
for single-family detached residential use if:
1. The normal side yard setback requirement must be maintained adjacent
to any lot with an existing structure not within the common development;
or not otherwise designated for zero lot line use.
§ 410-9.2 SEWARD CODE § 410-9.2
1:778
2. An easement for maintenance of the zero lot line facade is prepared
by the developer and filed with the Seward County Register of Deeds,
the City Clerk, and the Building Official at the time of application for a
building permit.
Note 4: Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Districts.
The Planning Commission and City Council may vary required minimum
setbacks in planned districts. However, the setback from the front facade
of a garage to any public or private street right-of-way (including the
boundary of sidewalks) must be at least 20 feet.
§ 410-9.3. Additional requirements.
Parking areas, accessory buildings, and garages must be at least five feet
from a side or rear lot line. A greater separation from residential zoning
districts may be required by Article 34.
§ 410-9.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-9.3
1:779

ARTICLE 10
R-4 Urban Residential Multifamily District (High-Density)
§ 410-10.1. Purpose.
The R-4 District is intended to provide for medium- and high-density
multifamily residential development, with gross densities generally above
18 units per acre. These developments may be in single or multiple
structure configurations. The district's regulations are designed to provide
for good-quality living environments that provide adequate open space for
high-density settings.
§ 410-10.2. Site development regulations.
Regulator
1-Family
Detached
1-Family
Attached
(Note 1) Duplex
Townhouse
(Note 1)
Multifamily
(Note
2)
Other
Permitted
Uses
Site area per
housing unit
(square feet)
In
conventional
development
4,400 2,200 2,200 2,500 1,500
In planned
developments
4,000 2,000 2,000 2,000 1,000
Minimum lot
area
In
conventional
development
4,400 2,200 4,400 2,500 9,500 5,000
In planned
developments
4,000 2,000 4,000 2,000 9,500 5,000
Minimum lot
width (feet)
In
conventional
development
40 20 50 25 80 50
In planned
developments
40 17.5 45 20 80 50
Minimum
yards (feet)
(Note 2)
Front yard 25 25 25 25 25 25
§ 410-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-10.2
1:781
Regulator
1-Family
Detached
1-Family
Attached
(Note 1) Duplex
Townhouse
(Note 1)
Multifamily
(Note
2)
Other
Permitted
Uses
Side yard
(Note 1)
5 5 5 5 10 10
Street side
yard
25 25 25 25 25 25
Rear yard* 20% of
lot
depth
20% of
lot
depth
20%
of lot
depth
20% of lot
depth
25 25
Maximum
height (feet)
In
conventional
development
35 35 35 35 45 35
In planned
unit
developments
35 35 35 35 60 35
Floor area
ratio
NA NA NA NA 0.80 0.80
Maximum
amount of
total parking
located in
street yard
NA NA NA NA 50% 50%
* The required rear yard area is calculated as 20% of the lot depth times
the lot width. Provided that this minimum area is maintained, a portion
of a residential structure may come as close as 10 feet to a rear lot line.
Note 1: Single-Family Attached and Townhouse Development.
Regulators are shown on a per-unit basis. Side yard setbacks are indicated
for detached building walls.
Note 2: Multifamily Development.
The minimum side yard setback increases by one foot for each one foot in
height above 35 feet, up to a maximum height of 45 feet.
Note 3: Zero Lot Line and Single-Family Attached Development.
Within a common development, one interior side yard may be equal to zero
for single-family detached residential use if:
1. The normal side yard setback requirement must be maintained adjacent
to any lot with an existing structure not within the common development;
or not otherwise designated for zero lot line use.
§ 410-10.2 SEWARD CODE § 410-10.2
1:782
2. An easement for maintenance of the zero lot line facade is prepared
by the developer and filed with the Seward County Register of Deeds,
the City Clerk, and the Building Official at the time of application for a
building permit.
Note 4: Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Districts.
The Planning Commission and City Council may vary required minimum
setbacks in planned districts. However, the setback from the front facade
of a garage to any public or private street right-of-way (including the
boundary of sidewalks) must be at least 20 feet.
Note 5: Flexible Yard Setbacks on 80-foot Right-of-Way (or Larger),
Where the Normal Minimum Setback is 25 Feet.
Front and/or side yard setback may reduced to 15 feet with specific
approval by the Building Director if the setback adjustment creates no
adverse conditions. [Added 9-18-2007 by Ord. No. 29-07]
§ 410-10.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-10.2
1:783

ARTICLE 11
RM Mobile Home Residential District
§ 410-11.1. Purpose.
The RM District recognizes that mobile home development, properly
planned, can provide important opportunities for affordable housing. It
provides opportunities for mobile home development within planned parks
or subdivisions, along with the supporting services necessary to create
quality residential neighborhoods.
§ 410-11.2. Site development regulations.
Regulator
1-Family
Detached
and
Mobile
Home
Units on
Subdivided
Lots Duplex
1-Family
Attached
and
Townhouse
(Note 1)
Mobile
Home
Park
(Note 4)
Other
Permitted
Uses
Site area per
housing unit
(square feet)
In conventional
development
5,000 2,500 3,000 NA
In planned
developments
4,000 2,500 2,500 6,000
Minimum lot area
In conventional
development
5,000 5,000 2,500 NA 6,000
In planned
developments
4,000 5,000 2,500 2 acres 6,000
Minimum lot width
(feet)
In conventional
development
40 50 25 NA 60
In planned
developments
40 45 25 150 60
Minimum yards
(feet) (Note 3)
Front yard 25 25 25 25 25
Side yard (Note
2)
5 5 10 10 10
§ 410-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-11.2
1:785
Regulator
1-Family
Detached
and
Mobile
Home
Units on
Subdivided
Lots Duplex
1-Family
Attached
and
Townhouse
(Note 1)
Mobile
Home
Park
(Note 4)
Other
Permitted
Uses
Street side yard 25 25 25 25 25
Rear yard* 20% of lot
depth
20% of
lot
depth
20% of lot
depth
25 25
Maximum height
(feet)
35 35 35 35 35
Floor area ratio NA NA NA NA 0.50
Maximum amount
of total parking
located in street
yard
NA NA NA NA 50%
* The required rear yard area is calculated as 20% of the lot depth times
the lot width. Provided that this minimum area is maintained, a portion
of a residential structure may come as close as 10 feet to a rear lot line.
Note 1: Single-Family Attached Townhouse Development.
No more than four units may be attached in a single townhouse structure
within an RM District. Regulators are shown on a per-unit basis. Side yard
setbacks are indicated for detached building walls.
Note 2: Zero Lot Line and Single-Family Attached Development.
Within a common development, one interior side yard may be equal to zero
for single-family detached residential use if:
1. The normal side yard setback requirement must be maintained adjacent
to any lot with an existing structure not within the common development;
or not otherwise designated for zero lot line use.
2. An easement for maintenance of the zero lot line facade is prepared
by the developer and filed with the Seward County Register of Deeds,
the City Clerk, and the Building Official at the time of application for a
building permit.
Note 3: Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Districts.
The Planning Commission and City Council may vary required minimum
setbacks in planned districts other than mobile home parks. However, the
setback from the front facade of a garage to any public or private street
right-of-way (including the boundary of sidewalks) must be at least 20 feet.
Note 4: Mobile Home Parks and Subdivisions.
§ 410-11.2 SEWARD CODE § 410-11.2
1:786
Complete development standards for mobile home parks and subdivisions
are set forth in § 410-31.3.
§ 410-11.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-11.2
1:787

ARTICLE 12
UC Urban Corridor Mixed Use District
§ 410-12.1. Purpose.
The UC District recognizes the mixed-use character of major urban
corridors, including traditional arterials such as 6th Street and Main Street,
as well as emerging mixed-use corridors. These corridors sometimes
accommodate a combination of residential, commercial, and office uses.
In many cases, these streets were traditional residential corridors, and
include houses that are converting to nonresidential use. Design standards
maintain their character as important urban streets. Some uses in the UC
District will require development above normal standards in order to assure
compatibility with surrounding uses.
§ 410-12.2. Site development regulations.
Regulator
1-Family
Detached
1-Family
Attached
(Note 1) Duplex
Townhouse
(Note 1)
Multi-
Family
(Note
2)
Other
Permitted
Uses
Site area per
housing unit
(square feet)
In conventional
development
4,400 2,200 2,200 2,500 1,500
In planned
developments
4,000 2,000 2,000 2,000 1,000
Minimum lot area
In conventional
development
4,400 4,400 4,400 2,500 9,500 5,000
In planned
developments
4,000 4,000 4,000 2,000 9,500 5,000
Minimum lot
width (feet)
In conventional
development
40 20 40 25 80 40
In planned unit
developments
40 20 40 20 80 40
Minimum yards
(feet) (Note 3)
Front yard 25 25 25 25 25 25
Side yard (Note
1)
5 5 5 5 10 5
§ 410-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12.2
1:789
Regulator
1-Family
Detached
1-Family
Attached
(Note 1) Duplex
Townhouse
(Note 1)
Multi-
Family
(Note
2)
Other
Permitted
Uses
Street side
yard
25 25 25 25 25 15
Rear yard* 20% of
lot
depth
20% of
lot
depth
20%
of lot
depth
20% of lot
depth
25 25
Maximum height
(feet)
35 35 35 35 45 35
Floor area ratio NA NA NA NA 0.80 0.50
Maximum
amount of total
parking located
in street yard
NA NA NA NA 50% 50%
* The required rear yard area is calculated as 20% of the lot depth times
the lot width. Provided that this minimum area is maintained, a portion
of a residential structure may come as close as 10 feet to a rear lot line.
Note 1: Single-Family Attached Townhouse Development.
Regulators are shown on a per-unit basis. Side yard setbacks are indicated
for detached building walls.
Note 2: Multifamily Development.
The minimum side yard setback increases by one foot for each one foot in
height above 35 feet, up to a maximum height of 45 feet.
Note 3: Zero Lot Line and Single-Family Attached Development.
Within a common development, one interior side yard may be equal to zero
for single-family detached residential use if:
1. The normal side yard setback requirement must be maintained adjacent
to any lot with an existing structure not within the common development;
or not otherwise designated for zero lot line use.
2. An easement for maintenance of the zero lot line facade is prepared
by the developer and filed with the Seward County Register of Deeds,
the City Clerk, and the Building Official at the time of application for a
building permit.
Note 4: Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Districts.
The Planning Commission and City Council may vary required minimum
setbacks in planned districts. However, the setback from the front facade
of a garage to any public or private street right-of-way (including the
boundary of sidewalks) must be at least 20 feet.
Note 5: Setbacks along Urban Corridors.
§ 410-12.2 SEWARD CODE § 410-12.2
1:790
Normal minimum setback is 25 feet. Front yard setback may be reduced to
15 feet if:
1. No parking is placed within the street yard.
2. The entire street yard area is landscaped, with the exception of
driveways to parking areas or pedestrian accesses to the principal
building on the site.
This setback flexibility shall not be applied on any street designated as a
major arterial by the City's Comprehensive Development Plan without the
specific approval of the City's Public Works Director.
§ 410-12.3. Supplemental development regulations for office and
commercial uses.
In order to maintain the fine-grained character of major mixed-use corridors
in Seward, the following design standards shall apply to any office or
commercial use developed within the UC District:
A. No single building shall have a building coverage area that exceeds
10,000 square feet without approval of a conditional use permit, as set
forth in § 410-44.3.466
B. No street-facing facade may have a continuous length of 50 feet or over
without an offset in the building elevation equal to a dimension of at
least five feet.
C. Window area on each street-facing facade shall be equal to at least 20%
of the area of that facade.
D. Exterior materials shall be brick, stone, wood clapboard, or other
exterior materials typical of exterior building materials in common use
in Seward's residential districts or Central Business District.
E. The dominant roof form shall be a pitched or gabled roof with a
minimum roof slope equal to one foot of vertical height to every three
feet of horizontal distance. Permitted roof materials may include
asphalt shingles, slate or simulated slate shingles, standing seam metal,
or other similar roof materials.
F. Each site design shall provide a clear and safe method of pedestrian
circulation along the street right-of-way and between the street right-ofway
and a principal customer entrance of the business.
466. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-12.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-12.3
1:791

ARTICLE 13
C-1 Community Commercial/Mixed Use District
§ 410-13.1. Purpose.467
The C-1 District accommodates commercial and office facilities that serve
the needs of markets ranging from several neighborhoods to the overall
region. While allowed commercial and office uses are generally compatible
with nearby residential areas, traffic and operating characteristics of some
uses may have an impact on adjacent residential neighborhoods. Use
regulations require conditional permit review for these selected uses. C-1
Districts are most appropriate at intersections of collector and arterial
streets, at the junction of several neighborhoods, along major commercial
or mixed-use corridors, or at substantial commercial subcenters. The
district also permits other uses with similar urban impacts to substantial
commercial development.
§ 410-13.2. Site development regulations for regular C-1 Districts.
Regulator
Permitted
Residential Uses
All Other
Permitted Uses
Site area per housing unit
(square feet)
Same standards as
for the R-4 District
NA
Minimum lot area 4,800
Minimum lot width (feet) 40
Minimum yards (feet)
Front yard (Note 1) 25
Side yard 5
Street side yard 15
Rear yard Lesser of 20% of lot
depth or 20 feet
Maximum height (feet) 35
Floor area ratio (Note 2) 1.00
Maximum amount of total
parking located in street yard
80%
Note 1: Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Unit Development
Districts.
The Planning Commission and City Council may vary required minimum
setbacks in PUD Districts. Along arterials designated in the City's
Comprehensive Development Plan, the Public Works Director may require
a deeper front yard setback.
Note 2: Flexible Floor Area Ratios in Planned Districts.
467. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-13.2
1:793
The Planning Commission and City Council may increase the maximum
floor area ratio for a development in a PUD District.
§ 410-13.3. Supplemental development regulations for office and
commercial uses.
In order to maintain a residential character in community commercial areas
in Seward, the following design standards shall apply to any office or
commercial use developed within the C-1 District:
A. No single building shall have a building coverage area that exceeds
15,000 square feet without approval of a conditional use permit, as set
forth in § 410-44.3.468
B. No street-facing facade may have a continuous length of 100 feet or
over without an offset in the building elevation equal to a dimension of
at least five feet.
C. Window area on each street-facing facade shall be equal to at least 20%
of the area of that facade.
D. No building facade facing a street shall have the appearance of a rear
facade. Architectural details, including materials, textures, patterns,
colors, and design features used on the front facade shall be
incorporated into all facades facing public streets and easily visible to
the public.
E. All buildings and developments shall include a direct, clear, and safe
pedestrian connection from adjacent public sidewalks to the entrances
of buildings within the development.
468. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-13.2 SEWARD CODE § 410-13.3
1:794
ARTICLE 14
C-2 Highway Commercial District
§ 410-14.1. Purpose.469
The C-2 District accommodates a variety of commercial uses, some of
which have significant traffic or visual effects. These districts may include
commercial uses that are oriented to services, including automotive
services, rather than retail activities. These uses may create land use
conflicts with adjacent residential areas, requiring provision of adequate
buffering. This district is most appropriately located along major arterial
streets, along major highway corridors characterized by large-scale uses
and traveler services such as Highway 15 south of Seward, or in areas
that can be adequately buffered from residential districts. The district
permits residential uses by conditional use permit, requiring such uses to be
reviewed for compatibility with primary commercial uses in busy corridors.
§ 410-14.2. Site development regulations.
Regulator
Permitted
Residential Uses
All Other
Permitted Uses
Minimum lot area Same standards as
for the R-4 District
6,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 65
Minimum yards (feet)
Front yard (Note 1) 15
Side yard 0
Street side yard 15
Rear yard 0
Maximum height (feet) 45
Floor area ratio (Note 2) 1.0
Maximum amount of total
parking located in street yard
100%
Note 1: Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Unit Development
Districts.
The Planning Commission and City Council may vary required minimum
setbacks in PUD Districts. Along arterials designated in the City's
Comprehensive Development Plan, the Public Works Director may require
a deeper front yard setback.
Note 2: Flexible Floor Area Ratios in Planned Districts.
The Planning Commission and City Council may increase the maximum
floor area ratio for a development in a PUD District.
469. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-14.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-14.2
1:795

ARTICLE 15
CBD Downtown Seward Mixed Use District
§ 410-15.1. Purpose.
The CBD District provides appropriate development regulations for
downtown Seward, the City's Central Business District. The grouping of
uses is designed to strengthen the town center's role as a center for trade,
service, and civic life. Mixed uses are allowed and encouraged within the
CBD District.
§ 410-15.2. Site development regulations.
Regulator
Permitted
Residential Uses
All Other
Permitted Uses
Site area per housing unit
(square feet)
1,000 NA
Minimum lot area 5,000 5,000
Minimum lot width (feet) No requirement No requirement
Minimum yards (feet)
Front yard 0 0
Side yard 0 0
Street side yard 0 0
Rear yard 0 0
Maximum height (feet) 45 45
Floor area ratio (Note 1) NA 6.0
Maximum amount of total
parking located in street yard
NA 50%
Note 1: Flexible Floor Area Ratios in Planned Unit Development
Districts.
The Planning Commission and City Council may increase the maximum
floor area ratio for a development in a planned district.
§ 410-15.3. Special regulations and standards.
A. No building facade facing a street shall have the appearance of a rear
facade. Architectural details, including materials, textures, patterns,
colors, and design features used on the front facade shall be
incorporated into all facades facing public streets and easily visible to
the public.
B. All buildings and developments shall include a direct, clear, and safe
pedestrian connection from adjacent public sidewalks to the entrances
of buildings within the development.
§ 410-15.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-15.3
1:797

ARTICLE 16
BP Business Park District
§ 410-16.1. Purpose.
The BP District is designed to promote the development of planned business
parks that accommodate corporate offices, research facilities, and
structures that can combine office, distribution, and limited industrial uses.
These facilities serve a more regional audience, but may provide services
to local residents. They usually include extensive landscaping, abundant
parking facilities, and good visual and pedestrian relationships among
buildings.
§ 410-16.2. Site development regulations.
Regulator Permitted Uses
Minimum district size 1 acre
Minimum lot area (square feet) 10,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 100
Minimum yards (feet)
Front yard (Note 1) 30
Side yard 10
Street side yard 20
Rear yard 20
Maximum height (feet) 45
Floor area ratio (Note 2) 2.0
Maximum amount of total parking
located in street yard
50%
Note 1: Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Unit Development
Districts.
The Planning Commission and City Council may vary required minimum
setbacks in PUD Districts. Along arterials designated in the City's
Comprehensive Development Plan, the Public Works Director may require
a deeper front yard setback.
Note 2: Flexible Floor Area Ratios in Planned Unit Development
Districts.
The Planning Commission and City Council may increase the maximum
floor area ratio for a development in a PUD District.
§ 410-16.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-16.2
1:799

ARTICLE 17
I-1 Limited Industrial District
[Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-16]
§ 410-17.1. Purpose.
The I-1 District is intended to reserve sites appropriate for the location of
industrial uses with relatively limited environmental effects. The district is
designed to provide appropriate space and regulations to encourage goodquality
industrial development, while assuring that facilities are served with
adequate parking and loading facilities.
§ 410-17.2. Site development regulations.
Regulator Permitted Uses
Minimum district size (square feet) 5,000
Minimum lot area (square feet) 5,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 100
Minimum yards (feet)
Front yard (Note 1) 25
Side yard 0
Street side yard 25
Rear yard 0
Maximum height (feet) 60
Maximum building coverage 75%
Floor area ratio (Note 2) 1.0
Maximum amount of total parking
located in street yard
100%
Note 1: Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Unit Development
Districts.
The Planning Commission and City Council may vary required minimum
setbacks in PUD Districts. Along arterials designated in the City's
Comprehensive Development Plan, the Public Works Director may require
a deeper front yard setback.
Note 2: Flexible Floor Area Ratios in Planned Unit Development
Districts.
The Planning Commission and City Council may increase the maximum
floor area ratio for a development in a PUD District.
§ 410-17.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-17.2
1:801

ARTICLE 18
I-2 General Industrial District
[Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-16]
§ 410-18.1. Purpose.
The I-2 District is intended to accommodate a wide variety of industrial
uses, some of which may have significant external effects. These uses may
have operating characteristics that create conflicts with lower-intensity
surrounding land uses. The district provides the reservation of land for
these activities and includes buffering requirements to reduce
incompatibility
§ 410-18.2. Site development regulations.
Regulator Permitted Uses
Minimum district size (square feet) 6,000
Minimum lot area (square feet) 6,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 60
Minimum yards (feet)
Front yard (Note 1) 25
Side yard 0
Street side yard 25
Rear yard 0
Maximum height (feet) 60
Maximum impervious coverage 90%
Floor area ratio (Note 2) 1.0
Maximum amount of total parking
located in street yard
100%
Note 1: Flexible Yard Setbacks in Planned Unit Development
Districts.
The Planning Commission and City Council may vary required minimum
setbacks in PUD Districts. Along arterials designated in the City's
Comprehensive Development Plan, the Public Works Director may require
a deeper front yard setback.
Note 2: Flexible Floor Area Ratios in Planned Unit Development
Districts.
The Planning Commission and City Council may increase the maximum
floor area ratio for a development in a PUD District.
§ 410-18.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-18.2
1:803

ARTICLE 19
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-18.2
1:805

Part 3
Special And Overlay Districts
ARTICLE 20
Special Districts
§ 410-20.1. Purpose.
Special districts are established as base districts for innovative
developments or unique development areas. They are designed to
encourage innovative design of mixed-use projects, to capitalize on the
special characteristics and visibility of unique areas in the City, and to
integrate special project types into the surrounding environment. Special
districts include uses or combinations of uses that are not easily
accommodated by traditional zoning districts.
§ 410-20.2. Establishment of districts.
The following special districts are hereby established:
Special Districts
MU Mixed Use District
U/MU University Mixed Use District
C/OS Conservation/Open Space District
§ 410-20.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-20.2
1:807

ARTICLE 21
MU Mixed Use District
§ 410-21.1. Purpose.
The MU Mixed Use District is intended to accommodate projects which
combine several compatible land uses into an integrated development. The
MU District may also be used to pre-designate parts of the City that are
appropriate for a mixture of residential, commercial, office, and accessory
uses. The district permits mixing residential areas with workplaces and
services. Development in the MU District must accommodate transportation
systems, pedestrian and bicycle movement, and surrounding environments.
§ 410-21.2. Permitted uses.
Each ordinance establishing an MU District establishes the use types
permitted within its boundaries.
§ 410-21.3. Site development regulations.
A. The minimum area of any MU District is one acre.
B. Prior to the issuance of any building permits or other authorization, all
projects in the MU District shall receive approval by the City Council,
following a recommendation by the Planning Commission. This
approval may be granted for a specific plan for the development of an
MU District in lieu of a plan for individual projects, provided that any
subsequent developments are consistent with the specific plan.
C. Applications for approval must contain at a minimum the following
information:
(1) A detailed site map, including:
(a) A boundary survey.
(b) Site dimensions.
(c) Contour lines at no greater than five-foot intervals.
(d) Adjacent public rights-of-way, transportation routes, and
pedestrian or bicycle systems.
(e) Description of adjacent land uses.
(f) Utility service to the site and easements through the site.
(g) Description of other site features, including drainage, soils, or
other considerations that may affect development.
(2) A development plan, including:
(a) A site layout, including the location of proposed buildings,
parking, open space, and other facilities.
§ 410-21.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-21.3
1:809
§ 410-21.4. Adoption of district.
(b) Location, capacity, and conceptual design of parking facilities.
(c) Description of the use of individual buildings.
(d) Description of all use types to be included in the project or
area, and maximum floor area devoted to each general use.
(e) Maximum height of buildings.
(f) Schematic location and design of open space on the site,
including a landscaping plan.
(g) Vehicular and pedestrian circulation plan, including
relationship to external transportation systems.
(h) Schematic building elevations and sections if required to
describe the project.
(i) Grading plans.
(j) Proposed sewer and utility improvements.
(k) Location, sizes, and types of all proposed signage.
(3) Specific proposed development regulations for the project,
including:
(a) The specific use types permitted within the proposed district.
(b) Maximum floor area ratios.
(c) Front, side, and rear yard setbacks.
(d) Maximum height.
(e) Maximum building and impervious coverage.
(f) Design standards applicable to the project.
(4) A traffic impact analysis, if required by the City.
A. The Planning Commission and City Council shall review and evaluate
each Mixed Use District application. The City may impose reasonable
conditions, as deemed necessary to ensure that a mixed-use
development shall be compatible with adjacent land uses, will not
overburden public services and facilities and will not be detrimental to
public health, safety and welfare.
B. The Planning Commission, after proper notice, shall hold a public
hearing and act upon each application.
C. The Planning Commission may recommend amendments to MU District
applications.
§ 410-21.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-21.4
1:810
§ 410-21.5. Amendments.
The Zoning Administrator is authorized at his/her discretion to approve
amendments to an approved development plan, provided that:
D. The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be transmitted
to the City Council for final action.
E. The City Council, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and
act upon any ordinance establishing an MU Mixed Use District. "Proper
notice" shall mean the same notice established for any other zoning
amendment.
F. An ordinance adopting a Mixed Use District shall require a favorable
simple majority of the City Council for approval.
G. Upon approval by the City Council, the development plan shall become
a part of the ordinance creating or amending the MU District. All
approved plans shall be filed with the City Clerk.
A. A written request is filed with the Zoning Administrator, along with
information specifying the exact nature of the proposed amendment.
B. The amendment is consistent with the provisions of this section.
C. The amendment does not alter the approved site regulations of the
development plan and does not materially alter other aspects of the
plan, including traffic circulation, mixture of use types, and physical
design; or does not increase density, floor area ratios.
D. Any amendment not conforming to these provisions shall be submitted
to the Planning Commission and City Council for action.
§ 410-21.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-21.5
1:811

ARTICLE 22
U/MU University Mixed Use District
§ 410-22.1. Purpose.
The U/MU University Mixed Use District is based on an understanding
that a college campus is a special kind of planned district, for which the
requirements of traditional zoning districts may be inappropriate or difficult
to apply. It provides an opportunity by which an official campus master plan
may be prepared and adopted as the development plan for a specific area
of the City. This relieves the university from receiving approval for each
project that is consistent with the overall adopted master plan.
§ 410-22.2. Permitted uses.
The U/MU District permits college and university use, including all facilities
and services that are auxiliary to campus use. Permitted auxiliary uses
includes residential development, commercial services, including retail and
food services that serve the campus community, maintenance facilities, and
any other use included within an official campus master plan.
§ 410-22.3. Site development regulations.
A. The minimum area of any U/MU District is 20 acres.
B. The City Council, following a recommendation by the Planning
Commission, may approve an official campus master plan as part of the
U/MU District designation. The campus master plan shall include at a
minimum:
(1) A conceptual site layout, including the location of proposed
buildings, parking, open space, and other facilities.
(2) General location, capacity, and conceptual design of parking
facilities.
(3) Description of all use types to be included in the project or area,
and maximum floor area devoted to each general use.
(4) Schematic location and design of campus open spaces and greens
on the site, including a landscaping plan.
(5) Vehicular and pedestrian circulation plan, including relationship to
external transportation systems.
(6) Proposed sewer, utility, and other infrastructure improvements.
(7) Proposed development regulations, including height limitations,
perimeter setbacks, and impervious coverage limitations.
(8) The range of flexibility and variation requested to maintain
consistency with the master plan.
§ 410-22.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-22.3
1:813
§ 410-22.4. Adoption of district.
§ 410-22.5. Amendments.
The Zoning Administrator is authorized at his/her discretion to approve
amendments to an approved development plan, provided that:
(9) Relevant design or architectural standards included in the master
plan.
A. The Planning Commission and City Council shall review and evaluate
the campus master plan and the U/MU application. The City may
impose reasonable additional conditions, as deemed necessary to
ensure that the campus master plan shall be compatible with adjacent
land uses, will not overburden public services and facilities and will not
be detrimental to public health, safety and welfare.
B. The Planning Commission, after proper notice, shall hold a public
hearing and act upon each application.
C. The Planning Commission may recommend amendments to U/MU
District applications.
D. The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be transmitted
to the City Council for final action.
E. The City Council, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and
act upon any ordinance establishing a U/MU University Mixed Use
District. "Proper notice" shall mean the same notice established for any
other zoning amendment.
F. An ordinance adopting a University Mixed Use District shall require a
favorable simple majority of the City Council for approval.
G. Upon approval by the City Council, the campus master plan shall
become a part of the ordinance creating or amending the U/MU
District. All approved plans shall be filed with the City Clerk.
A. A written request is filed with the Zoning Administrator, along with
information specifying the exact nature of the proposed amendment.
B. The amendment is consistent with the provisions of this section.
C. The amendment does not alter the approved site regulations of the
development plan and does not materially alter other aspects of the
plan, including traffic circulation, mixture of use types, and physical
design; or does not increase density, floor area ratios.
D. Any amendment not conforming to these provisions shall be submitted
to the Planning Commission and City Council for action.
§ 410-22.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-22.5
1:814
ARTICLE 23
C/OS Conservation and Open Space District
§ 410-23.1. Purpose.
The C/OS District accommodates Seward's policy of retaining large areas
of environmental importance for conservation and recreational purposes.
These include large purchases along the Plum Creek and Blue River
corridors and major areas of passive recreation, such as Wilderness Park.
These natural resource areas, recognized by the City's Comprehensive
Development Plan, are not appropriately described by traditional base
zoning districts.
§ 410-23.2. Property ownership.
All land within C/OS Districts shall be owned by the City of Seward, another
public agency, or a nonprofit organization or corporation whose primary
purpose is resource conservation. The C/OS District is not ordinarily
intended to apply to other private property and is not intended to restrict
the development rights of private property owners.
§ 410-23.3. Permitted uses.470
Land within C/OS Districts may be used for low-impact purposes associated
with open space and recreation. Permitted uses include horticulture, crop
production, cultural services, parks and recreation. Recreational clubs that
include primarily outdoor uses may be permitted following approval of a
conditional use permit.
§ 410-23.4. Site development regulations.
Because of the primary open space character of the C/OS District, site
development regulations that apply to development districts do not apply.
470. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-23.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-23.4
1:815

ARTICLE 24
Overlay Districts
§ 410-24.1. Purpose.
Overlay districts are used in combination with base districts to modify or
expand base district regulations. They adapt to the special needs of areas of
the City and further allow Seward's Unified Land Development Ordinance to
evolve as the planning and development needs and trends of specific areas
also change. The overlay districts are designed to achieve the following
objectives:
§ 410-24.2. Establishment of districts.
The following overlay districts are hereby established:
Overlay Districts
PUD Planned Unit Development District
TND Traditional Neighborhood Development District
RC Rural Conservation Development Overlay District
HD Historic and Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District
FP/FW Floodplain/Floodway Overlay District
AV Aviation Overlay District
A. To recognize special conditions in specific parts of the City which
require specific regulation.
B. To provide for the protection of special features in the natural and built
environment of the City.
C. To allow for change and adaptability to different needs and trends in
land development.
D. To encourage comprehensive neighborhood and environmental
planning in the City, and to protect the integrity of vital City services
such as the water supply and airport operation.
E. To provide flexibility in development and to encourage innovative
design through comprehensively planned projects.
§ 410-24.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-24.2
1:817

ARTICLE 25
PUD Planned Unit Development District
§ 410-25.1. Purpose.
The PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District is intended to provide
flexibility in the design of planned projects; to permit innovation in project
design that incorporates open space and other amenities; and to ensure
compatibility of developments with the surrounding urban environment.
Planned unit developments often involve groupings of buildings or sites
that are designed as an integrated unit on land under unified control
or ownership at the time of grant of development permission. The
requirements of a PUD run with the land regardless of the subsequent sale
or conveyance of property The PUD District may be used in combination
with any base district specified in this chapter. The PUD District, which
is adopted by the City Council with the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, assures specific development standards for each designated
project.
§ 410-25.2. Permitted uses.
Uses permitted in a PUD Overlay District are those permitted in the
underlying base district. A PUD also may be combined with an MU Mixed
Use District to allow a combination of use types not anticipated by
conventional base districts.
§ 410-25.3. Objectives.
In evaluating applications for PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay
Districts, the Planning Commission and City Council shall consider the
following general objectives:
A. Residential PUD Districts. Residential PUD Districts should be designed
to produce more usable open space, provide better recreation
opportunities, enhance pedestrian scale, protect or create
neighborhood amenities and environmental features, and produce more
attractive neighborhoods than those produced by conventional
development techniques.
B. Commercial PUD Districts. Commercial PUD Districts should be
designed to produce more attractive and functional clusters and
commercial centers than the strip development that is frequently
produced by the application of conventional zoning regulations.
Techniques encouraged by PUD Districts include consolidated access,
shared parking, consistent architectural quality, improved pedestrian
and trail access to commercial facilities, public space, and integrated
landscaping and signage programs.
C. Industrial PUD Districts. Industrial PUD Districts should promote the
establishment of industrial parks and encourage groups of industrial
§ 410-25.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-25.3
1:819
§ 410-25.4. Site development regulations.
Site development regulations are developed individually for each Planned
Unit Development District, but must comply with the minimum or maximum
standards established for the base district. Base district regulations provide
flexibility, including higher densities, within Planned Unit Development
Districts.
§ 410-25.5. Access to public streets.
Each PUD District must abut a public street for at least 100 feet and gain
access from that street.
§ 410-25.6. Application process.
buildings with integrated site design and architectural and landscaping
themes.
D. Mixed-use PUD Districts. Mixed-use PUD Districts should promote the
objectives of innovative design of their individual uses and encourage
creative groupings of different but complementary uses to establish
high-quality urban environments. Mixed-use PUD Districts may
encourage co-location of living and working areas, or activity centers
that incorporate a variety of uses.
E. PUD Districts in sensitive contexts. PUD Districts may be utilized to
provide a high level of detail and define the requirements of project
approval for developments proposed within settings that are so
sensitive that normal zoning requirements, including landscaping and
buffering requirements, do not provide sufficient protection for
neighboring properties.
A. Development plan. The application for a Planned Development District
shall include a development plan containing the following information
indicated in this section.
B. Application requirements. An application for approval must contain at a
minimum the following information:
(1) A detailed site map, including:
(a) A boundary survey.
(b) Site dimensions.
(c) Contour lines at no greater than two-foot intervals.
(d) Adjacent public rights-of-way, transportation routes, and
pedestrian or bicycle systems.
(e) Description of adjacent land uses.
(f) Utility service to the site and easements through the site.
§ 410-25.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-25.6
1:820
§ 410-25.7. Adoption of district.
(g) Description of other site features, including drainage, soils, or
other considerations that may affect development.
(2) A development plan, including:
(a) A land use plan designating specific uses for the site and
establishing site development regulations, including setback,
height, building coverage, impervious coverage, density, and
floor area ratio requirements.
(b) A site layout, including the location of proposed buildings,
parking, open space, and other facilities.
(c) Location, capacity, and conceptual design of parking facilities.
(d) Description of the use of individual buildings.
(e) Conceptual information sufficient to indicate a building height,
bulk, materials, and general architectural design.
(f) A site development and landscaping plan, showing building
locations, or building envelopes; site improvements; public or
common open spaces; community facilities; significant visual
features; and typical landscape plans.
(g) Vehicular and pedestrian circulation plan, including
relationship to external transportation systems.
(h) Schematic building elevations and sections if required to
describe the project.
(i) Grading plans.
(j) Proposed sewer and utility improvements.
(k) Location, sizes, and types of all proposed signage.
(3) A statistical summary of the project, including gross site area, net
site area, number of housing units by type, gross floor area of other
uses, total amount of parking, and building and impervious surface
percentages.
A. The Planning Commission and City Council shall review and evaluate
each planned unit development application. Criteria for findings of fact
in acting on PUD applications are set forth in Table 25A.471 The City
may impose reasonable conditions, as deemed necessary to ensure that
a PUD shall be compatible with adjacent land uses, will not overburden
public services and facilities and will not be detrimental to public
health, safety and welfare.
471. Editor's Note: Table 25A is included at the end of this article.
§ 410-25.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-25.7
1:821
§ 410-25.8. Amendment procedure.
Major amendments to the development plan must be approved according to
the same procedure set forth in § 410-25.7.
§ 410-25.9. Building permits.
The City shall not issue a building permit, certificate of occupancy, or
other permit for a building, structure, or use within a PUD District unless
it is in compliance with the approved development plan or any approved
amendments.
§ 410-25.10. Termination of PUD District.
If no substantial development has taken place in a Planned Unit
Development District for three years following approval of the District, the
Planning Commission shall reconsider the zoning of the property and may,
on its own motion, initiate an application for rezoning the property.
Table 25A
Criteria for Findings of Fact in Approving Planned Unit
Developments
Criteria for Findings of Fact
Land Use Compatibility
Development density Site area per unit or floor area ratio should
be similar to surrounding uses if not
separated by major natural or artificial
features.
B. The Planning Commission, after proper notice, shall hold a public
hearing and act upon each application.
C. The Planning Commission may recommend amendments to PUD
District applications.
D. The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be transmitted
to the City Council for final action.
E. The City Council, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and
act upon any ordinance establishing a PUD Planned Unit Development
Overlay District. "Proper notice" shall mean the same notice
established for any other zoning amendment.
F. An ordinance adopting a Planned Unit Development Overlay Zoning
District shall require a favorable simple majority of the City Council for
approval.
G. Upon approval by the City Council, the development plan shall become
a part of the ordinance creating or amending the PUD District. All
approved plans shall be filed with the City Clerk.
§ 410-25.7 SEWARD CODE § 410-25.10
1:822
Table 25A
Criteria for Findings of Fact in Approving Planned Unit
Developments
Criteria for Findings of Fact
Land use plan Consistency with the land use plan of the
City of Seward.
Height and Scale
Height and bulk Development should minimize differences
in height and building size from
surrounding structures. Differences should
be justified by urban design considerations.
Setbacks Development should respect preexisting
setbacks in its urban context. Variations
should be justified by site or operating
characteristics.
Building coverage Building coverage should be similar to that
of surrounding development if possible.
Higher coverage should be mitigated by
landscaping or site amenities.
Site Development
Environment Project should maximize conservation of
existing environmental features, including
natural vegetation, tree cover, and
drainage patterns.
Parking and internal
circulation
Parking should serve all structures, with
minimal conflicts between pedestrians and
vehicles.
All structures must be accessible to public
safety vehicles.
Development must have access to adjacent
public streets and ways. Internal
circulation should minimize conflicts and
congestion at public access points.
Site Development
Open space Open spaces should contribute to the
quality of the overall project and should
provide supporting amenities for
residential development. Open spaces
should contribute to the design of the
project and, when appropriate, provide
locations for project-related activities.
§ 410-25.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-25.10
1:823
Table 25A
Criteria for Findings of Fact in Approving Planned Unit
Developments
Criteria for Findings of Fact
Landscaping Landscaping should be integral to the
development, providing street landscaping,
breaks in uninterrupted paved areas, and
buffering where required by surrounding
land uses. Project design should preserve
features of environmental importance to
the greatest degree possible. These
features include mature trees and
woodlands, wetlands, steep slopes,
waterways and bodies of water.
Streetscape Projects should relate to surrounding
public streets and contribute to the quality
of the street environment.
Building Design
Architectural quality Architectural design and building materials
should be compatible with surrounding
areas or reflect the specific design
objectives of a new development area.
Transportation
Traffic capacity Project should not reduce the existing level
of traffic service on adjacent streets.
Compensating improvements should be
included to mitigate impact on street
system operations.
Street network and continuity Project should maintain the continuity of
Seward's street network or should provide
opportunities for local traffic flow away
from major arterials.
Alternative modes Project should make appropriate
accommodations for access by public
transportation, bicycles, and pedestrians.
Public Facilities
Utility service Project is adequately served by public
utilities and infrastructure.
Storm drainage Project should handle stormwater
adequately to prevent overloading of public
stormwater management system.
§ 410-25.10 SEWARD CODE § 410-25.10
1:824
Table 25A
Criteria for Findings of Fact in Approving Planned Unit
Developments
Criteria for Findings of Fact
Project should not inhibit development of
other properties or create adverse effects
on other sites.
Development should not increase
probability of erosion, flooding, landslides,
or other run-off related effects.
Project should maximize d preservation
and enhancement of natural drainage
features on site and should facilitate
stormwater storage techniques consistent
with the policies of the City.
Public safety Project can be adequately served with
police and fire protection.
Comprehensive Plan
Consistency with
development objectives
Project must be consistent with the City's
Comprehensive Plan, including applicable
special area or specific plans. Project
design should be consistent with the
development standards and objectives of
these plans.
§ 410-25.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-25.10
1:825

ARTICLE 26
TND Traditional Neighborhood Design District
§ 410-26.1. Purpose.
The TND Traditional Neighborhood Design District is intended to
encourage innovative mixed-use residential environments that reflect the
planning and development patterns in place when Seward was initially
developed. The TND District produces environments which manage
automobiles but maintain a scale and set of linkages that promote
pedestrian travel and civic space. These theories of urban design have
been classified as "New Urbanism," although they transport the patterns of
development of traditional Seward into new settings. The TND regulations
included in this article are intended to capture the essence of this design
technique, while avoiding excessive requirements that will discourage the
use of the concept. The Seward regulations are intended to capture the
general concept and vision of traditional neighborhood design, without
being so prescriptive as to inhibit the use of the concept or discourage
design flexibility.
§ 410-26.2. Size.
The minimum size of a TND District shall be 10 acres.
§ 410-26.3. Application process.
§ 410-26.4. Permitted uses.
A. The application and adoption process shall be the same as those
established by PUD Planned Unit Development Districts.
B. All applications for a TND subdivision must be accompanied by a TND
development plan, in addition to other documents required by this
chapter. This plan shall illustrate the distribution of land uses
throughout the subdivision; the location and design of public spaces,
streets, and alleys; the location and nature of special design features;
architectural controls; and other information necessary to
communicate the concept of the TND subdivision. The TND subdivision
plan shall be a part of the approved subdivision. Subsequent building
and development permits shall be issued by the City only in consistency
with the TND development plan.
C. Articles of Incorporation and/or covenants for a homeowners'
association or other provision assuring maintenance or operation of all
common spaces shall be submitted with the TND application.
A. Mixed land uses.
(1) Retail, service, civic, office, and various types of residential land
uses may be combined within a TND development, notwithstanding
the use regulations of the underlying zoning district. The
§ 410-26.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-26.4
1:827
§ 410-26.5. Density.
§ 410-26.6. Lot dimensions and setbacks.
distribution and location of land uses shall be consistent with the
TND plan submitted for the subdivision.
(2) The gross floor area of commercial area permitted within a TND
shall not exceed 10,000 square feet per 100 people projected to live
in the development. For the purpose of calculating projected
population, the following factors shall be used:
(a) Single-family detached: 3.5 people per unit.
(b) Single-family attached: 2.75 people per unit.
(c) Townhouses: 2.5 people per unit.
(d) Multifamily: 2.0 people per unit.
(3) Parks and public open spaces shall make up at least 10% of the
total area of the TND development.
A. The average site area per unit of a TND shall be established by the
underlying zoning district. However, the density of individual parts of
the TND may exceed the average density.
B. Overall density permitted by the underlying zoning district of the TND
may be increased as follows for specific amenities: 10% for the
provision of a centrally located town square of at least one acre for each
25 acres of developed area; 10% for the provision of approved
ornamental lighting throughout the TND subdivision; and 10% for the
development of a central community boulevard. Cumulative density
bonuses shall not exceed 25% of the density permitted by the
underlying zoning district.
A. Lot dimensions. Individual lot size dimensions, including minimum
width, may be reduced to 75% of the requirement of the underlying
zoning district. Any savings on lot size shall be devoted to public space,
including but not limited to town squares, small parks, greenways, and
community facilities.
B. Lot setbacks.
(1) Lot setbacks may be varied from those otherwise specified for the
zoning district. Typically, the front yard setback should respect a
build-to line that is not less than five feet nor greater than 20 feet.
Different setbacks may be incorporated as part of the TND District
approval. Setback limits must be established on the preliminary
and final plat.
§ 410-26.4 SEWARD CODE § 410-26.6
1:828
§ 410-26.7. Street system design.
(2) The distance across a street from building face to building face
shall not exceed 100 feet except along a community street or
boulevard.
(3) The setback from any garage entrance to any circulation way,
including an alley, must be at least 20 feet unless the project design
makes other specific provisions for dedicated off-street parking.
Garage access from the rear of lots by way of an alley is
encouraged.
A. Street continuity. All streets within a TND District connect to other
streets within the district, forming a continuous network. All streets
and alleys shall terminate at other streets within the TND District and
shall connect to other streets on the edge of the district.
B. Street and block characteristics.
(1) The design of the street system shall create an open network that
creates blocks with a length of no more than 660 feet.
(2) Street loops and culs-de-sac may be included as part of the street
system design. However, no street with a single point of access
onto a connecting street should be longer than 200 feet.
(3) Street or right-of-way widths may be varied for local streets within
TND subdivisions as provided in Article 40, Circulation System
Design.
C. Pedestrian system. Each project within a TND District shall include a
complete pedestrian system, providing access to all residential lots or
sites and major activity centers within the project. In addition, each
project shall provide direct access to any public multiuse recreational
trails that run through or are adjacent to the project site.
D. Community streets and boulevards. Community streets and boulevards
are streets that are designed as central open space features within a
TND development. The incorporation of these facilities within a TND is
strongly encouraged and receives a density bonus, as provided in
§ 410-26.5. Characteristics of such a street include:
(1) Alignment that generally runs more than 50% of the longest
dimension of the development.
(2) Orientation to a main activity center in the development, including
parks and neighborhood greens, civic facilities, commercial activity
centers, or designed landmarks.
(3) Extensive street landscaping and parallel sidewalks and trails.
(4) Thematic lighting and street furniture.
§ 410-26.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-26.7
1:829
(5) A street section which incorporates a median or wide sidewalk
setbacks. A median's width should be equal to 1.00 times the width
of either individual street channel. If the road channel is undivided,
the distance between sidewalk and curb should be equal to at least
50% of the curb-to-curb width.
§ 410-26.7 SEWARD CODE § 410-26.7
1:830
ARTICLE 27
RC Rural Conservation Development Overlay District
§ 410-27.1. Purpose.
The RC Rural Conservation Development Overlay District is intended to
require development design standards and techniques in sensitive
environmental areas around Seward that preserve unique landforms and
the character of land. The techniques of the RC District require that the
natural landforms determine the design and character of new residential
development in these sensitive areas. Areas of environmental sensitivity and
potential application of the RC Overlay District may be established by the
City's Comprehensive Development Plan.
§ 410-27.2. Process.472
Subdivisions in an RC Overlay District generally follow the approval
procedures outlined in Article 44, establishing the process for preliminary
and final plat approval. Projects which do not require subdivision follow
approval procedures appropriate to the specific project, including
conditional use permits, zoning amendments, site plan review, or other
applicable measures. The requirements and standards included in this
article are in addition to those established procedures.
§ 410-27.3. Permitted uses.
Land uses permitted in an RC District are the same as those permitted in
the underlying base district.
§ 410-27.4. Permitted density yield.473
Developments in RC Overlay Districts are permitted the same density on
developable area as would be allowed to conventional residential
development in the underlying zoning district. Yield in housing units (Y) is
calculated by the formula:
Y =
0.90(TA - UA)
SA
Where:
TA = Total parcel area.
472. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
473. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-27.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-27.4
1:831
UA = Undevelopable areas, defined as the sum of wetlands
designated by the National Wetlands Survey, Water of the
United States, slopes exceeding 20%, floodways, and soils
subject to slumping, as indicated on the medium intensity maps
contained in the county soil survey published by the USDA
Natural Resources Conservation Service, is subtracted from the
total parcel area.
0.90 = An allowance for the typical percentage of land available after
deducting the area of public streets and rights-of-way serving a
low-density residential development.
SA = Minimum site area per unit required by the underlying zoning
district.
§ 410-27.5. Minimum percentage of open space.
§ 410-27.6. Conservation areas as open space.
A. The minimum percentage of land that shall be designated as permanent
open space, not to be further subdivided, and protected through a
conservation easement held by the City of Seward, Seward County, a
homeowners' association, or a recognized land trust or conservancy,
shall be a minimum of 35% of the net developable area, defined as
0.90(TA-UA).
B. The above areas shall generally be designated as undivided open space,
to facilitate easement monitoring and enforcement, and to promote
appropriate management by a single entity according to approved land
management standards.
C. All undivided open space and any lot capable of further subdivision
shall be restricted from further subdivision through a permanent
conservation easement, in a form acceptable to the City and duly
recorded in the Seward County Register of Deeds' office.
D. The required open space may be used, without restriction, for
underground drainage fields for individual or community septic
systems, and for "spray fields" for spray irrigation purposes in a "land
treatment" sewage disposal system. However, "mound" systems
protruding above grade and aerated sewage treatment ponds shall be
limited to no more than 10% of the required minimum open space.
E. Stormwater management ponds or basins may be included as part of
the minimum required open space, as may land within the rights-of-way
for underground pipelines. However, land within the rights-of-way of
high-tension power lines shall not be included as comprising part of the
minimum required open space.
A. The location of open space shall be consistent with the policies
contained in the City of Seward's Comprehensive Development Plan,
§ 410-27.4 SEWARD CODE § 410-27.6
1:832
and with the recommendations contained in this section and the
following section ("evaluation criteria").
B. Open space shall be comprised of two types of land: "primary
conservation areas" and "secondary conservation areas." All lands
within both primary and secondary conservation areas shall be
protected by a permanent conservation easement prohibiting future
development, and setting other standards safeguarding the site's
special resources from negative changes.
(1) Primary conservation areas. This category consists of wetlands
designated by the National Wetlands Survey, Water of the United
States, slopes exceeding 20%, floodways, and soils subject to
slumping, as indicated on the medium intensity maps contained in
the county soil survey published by the USDA Natural Resources
Conservation Service.
(2) Secondary conservation areas. Secondary conservation areas
comprise at least 35% of the net developable area and shall be
designated and permanently protected. Full density credit shall be
allowed for land in this category that would otherwise be buildable
under local, state, and federal regulations, so that their
development potential is not reduced by this designation. Such
density credit may be applied to other unconstrained parts of the
site. Secondary conservation areas are determined by specific
project design and typically include all or some of the following
kinds of resources:
(a) A one-hundred-foot-deep greenway buffer along all water
bodies and watercourses, and a fifty-foot greenway buffer
alongside wetlands soils classified as "very poorly drained" in
the medium intensity county soil survey of the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service. These areas must be
conserved as secondary conservation areas but are considered
as developable areas for the purpose of calculating yield.
(b) One-hundred-year floodplains.
(c) Woodlands, individual specimen trees, or small stands of
significant trees.
(d) Aquifer recharge areas and areas with highly permeable
("excessively drained") soil.
(e) Significant wildlife habitat areas.
(f) Class I and Class II farmlands.
(g) Historic, archaeological or cultural features listed (or eligible
to be listed) on the National Register of Historic Places or the
Historic Resources Surveys of the Nebraska State Historical
Society.
§ 410-27.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-27.6
1:833
§ 410-27.7. Location standards for open space.
§ 410-27.8. Special processes for conservation developments.
The review and approval process for subdivisions in the RC Overlay District
is the same as that for conventional subdivisions, as set forth in Article 38.
Additional provisions and approval processes are set forth in this section.
(h) Slopes in excess of 15%.
(i) Ridgelines and view corridors.
(j) Land with soils that do not support residential development.
A. Access to residential lots. Undivided open space shall be directly
accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within a
conservation subdivision. To achieve this, the majority of house lots
should abut undivided open space in order to provide direct views and
access. Safe and convenient pedestrian access to the open space from
all lots not adjoining the open space shall be provided (except in the
case of farmland, or other resource areas vulnerable to trampling
damage or human disturbance). Where the undivided open space is
designated as separate, noncontiguous parcels, no parcel shall consist
of less than three acres in area nor have a length-to-width ratio in
excess of 4:1, except such areas that are specifically designed as village
greens, ballfields, upland buffers to wetlands, water bodies or
watercourses, or trail links.
B. Interconnection of open spaces. Protected open spaces in each new
subdivision are encouraged to adjoin each other, ultimately forming an
interconnected network of primary and secondary conservation areas
across the county. The only elements of the network that would
necessarily be open to the public are those lands that have been
required to be dedicated for public use and typically configured in a
linear fashion as an element of Seward's long-range open space
network through the Comprehensive Development Plan.
A. Existing features plan.
(1) Plans analyzing each site's special features are required for all
proposed subdivisions. The existing features plan shall include, at a
minimum:
(a) A contour map based at least upon topographical maps
published by the United States Geological Survey;
(b) The location of severely constraining elements such as steep
slopes (over 25%), wetlands, watercourses, intermittent
streams and one-hundred-year floodplains, and all rights-ofway
and easements;
§ 410-27.6 SEWARD CODE § 410-27.8
1:834
(c) Soil boundaries as shown on USDA Natural Resources
Conservation Service medium intensity maps; and
(d) The location of significant features such as woodlands,
treelines, open fields or meadows, scenic views into or out from
property, watershed divides and drainageways, fences or stone
walls, rock outcrops, and existing structures, roads, tracks and
trails.
(2) The existing features plan shall identify both primary conservation
areas and secondary conservation areas, as described in
§ 410-27.6B(1) and (2) of this article. The existing features plan
shall form the basis for the conceptual preliminary plan, which
shall show the tentative location of houses, streets, lot lines, and
greenway lands in new subdivisions, according to the four-step
design process described in Subsection B below.
B. Conceptual preliminary plan.
(1) A sketch plan or a conceptual preliminary plan shall be submitted
for all proposed subdivisions to the Zoning Administrator before
submission of a formal preliminary plat application. A conceptual
preliminary plan presents a conceptual layout for greenway and
open lands, house sites, and street alignments. Each conceptual
preliminary plan shall follow a four-step design process, as
described below. Applicants shall be prepared to demonstrate to
the Zoning Administrator that these four design steps were
followed in the preparation of the plan.
(a) Step One: Designating the Open Space. During the first step,
all potential conservation areas (both primary and secondary
as defined above) are identified, using the existing features
plan.
(b) Step Two: Location of House Sites. During the second step,
potential house sites are located. Subdivision applicants shall
identify tentative house sites on the conceptual preliminary
plan and proposed house sites on the detailed final plan. House
sites should generally be located not closer than 100 feet to
primary conservation areas, but may be situated within 50 feet
of secondary conservation areas, in order to enjoy views of the
latter without negatively affecting the former.
(c) Step Three: Street and Lot Layout. The third step consists of
aligning proposed streets to provide vehicular access to each
house in the most reasonable and economical way. When lots
and access streets are laid out, they shall be located in a way
that avoids or at least minimizes adverse impacts on both the
primary and secondary conservation areas. To the greatest
extent practicable, wetland crossings and streets traversing
existing slopes over 15% shall be strongly discouraged. Street
connections shall generally be encouraged to minimize the
§ 410-27.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-27.8
1:835
§ 410-27.9. Ownership and maintenance of common open space.
Developments in the RC Overlay District shall provide for ownership and
maintenance of common open space. Common open space within a
development shall be owned, administered, and maintained by any of the
following methods, either individually or in combination, and subject to
approval by the City.
number of new culs-de-sac to be maintained and to facilitate
easy access to and from homes in different parts of the
property (and on adjoining parcels). Where culs-de-sac are
necessary, those serving six or fewer homes may be designed
with "hammerheads" facilitating three-point turns. In TND
Districts, the location of house sites follows the location of
streets and squares.
(d) Step Four: Lot Lines. The fourth step is simply to draw in the
lot line (where applicable). These are generally drawn midway
between house locations and may include L-shaped "flag lots"
meeting the City's minimum standards for the same.
(2) Review and comments. The Zoning Administrator and the Public
Works Director shall return written comments on the conceptual
preliminary plan to the applicant within 30 days of submittal. These
comments should recommend changes to be made prior to
submittal of a preliminary plat application.
A. Offer of dedication. The City of Seward, Seward County, or the Natural
Resources District shall have the first and last offer of dedication of
undivided open space in the event said land is to be conveyed.
Dedication shall take the form of a fee simple ownership. The City or
other public agency may, but shall not be required to accept undivided
open space, provided: 1) such land is accessible to the residents of the
county; 2) there is no cost of acquisition other than any costs incidental
to the transfer of ownership, such as title insurance; and 3) the county
agrees to and has access to maintain such lands. Alternatively, a public
agency may accept an easement, subject to the above conditions.
B. Homeowners' association. The undivided open space and associated
facilities may be held in common ownership by a homeowners'
association. The association shall be formed and operated under the
following provisions:
(1) The developer shall provide a description of the association,
including its bylaws and methods for maintaining the open space.
(2) The association shall be organized by the developer and shall be
operated with financial assistance from the developer, before the
sale of any lots within the development.
(3) Membership in the association is automatic (mandatory) for all
purchasers of homes therein and their successors. The conditions
§ 410-27.8 SEWARD CODE § 410-27.9
1:836
§ 410-27.10. Maintenance standards.
and timing of transferring control of the association from developer
to homeowners shall be identified.
(4) The association shall be responsible for maintenance of insurance
and taxes on undivided open space, enforceable by liens placed by
the county on the association. The association may place liens on
the homes or house lots of its members who fail to pay their
association dues in a timely manner. Such liens may require the
imposition of penalty interest charges.
(5) The members of the association shall share equitably the costs of
maintaining and developing such undivided open space. Shares
shall be defined within the association bylaws.
(6) In the event of a proposed transfer, within the methods here
permitted, of undivided open space land by the homeowners'
association, or of the assumption of maintenance of undivided open
space land by a public agency, notice of such action shall be given
to all property owners within the development.
(7) The homeowners' association may lease open space lands to any
other qualified person, or corporation, for operation and
maintenance of open space lands.
C. Condominiums. The undivided open space and associated facilities may
be controlled through the use of condominium agreements. Such
agreements shall be in conformance with the state statute. All
undivided open space land shall be held as a "common element."
D. Transfer of easements to a private conservation organization. An owner
may transfer easements to a private, nonprofit organization, among
whose purposes it is to conserve open space and/or natural resources,
provided that:
(1) The organization is acceptable to the City, and is a bona fide
conservation organization with perpetual existence;
(2) The conveyance contains appropriate provisions for proper
reverter or retransfer in the event that the organization becomes
unwilling or unable to continue carrying out its functions; and
(3) A maintenance agreement acceptable to the Planning Commission
is entered into by the developer and the organization.474
A. Financial responsibility. The ultimate owner of the open space (typically
a homeowners' association) shall be responsible for raising all monies
required for operations, maintenance, or physical improvements to the
open space through annual dues, special assessments, etc. The
474. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-27.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-27.10
1:837
§ 410-27.11. Evaluation criteria.
In evaluating the layout of lots and open space, the following criteria will
be considered by the Planning Commission and City Council as indicating
design appropriate to the site's natural, historic, and cultural features, and
meeting the purpose of this chapter:
homeowners' association shall be authorized under its bylaws to place
liens on the property of residents who fall delinquent in payment of
such dues or assessments.
B. Maintenance enforcement.
(1) In the event that the association or any successor organization
shall, at any time after establishment of a development containing
undivided open space, fail to maintain the undivided open space in
reasonable order and condition in accordance with the
development plan, the City may serve written notice upon the
owner of record, setting forth the manner in which the owner of
record has failed to maintain the undivided open space in
reasonable condition.
(2) Failure to adequately maintain the undivided open space in
reasonable order and condition constitutes a violation of this
chapter.
(3) Should any bill or bills for maintenance of undivided open space by
the City or county be unpaid, a late fee of 15% shall be added to
such bills and a lien shall be filed against the premises in the same
manner as other municipal claims.
A. Protection of floodplains, wetlands, and steep slopes from clearing,
grading, filling, or construction, except as may be approved for
essential infrastructure or active or passive recreation amenities.
B. Preservation and maintenance of woodlands, existing fields, pastures,
meadows, and orchards, and sufficient buffer areas to minimize
conflicts between residential and agricultural uses.
C. Maintenance of buffers at least 100 feet in depth adjacent to wetlands
and surface waters, including creeks, streams, springs, lakes and
ponds.
D. Design around existing treelines between fields or meadows, and
minimal impacts on large woodlands (greater than five acres),
especially those containing many mature trees or a significant wildlife
habitat.
E. Maintenance of scenic views.
F. Avoidance of new construction on prominent hilltops or ridges, by
taking advantage of lower topographic features.
§ 410-27.10 SEWARD CODE § 410-27.11
1:838
G. Protection of wildlife habitat areas of species listed as endangered,
threatened, or of special concern by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
H. Design around and preserves sites of historic, archaeological, or
cultural value, including stone walls, barn foundations, cellar holes,
earthworks, and burial grounds.
I. Protection of rural character and improves public safety and vehicular
carrying capacity by avoiding development fronting directly onto
existing public roads.
J. Landscaping of common areas if appropriate.
K. Provision of active or passive recreational areas in suitable locations
that offer convenient access by residents and adequate screening from
nearby house lots.
L. Inclusion of a pedestrian circulation system providing access between
properties, activities, or special features within the neighborhood open
space system. All roadside footpaths should connect with off-road trails.
M. Provision of open space that is reasonably contiguous, avoiding
fragmented open spaces.
§ 410-27.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-27.11
1:839

ARTICLE 28
HD Historic and Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District
§ 410-28.1. Purpose.
The HD Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District enables the adoption
of special performance and development standards in combination with site
development regulations of a base district for areas of special historical or
architectural significance within the City of Seward. The district recognizes
the importance of historically and architecturally significant districts to the
character of Seward and provides for their conservation. The HD District
applies standards and procedures to existing neighborhoods that are
analogous to those applied to new development in PUD Districts.
§ 410-28.2. Application and use.
The HD Overlay District provides an opportunity to establish and apply
special development controls and standards for areas in Seward with
special physical or design characteristics. Examples of these standards may
include, but not be limited to:
§ 410-28.3. Procedure for adoption.
A. Variations or substitutions of development regulations, including
revised minimum and maximum setbacks, lot sizes, heights, and other
regulations, based on the unique characteristics of the neighborhood.
B. Requirements for building design, materials, features, and orientations.
C. Special requirements or permissions for signage.
D. Limitations on maximum size and scale of buildings.
E. Limitations on location of parking, driveways, and other features that
have an impact on the fabric of a traditional neighborhood.
A. Proposal. The creation of an HD Overlay District may be initiated by the
Planning Commission, the City Council, or by petition of the owner or
owners of 51% of the property area within the proposed district.
B. Requirements for application. An application for the creation of an HD
Overlay District must include:
(1) A statement describing the proposed district's special historical or
architectural characteristics and stating the reasons for proposal of
the district.
(2) A map indicating the boundaries of the proposed HD Overlay
District, specifying the base district(s) included within these
boundaries.
(3) An inventory of the land uses, buildings or historically important
sites located within the boundaries of the proposed district.
§ 410-28.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-28.3
1:841
§ 410-28.4. Adoption of district.
§ 410-28.5. Building permits.
Building or other development permits issued by the City in an HD District
shall be consistent with the adopted HD District Ordinance and shall follow
all procedures for review that are established by the City.
(4) A future land use plan for the district.
(5) Supplemental site development regulations, design criteria, and
performance standards that apply to the proposed district.
A. The Planning Commission and City Council shall review and evaluate
each HD Overlay District application.
B. The Planning Commission, after proper notice, shall hold a public
hearing and act upon each application.
C. The Planning Commission may recommend amendments to HD District
applications.
D. The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be transmitted
to the City Council for final action.
E. The City Council, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and
act upon any ordinance establishing an HD Overlay District.
F. The ordinance adopting the HD District shall include a statement of
purpose, a description of district boundaries, and a list of supplemental
site development regulations and performance standards.
G. Upon approval by the City Council, each HD Overlay District shall be
shown on the Zoning Map, identified sequentially by order of enactment
and referenced to the enacting Ordinance.
H. Any protest against an HD Overlay District shall be made and filed as
provided by Nebraska state statutes, and amendments thereto.
§ 410-28.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-28.5
1:842
ARTICLE 29
FP/FW Floodplain/Floodway Overlay District
§ 410-29.1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize losses to property by applying the
provisions of this article to:
§ 410-29.2. Findings; applicability; enforcement officer;
interpreting district boundaries; interpretation; appeals.
A. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood heights
or velocities.
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities that
serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of initial
construction.
C. Protect individuals from buying lands that are unsuitable for intended
purposes because of flood hazard.
D. Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance in the National Flood Insurance
Program when identified by the Federal Insurance Administration as a
flood-prone community.
A. Flood losses resulting from periodic inundation. Flood hazard areas of
the City of Seward, Nebraska, are subject to inundation that results in
loss of life or property, health and safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
(1) General causes of these flood losses. These flood losses are caused
by:
(a) The cumulative effect of obstruction in floodways causing
increases in flood heights and velocities;
(b) The occupancy of flood areas by uses vulnerable to floods or
hazardous to others which are inadequately elevated or
otherwise protected from flood damages.
(2) Methods used to analyze flood hazards. This article uses a
reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards that consists of a
series of interrelated steps:
(a) Selection of a base flood which is based upon engineering
calculations which permit a consideration of such flood factors
as its expected frequency of occurrence, the area inundated
§ 410-29.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-29.2
1:843
and the depth of inundation. The base flood selected for this
article is representative of large floods that are reasonably
characteristic of what can be expected to occur on the
particular streams subject to this article. It is in the general
order of a flood which could be expected to have a one-percent
chance of occurrence in any one year, as delineated by
applicable Flood Insurance Studies and the Federal
Emergency Management Administration's Flood Insurance
Rate Maps and Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, or any
subsequent effective Flood Insurance Studies, Rate Maps, and
Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps issued after the effective
date of this article and adopted by the City of Seward.
(b) Calculation of water surface profiles based upon a hydraulic
engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream channel and
overbank areas to convey the base flood.
(c) Computation of the floodway required to convey this flood
without increasing flood heights more than one foot at any
point.
(d) Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no
obstruction is permitted which would cause any increase in
flood height.
(e) Delineation of floodway fringe, i.e., that area outside the
floodway encroachment lines but which still is subject to
inundation by the base flood.
B. Land to which article applies. This article shall apply to all lands within
the jurisdiction of the City of Seward identified on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) as numbered and unnumbered A Zone and/or within
the Overlay Districts FP and FW established in this article. In all areas
covered by this article, no development shall be permitted except upon
a permit to develop granted by the City Council or its duly designated
representative under such safeguards and restrictions as the City
Council may reasonably impose for the promotion and maintenance of
the general welfare, health of the inhabitants of the community as
contained in the City Code.
C. Enforcement officer. The Chief Building Official of the City of Seward is
hereby designated as the City Council's duly designated enforcement
officer under this article. Unless otherwise provided by the City
Council, the Central Platte or Tri-Basin Natural Resources District shall
assist the City of Seward on interpretation of floodplain/floodway rules
and regulations. The enforcement officer shall obtain comments from
the NRD as part of his/her review of all proposed activity in this overlay
district.
D. Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. The boundaries of the
Floodway and Floodway Fringe Overlay Districts shall be determined
by scaling distances on the Official Zoning Map. Where interpretation is
§ 410-29.2 SEWARD CODE § 410-29.2
1:844
needed to the exact location of the boundaries of the districts as shown
on the Official Zoning Map, as for example where there appears to be
a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the
enforcement officer shall make the necessary interpretation. In such
cases where the interpretation is contested, the Board of Adjustment
will resolve the dispute. The base flood elevation for the point in
question shall be the governing factor in locating the district boundary
on the land. The person contesting the location of the district boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to the Board
and to submit his own technical evidence if he so desires.
E. Compliance. No development located within known flood hazard areas
of the community shall be located, extended, converted or structurally
altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other
applicable regulations.
F. Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by this article to
repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed
restrictions. However, where this article imposes greater restrictions,
the provisions of this article shall prevail. All other ordinances
inconsistent with this article are hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency only.
G. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this article shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be
liberally construed in favor of the City of Seward and shall not be
deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state
statute.
H. Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study.
Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood height may be
increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge
openings restricted by debris. This article does not imply that areas
outside floodway and floodway fringe district boundaries or land uses
permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the City of
Seward or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
may result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
I. Severability. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this article is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this article shall not be affected thereby.
J. Application for appeal. Where a request for a permit to develop is
denied by the Chief Building Official, the applicant may apply for such
permit or variance directly to the Board of Adjustment. Procedures for
appeals to the Board of Adjustment shall proceed as set forth by
§§ 410-44.8 through 410-44.10 of this chapter.
§ 410-29.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-29.3
1:845
§ 410-29.3. Floodplain and floodway permits; administration.
A. Permit required. No person, firm, or corporation shall initiate any
development or substantial improvement or cause the same to be done
without first obtaining a separate permit for development as defined in
this section.
B. Administration.
(1) The Chief Building Official is hereby appointed to administer and
implement the provisions of this article.
(2) Duties of the Chief Building Official shall include, but not be limited
to:
(a) Review of all development permits to assure that sites are
reasonably safe from flooding and that the permit
requirements of this article have been satisfied.
(b) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal,
state or local governmental agencies from which prior
approval is required.
(c) Notify adjacent communities and the appropriate Natural
Resources District prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration when participating in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
(d) Notify the appropriate Natural Resources District of any
proposed construction and development activity in floodplain
areas, and/or upon land situated within the Floodplain/
Floodway Overlay Zoning District.
(e) Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
(f) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures.
(g) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which the new or substantially improved structures
have been floodproofed.
(h) When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, the
Chief Building Official shall be presented certification from a
registered professional engineer or architect.
§ 410-29.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-29.3
1:846
§ 410-29.4. Establishment of zoning districts.
The mapped floodplain areas within the jurisdiction of this article are
hereby divided into the two following districts: a Floodway Overlay District
(FW) and a Floodplain Overlay District (FP) as identified in the official
Floodplain Study. Within these districts, all uses not meeting the standards
of this article and those standards of the underlying zoning district shall
be prohibited. These zones shall be consistent with the numbered and
unnumbered A Zones as identified on the official FIRM when identified
in the Flood Insurance Study provided by the Federal Insurance
Administration.
§ 410-29.5. District standards.
C. Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file
an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every
such application shall:
(1) Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit.
(2) Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot,
block, tract and house and street address, or similar description
that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building
or work.
(3) Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended.
(4) Be accompanied by plans for the proposed construction.
(5) Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent, who may be
required to submit evidence to indicate such authority.
(6) Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the
Chief Building Official.
A. No permit for development shall be granted for new construction,
substantial improvement or other improvements, including the
placement of manufactured homes, within the identified floodplain
unless the conditions of this section are satisfied.
B. All areas identified as unnumbered A Zones by the Federal Insurance
Administration are subject to inundation of the one-hundred-year flood;
however, the water surface elevation was not provided. The
unnumbered A Zones shall be subject to all development provisions of
this article. If Flood Insurance Study data is not available, the
community shall utilize any base flood elevation data currently
available within its area of jurisdiction. Further, in cases of proposed
development within unnumbered A Zones, the developer's engineer
shall be required to conduct the necessary studies to determine the
one-hundred-year flood elevation and its extent in relation to such
development.
§ 410-29.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-29.5
1:847
C. New construction, subdivision proposals, substantial improvement,
prefabricated buildings, placement of manufactured homes and other
development shall require:
(1) Design or anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
(2) New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage
systems designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into
floodwaters, and on-site waste disposal systems to be located so as
to avoid impairment or contamination.
(3) Construction with materials resistant to flood damage, utilizing
methods and practices that minimize flood damages, and with
electrical, heating, and ventilation that are designed and/or located
so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
(4) All utility and sanitary facilities to be elevated or floodproofed one
foot above the regulatory flood elevation. Such floodproofing is
permitted only for nonresidential properties.
(5) That until a floodway has been designated, no development,
including landfill, may be permitted within the identified floodplain
unless the applicant for the land use has demonstrated that the
proposed use, when combined with all other existing and
reasonably anticipated uses, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the one-hundred-year flood more than one foot on the
average cross-section of the reach in which the development or
landfill is located as shown in the official floodplain study
incorporated by reference herein.
(6) Storage of materials and equipment.
(a) The storage of processing of materials that are in time of
flooding buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to
human, animal or plant life is prohibited.
(b) Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if not
subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to
prevent flotation or if readily removable from the area within
the time available after flood warning.
(7) Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, are required
to assure that:
(a) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage.
§ 410-29.5 SEWARD CODE § 410-29.5
1:848
§ 410-29.6. Floodplain Overlay Districts.
(b) All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems, are located, elevated and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(c) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
(d) Proposals for development (including proposals for
manufactured home parks and subdivisions) of five acres or 50
lots, whichever is less, include within such proposals the
regulatory flood elevation.
A. Permitted uses. Any use permitted in the underlying base district shall
be permitted in the Floodplain Overlay District. No use shall be
permitted in the district unless the standards of this section are met.
B. Standards for the Floodplain Overlay District.
(1) Any new construction or substantial improvements of residential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
one foot above the base flood elevation.
(2) Any new construction or substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated one foot above the base flood elevation, or,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall be
floodproofed so that below such a level the structure is watertight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A
registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the
standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall
be provided to the enforcement official. Such floodproofing is
permitted only for nonresidential properties.
(3) All new construction and substantial improvements that fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding
shall be designated to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by the registered professional engineer or architect or
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two
openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be
provided. The bottom of all openings shall be not higher than one
foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves, or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 410-29.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-29.6
1:849
(4) Within AH Zones, adequate drainage paths around structures on
slopes shall be required in order to guide floodwaters around and
away from proposed structures.
(5) Manufactured homes.
(a) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Manufactured homes must be
anchored in accordance with local building codes or FEMA
guidelines. In the event that over-the-top frame ties to ground
anchors are used, the following specific requirements (or their
equivalent) shall be met:
[1] Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four
corners of the manufactured home with two additional ties
per side at intermediate locations, with manufactured
homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie
per side.
[2] Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the home,
with five additional ties per side at intermediate points,
with manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring
four additional ties per side.
[3] All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of
carrying a force of 4,800 pounds.
[4] Any additions to manufactured homes shall be similarly
anchored.
(b) All manufactured homes to be placed within Zones A1-30, AH
and AE on the community's FIRM shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation and
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform
Building Code.
C. AO Zone special regulations. Located within the areas of special flood
hazard are areas designated as "AO Zones." These areas have special
flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one foot to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate. Therefore, the following
provisions apply with AO Zones:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as one
foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's
FIRM.
§ 410-29.6 SEWARD CODE § 410-29.6
1:850
§ 410-29.7. Floodway Overlay Districts.
§ 410-29.8. Request for variances from district requirements.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(a) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as one foot above the
depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM; or
(b) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any
space below that level is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Such certification
shall be provided to the official as set forth in § 410-29.3.
(c) Adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be
required in order to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures.
A. Permitted uses. Only uses having a low flood-damage potential and not
obstructing flood flows shall be permitted within the Floodway District
to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance and
provided that they do not require structures, fill or storage of materials
or equipment. No use shall increase the flood levels of the base flood
elevation. These uses are subject to the standards of § 410-29.5 and
other applicable sections.
(1) Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, nurseries,
forestry.
(2) Accessory residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking and
play areas.
(3) Nonresidential areas such as loading areas, parking, and airport
landing strips.
(4) Public and private recreational uses such as golf courses, archery
ranges, picnic grounds, parks, wildlife and nature preserves. New
placement of residential structures, including manufactured
homes, is prohibited with the identified floodway (FW) area.
(5) In Zone A, unnumbered, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any
floodway data available through federal, state or local sources in
meeting the standards of this section.
A. The Board of Adjustment, as established by the City of Seward, shall
hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this article.
§ 410-29.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-29.8
1:851
B. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Chief Building Official in the enforcement or
administration of this article.
C. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment or any
taxpayer may appeal such decision to the District Court as provided by
Nebraska state statutes.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Board of Adjustment shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this article, and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
(3) The susceptibility of a proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
(6) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or
erosion damage, for the proposed use.
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area.
(9) The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
(10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effect of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.
(11) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
E. Conditions for variance.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or
less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, provided items
§ 410-29.8 SEWARD CODE § 410-29.8
1:852
§ 410-29.9. Nonconforming uses.
(2) through (6) below have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical jurisdiction
required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to
the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) In addition to the criteria for variances set forth in Subsection D of
this section, variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of the variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause
fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing
local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given a
written notice that the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced
lowest floor elevation.
A. Continuance of nonconforming uses. A structure or the use of a
structure or premises which was lawful before the passage or
amendment of this article but which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this article may be continued, subject to the following
conditions:
(1) No such use or substantial improvement of that use shall be
expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way that increases its
nonconformity.
(2) If such use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future
use of the building premises shall conform to this article. The
Utility Department shall notify the Building Inspector in writing of
instances of nonconforming uses where utility services have been
discontinued for a period of 12 months.
§ 410-29.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-29.9
1:853
§ 410-29.10. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall
be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common
usage and so as to give this article its most reasonable application. As used
in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
100-YEAR FLOOD — The base flood having a one-percent chance of annual
occurrence.
ACTUARIAL RATES or RISK-PREMIUM RATES — Those rates established
by the Federal Insurance Administrator pursuant to individual community
studies and investigations which are undertaken to provide flood insurance
in accordance with 42 U.S.C. § 4014 and the accepted actuarial principles.
Actuarial rates include provisions for operating costs and allowances.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Chief Building Official's
interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH Zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent or
greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one foot to three
feet where a clearly defined channel is unpredictable and where velocity
flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet
flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given
year.
(3) Uses or adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances shall not
be entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
B. Replacement of residential uses. If any residential nonconforming use
or structure is destroyed by any means, including flood, it shall not be
reconstructed if the cost is more than 50% of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred within those areas identified as
floodway (FW). This limitation does not include the cost of any
alteration to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary,
building, or safety codes or regulations or the cost of any alteration of a
structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State
Inventory of Historic Places.
C. Replacement of nonresidential uses. If any nonresidential
nonconforming use of structure is destroyed by any means, including
flood, it should not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred, except if it is
reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this article. This
limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary, building, or safety codes or
regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic
Places.
§ 410-29.9 SEWARD CODE § 410-29.10
1:854
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — Elevation indicated in the official floodplain
study as the elevation of the one-hundred-year flood.
BASE FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION — An elevation one foot higher
than the water surface elevation of the base flood.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with
a definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically
flowing water. Channel flow, thus, is that water which is flowing within the
limits of a defined channel.
COMMUNITY — Any state or area or political subdivision thereof which has
authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for the
area within its jurisdiction.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
EXISTING STRUCTURES — For the purposes of determining rates,
structures for which the start of construction commenced before the
effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective
before that date.475
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community,
on which the Flood Insurance Study has delineated the flood hazard
boundaries and the zones establishing insurance rates applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well
as the Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventative measures for reducing flood damage, including,
but not limited to, emergency preparedness plan, flood control works, and
floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN (FP) — That area of the floodplain, outside of the floodway,
that on an average is likely to be flooded once every 100 years (i.e., that has
a one-percent chance of flood occurrence in any one year).
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and
sanitary facilities, which would preclude the entry of water. Structural
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
475. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-29.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-29.10
1:855
components shall have the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM — Those physical structural works
constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent
of the area within a community subject to a special flood hazard. Such a
system typically includes levees or dikes. These specialized modifying works
are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODWAY (FW) — The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent portion of the floodplain that must be reserved in order to
discharge the one-hundred-year flood without cumulatively increasing the
water surface elevation more than one foot at any point, assuming equal
conveyance reduction outside the channel from the two sides of the
floodplain.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the heights calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, clogged bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of this article.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also
includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on
a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the
term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers,
and other similar vehicles.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction or
substantial improvement is commenced on or after the effective date of the
FIRM.
OVERLAY DISTRICT — A district which acts in conjunction with the
underlying zoning district or districts.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub.
§ 410-29.10 SEWARD CODE § 410-29.10
1:856
Law 97-348), includes substantial improvement, and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such
as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of street
and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the
installation of the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home, and a gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction, or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure either 1) before the improvement or repair
is started, or 2) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored,
before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, "substantial
improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The
term does not, however, include either 1) any project for improvement
of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or
safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions, or 2) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register
of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this
article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this
article where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
§ 410-29.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-29.10
1:857

ARTICLE 30
AV Aviation Overlay District
§ 410-30.1. Purpose.
The AV Aviation Overlay District is intended to provide for the safe
operation of aircraft into and out of Seward Municipal Airport, located in
Section 5, Township 10 North, Range 3 East in Seward County, Nebraska.
The district provides special regulations to maintain adequate clearance
and to eliminate potential hazard, safety, and development conflicts
between airport operations and surrounding development. The following
additional regulations shall apply to such lands within the corporate limits
of Seward, Nebraska and its two-mile zoning jurisdiction within the area of
three miles in all directions from the boundaries of any airport. This area
within three miles of the boundaries of said airport shall be known as the
"airport hazard area" and shall be regulated as follows.
§ 410-30.2. Boundaries and zone descriptions.
A. Detailed description of hazard area. The hazard area consists of
approach and operation zones, transition zones, and turning zones.
(1) The outer boundary of the hazard area is composed of a series of
connected tangents and simple curves which also constitute the
outer boundaries of the approach and turning zones.
(2) The inner boundary of the hazard area is a boundary consisting of a
series of intersecting tangents, 500 feet from and parallel to the
center line of the instrument runway or landing strip and 250 feet
from and parallel to the respective center lines of all other runways
or landing strips and connecting the inner boundaries of adjacent
approach zones at the ends of the runways, landing strips or
proposed runways or landing strips.
B. Zone descriptions.
(1) An operation zone shall be located at each end of each existing or
proposed runway, landing strip or other portion of the airfield used
regularly, or to be used regularly, for the landing or taking off of
airplanes. Such approach zones shall begin 200 feet beyond the
ends of their respective strips and at such beginning shall be 1,000
feet in width for the instrument runway or landing strip and 500
feet in width for all other runways and landing strips. The approach
zones shall begin at the ends of their respective operation zones
and shall extend and expand uniformly centered along the
extended center line of the respective landing strip, to the outer
boundary of the approach zone at a rate of 30 feet of width for each
100 feet of horizontal length for the instrument runway or landing
strip and 20 feet of width for each 100 feet of horizontal length of
all other runways.
§ 410-30.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-30.2
1:859
§ 410-30.3. Height restrictions.
(a) The inner area of each approach zone shall be that portion of
the approach zone beginning 200 feet beyond the end of the
respective or proposed landing strip and extending to the
intersection of the controlling glide angle with a plane 150 feet
above the highest elevations of the end of the respective
runway or landing strip.
(b) The outer area of each approach zone shall be the area
between the inner area of the approach zone and the outer
limit of the approach zone.
(2) The transition zones shall be the areas bounded by the inner
boundary of the hazard area, the sides of contiguous inner areas of
approach zones and the outer limits of the transition zones; said
outer limits of the transition zones being the intersections, at
elevations of 150 feet above the highest elevation at the ends or
edges of the closest runway or landing strip, or proposed runway or
landing strip, of a series of contiguous planes originating from
bases established by the inner boundary of the hazard area and the
edges of adjacent inner areas of approach zones; said planes rising
from their respective bases at the rate of one foot vertically to
seven feet horizontally to the lines of intersection previously
referred to.
(3) The turning zones shall comprise all portions of the hazard area not
contained in the approach zones and in the transition zones. The
outer limits of the turning zones shall be a series of points forming
a line which is a horizontal distance of three statute miles from the
nearest points of the airport's property line boundary.
A. Height regulations. No building, transmission line, communication line,
pole, tree, smokestack, chimney, wires, tower or other structure or
appurtenance thereto of any kind or character shall hereafter be
erected, constructed, repaired or established, nor shall any tree or
other object of natural growth be allowed to grow:
(1) In inner areas of approach zones to a height above the elevation of
the nearest point on the end or proposed end of said instrument
runway or landing strip in excess of 1/50 and all other runways or
landing strips in excess of 1/40 of the distance from the end of the
approach zone to said structure or object.
(2) In the outer area of approach zones and in turning zones to a height
in excess of 150 feet above the elevation at the end or proposed end
of the nearest runway or landing strip.
(3) In the transition zones to a height above the planes forming the
transition slopes.
§ 410-30.2 SEWARD CODE § 410-30.3
1:860
§ 410-30.4. Permits.
§ 410-30.5. Nonconforming structures.
(4) In the existing or proposed operation zones to a height above the
existing or proposed finished grade of said runways or landing
strips or the surface of the ground.
B. Exceptions. In the outer area or approach zones and within the turning
zones, these height regulations shall not apply to construction or
planting which is no higher than 75 feet above the elevation of the end
of the nearest runway or landing strip.
A. Permit required. It shall hereafter be unlawful to erect, construct,
reconstruct, repair or establish any building, transmission line,
communication line, pole, tree, tower, smokestack, chimney, wires or
other structure or appurtenance thereto of any kind or character or to
plant or replant any tree or other object of natural growth within the
boundary of the hazard area of said airport without first obtaining a
permit from the Building Official of Seward, Nebraska.
B. Application forms. Application for a permit as required under these
regulations shall be made upon a form to be available in the office of the
Building Official, Seward, Nebraska, and shall indicate the approximate
location, ground elevation with reference to the elevation at the end of
the nearest runway or landing strip and height of the proposed
structure or planting.
A. Nonconforming structures. Within the hazard area as hereinbefore
defined, no nonconforming building, transmission line, communication
line, pole, tree, tower, smokestack, chimney, wires or other structure or
appurtenance thereto of any kind or character or object of natural
growth shall hereafter be replaced, substantially reconstructed,
repaired, altered, replanted or allowed to grow, as the case may be, to a
height which constitutes a greater hazard to air navigation than existed
before these regulations were adopted; if such structures or objects of
natural growth have been torn down, destroyed, have deteriorated or
decayed to an extent of 80% or more, or abandoned for a period of 12
months or more. "Transmission lines" and "communication lines" as
referred to in these regulations shall be interpreted to mean all poles,
wires, guys and all other equipment necessary for the operation and
maintenance of same within the zone regulated.
B. Marking of nonconforming structures. Whenever the Building Official
shall determine, or shall be notified by the Joint Zoning Board or the
Nebraska Department of Aeronautics, that a specific nonconforming
structure or object exists and has existed prior to the passage of these
regulations and within the zones area hereinbefore described at such
height or in such position as to constitute a hazard to the safe operation
of aircraft landing at or taking off from said airport, the owner or
owners and the lessor or lessors of the premises on which such
§ 410-30.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-30.5
1:861
§ 410-30.6. Administration.
structure or object is located shall be notified in writing by the Building
Official and shall within a reasonable time permit the marking thereof
by suitable lights or other signals designated by the Building Official.
The cost of such marking shall not be assessed against the owner or
lessor of said premises.
A. Administrative agency. The Building Official of the City of Seward,
Nebraska, shall administer and enforce these regulations and shall be
the administrative agency provided for in Neb. RS 3-319, and shall have
all the powers and perform all the duties of the administrative agency
as provided by the Joint Airport Zoning Board.
B. Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment of the City of Seward,
Nebraska, shall be the Board of Adjustment with respect to these
regulations, to have and exercise the powers conferred by Neb. RS
3-320, and such other powers and duties as are conferred and imposed
by law.
§ 410-30.5 SEWARD CODE § 410-30.6
1:862
Part 4
Supplemental Use And Development Regulations
ARTICLE 31
Supplemental Use Regulations
§ 410-31.1. Purpose.
The supplemental use regulations set forth additional standards for certain
uses located within the various zoning districts. These regulations
recognize that certain use types have characteristics that require additional
controls in order to protect public health, safety, and welfare. These
regulations complement the use regulations contained in Articles 4 through
19 of this chapter.
§ 410-31.2. Agricultural uses.476 [Amended 4-15-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-8]
Nothing in these provisions shall relieve any property owner or user from
satisfying any condition or requirement associated with a previous
approval, conditional use permit, variance, development permit, or other
permit issued under any local, state, or federal ordinance or statute.
A. Crop production in nonagricultural districts. Crop production is a
permitted interim use in any zoning district.
B. Horticulture and crop production: retail sales. Retail operation of
garden centers or roadside stands associated with a primary
agricultural use may be permitted in the AG District, subject to the
following requirements:
(1) Garden centers.
(a) A garden center is a building or premises used for the retail
sale of plant materials or items useful in the growing or display
of lawns, gardens, and plants.
(b) Garden centers must conform to all site development
regulations for the zoning district.
(c) Any garden center adjacent to a residential district must
maintain a twenty-foot landscaped bufferyard, consistent with
the standards established in § 410-33.5.
(2) Roadside stands.
(a) A roadside stand is a facility used on a temporary or seasonal
basis for the retail sale of produce grown largely on adjacent or
surrounding agricultural lands.
476. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-31.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-31.2
1:863
(b) A roadside stand may be located within a required front yard
but no closer than 40 feet to the edge of a traveled roadway.
(c) A roadside stand may operate for a maximum of 180 days in
any one year.
C. Animal production in the RR District.
(1) Breeding and raising of small animals and fowl, such as birds,
rabbits, chinchillas, and hamsters, is permitted in the RR District,
provided that any building housing such animals shall be at least 50
feet from any property line and 25 feet from any dwelling unit on
the site. Any such activity must be located entirely within a rear
yard. The raising of fowl shall be limited to 50 birds per acre, up to
a maximum of 500 birds.
(2) Within the RR District, any lot of one acre and over may maintain
one horse, llama, or other equine and/or hoofed animal and its
immature offspring. Such a lot may have one additional animal for
each additional two acres of lot area, up to a maximum total of 10
animals. No stable shall be located closer than 50 feet to any
dwelling unit on the site or 50 feet to any property line.
D. Animal production: separation from residential uses.
(1) Animal production use types may not be established within 500 feet
of a preexisting residential districts, including RR through RM.
(2) No feeding or disposal of garbage, rubbish, or offal associated with
animal production shall occur within 500 feet of any preexisting
residential districts, including RR through RM.
E. Confined Animal Feeding Operations (CAFO).
(1) No new confined animal feeding operations shall be established
within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Seward.
(2) A CAFO that is lawfully in existence on the effective date of this
chapter may continue to operate as a permitted use in an AG
District. Operation and expansion of such a facility shall be subject
to the following requirements:
(a) Any expansion must maintain a minimum setback of 500 feet
from the property line of its parcel and a minimum separation
of 1,760 feet from any residential, commercial, or industrial
structure other than that of the owner of the facility.
Separations shall be measured between the nearest points of
the CAFO expansion and any affected structure.
(b) Livestock wastes shall be removed or disposed of by spraying
or spreading on land promptly followed by discing or plowing;
grinding or dehydrating in properly designed dehydrators; or
§ 410-31.2 SEWARD CODE § 410-31.2
1:864
§ 410-31.3. Residential uses.
composting in a facility located at least two miles from a
residential zoning district.
(c) Insect and rodent control mechanisms shall be instituted for
confined areas by removal or disposal of manure; or by other
accepted pest control methods.
(d) All ground surfaces within CAFO areas shall be graded and
compacted to provide proper drainage. No appreciable amount
of surface runoff from CAFO areas shall be carried into a
roadway ditch, drainage area, or other low-lying area.
(e) Water shall be retained on site to prevent runoff onto
neighboring properties except in the event of a storm event
with a four-percent or smaller probability of occurrence within
any twenty-four-hour period, corresponding to a twenty-fiveyear
flood level.
(f) A CAFO shall not produce measurable increases in pollution in
any public water-based recreation facility, public water supply,
or any waterway that is part of a public or private water supply.
(3) General standards and conditional use permit application
requirements.
(a) All aspects of the CAFO operation shall comply with the
standards of the Nebraska Department of Environmental
Quality.
(b) Expansion of a lawfully existing CAFO is subject to approval of
a conditional use permit. All expansions, alterations, or
modifications of existing CAFOs shall comply with the setback
and separation requirements set forth in this section. The
conditional use permit application for expansion shall include
certification of plan review and approval by the Nebraska
Department of Environmental Quality; a site plan indicating
the location and maximum area of the confined area; and a
detailed description of operations that specifies the maximum
number and type of livestock to be confined, waste disposal
plans, drainage plans, and pollution control measures.
(c) A transfer of ownership and/or operator of an existing CAFO
shall require application and approval of a conditional use
permit, and compliance with the standards of this section.
A. Separation from CAFOs. No new residential use shall be established
within 1,760 feet of an existing CAFO, except for the residence of the
owner or operator of the CAFO, employee, or working tenant.
§ 410-31.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-31.3
1:865
B. Downtown and group residential in CBD District. [Amended
7-20-2010 by Ord. No. 17-10]
(1) Downtown and group residential uses are permitted in the CBD
District only on levels above street level. A unit or units specifically
designed for occupancy by disabled residents may be developed at
street level subject to approval by the Board of Adjustments.
(2) Exception: A downtown street level residential unit specifically
designated for the building owner's residential use may be
developed under a conditional use permit, provided that such
dwelling unit meet all of the following conditions. (Note:
Conditional use would mandate a recommendation for approval by
the Planning Commission and approval by the City Council):
(a) The unit must be occupied by the owner of the building and
may not be used as a rental unit for other residential purposes.
(b) Access to the unit shall not be acquired through the store
frontage. Access must be gained by a separate ingress and
egress system. In addition, no part or portion of the residential
dwelling shall be visible to the public from the street
storefront, either by window, door or other type of opening.
(c) Minimum height, area regulations, light and ventilation
requirements, and egress requirements set forth in the
prevailing building codes are met.
(d) A minimum of two off-street parking spaces must be provided.
(e) Must meet applicable fire separation requirements between
any adjacent occupancies that may come about as a result of
the development of the residential unit.
C. Group residential. Group residential and boardinghouse uses, when
permitted, are subject to the requirements set forth in Table 31A.
§ 410-31.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-31.3
1:866
Table 31A
Group Residential and Boardinghouse Density Requirements
by Zoning District
Zoning
District
Terms of
Permitted Use
Maximum
Number of
Unrelated
Persons in
Structure
Minimum
Floor Area
per
Resident
(square
feet)
Minimum
Site Area
per
Resident
(square
feet)
AG Special use for
group residential
5 500 1,500
R-2 Special use for
group residential
6 350 1,000
R-3 Special use for
group residential
10 300 850
R-4 Permitted for
group residential,
special use for
boardinghouse
15 250 650
RM Special use for
group residential
6 350 1,000
UC, C-1
and
C-1(N)
Special use for
group residential
10 300 650
D. Mobile home parks in the RM District. Mobile home parks and mobile
home residential use are permitted in the RM District. Such use may be
configured in a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision.
Following the effective date of this chapter, no mobile home shall be
located outside of a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision. A
mobile home park is subject to compliance with the following
regulations:
(1) Certification.
(a) A certification of compliance with all ordinances and
regulations regarding mobile home licensing, zoning, health,
plumbing, electrical, building, fire protection and any other
applicable requirements shall be required of all mobile home
parks.
(b) The Building Official is authorized to perform an annual
inspection of any mobile home park to ensure compliance with
these regulations.
§ 410-31.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-31.3
1:867
(c) These regulations do not address the structural integrity of any
units within a mobile home park. Compliance with these
regulations does not represent City warrant of the structural
integrity of any structure or unit in such a facility.
(2) Minimum and maximum area. A mobile home park shall be
considered to be one zoned lot. The minimum contiguous area of a
mobile home park shall be two acres.
(3) Density requirements.
(a) The maximum gross density of a mobile home park shall be
seven units per acre.
(b) The minimum size of an individual mobile home space shall be
4,000 square feet for single-wide mobile home units and 5,000
square feet for double-wide mobile home units.
(c) Each mobile home space shall have a width of at least 40 feet
and a length of at least 75 feet.
(4) Site development standards.
(a) Setbacks. Each mobile home park shall have a minimum
perimeter setback of 30 feet. No space for a dwelling unit or
any other structure shall be permitted in the required setback.
(b) Setback landscaping. All area contained within the required
setbacks, except sidewalks and private drives, shall be
landscaped and screened in conformance with Article 33 of
this chapter.
(c) Impervious coverage. Impervious coverage for a mobile home
park shall not exceed 60% of the total site area.
(d) Open space. Each mobile home park shall provide a minimum
of 400 square feet of open recreational space per unit. Such
space shall be provided at a central location accessible from all
parts of the park by pedestrians. Required perimeter setbacks
or buffers shall not be credited toward the fulfillment of this
requirement.
(e) Separation between mobile home units. The minimum
separation between a mobile home unit and attached
accessory structure and any other mobile home units and/or
accessory structure shall be 20 feet.
(f) Separation and setbacks for accessory buildings. An accessory
building on a mobile home space shall maintain a minimum
rear and side yard setback of five feet. A minimum distance of
10 feet shall be provided between any mobile home and an
unattached accessory building.
§ 410-31.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-31.3
1:868
(5) Street access and circulation requirements.
(a) Access to public street. Each mobile home park must abut and
have access to a dedicated public street with a right-of-way of
at least 60 feet. Direct access to a mobile home space from a
public street is prohibited.
(b) Vehicular circulation. The mobile home park must provide
interior vehicular circulation on a private internal street
system. Minimum interior street width shall be 27 feet. The
street system shall be continuous and connected with other
internal and public streets; or shall have a cul-de-sac with a
minimum diameter of 100 feet. No such culs-de-sac may
exceed 300 feet in length.
(c) Separation between units and circulation areas. The minimum
distance between a mobile home unit and any attached
accessory structure and the pavement of an internal street or
parking area shall be 10 feet.
(d) Sidewalks. Each mobile home park shall provide a sidewalk
system to connect each mobile home space to common
buildings or community facilities constructed for the use of its
residents; and to the fronting public right-of-way. Sidewalk
width shall be at least four feet.
(e) Street and sidewalk standards. All internal streets and
sidewalks shall be hard-surfaced. Electric streetlighting is
required along all internal streets.477
(6) Utilities.
(a) All mobile home parks shall provide individual units and
common facilities with an adequate, piped supply of hot and
cold water for both drinking and domestic purposes; and
standard electrical service, providing at least one 120-volt and
one 240-volt electrical service outlet to each mobile home
space.
(b) Complete water and sewer service shall be provided within
each mobile home park in accordance with Part 8, Subdivision
Regulations, of this chapter.
(c) Properly spaced and operating fire hydrants shall be provided
for proper fire protection within each mobile home park in
accordance with Part 8, Subdivision Regulations, of this
chapter.
477. Editor's Note: Original Subsection (f), Parking requirements, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I).
§ 410-31.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-31.3
1:869
(d) All electric, telephone, gas, and other utility lines shall be
installed underground.
(7) Foundation requirements.
(a) All mobile homes shall be secured to the ground by tie-downs
and ground anchors that comply with the requirements of the
Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services.
(b) All mobile homes shall be blocked at a maximum of ten-foot
centers around the perimeter of each unit; such blocking shall
provide sixteen-inch by sixteen-inch bearing on the stand.
(c) Pads shall be a hard surface capable of carrying the weight and
of sufficient length to support all blocking points of the mobile
home.
(d) Each home shall be skirted within 30 days of its placement in
the park. Skirting materials shall be compatible with the
exterior finish of the mobile home.
(8) Financial responsibility. Each application for a mobile home park
shall include a demonstration by the developer of financial
capability to complete the project; and a construction schedule.
(9) Completion schedule. Construction must begin on any approved
mobile home park within one year of the date of approval by the
Planning Commission and City Council. Such construction shall be
completed within two years of approval, unless otherwise extended
by the Commission.
E. Mobile home subdivisions in the MH District.
(1) Mobile home subdivisions shall be developed in accordance with all
standards and requirements set forth in Part 8, Subdivision
Regulations, of this chapter. Site development regulations shall be
the same as those required in the R-2 Zoning District. Each mobile
home shall be considered a single-family detached residential unit
for the purpose of determining applicable development regulations.
(2) Mobile home units within mobile home subdivisions shall be built in
accordance with the minimum design standards of the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development and display
a certification of such compliance. All units shall be installed on a
permanent foundation with complete removal of wheels and towing
packages.
F. Retirement residence.
(1) Maximum floor area ratio is 0.5 for buildings up to and including
three stories. The number of living units and occupants is
determined by floor area ratio rather than site area per unit
regulators. For example, the maximum gross floor area of a
§ 410-31.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-31.3
1:870
§ 410-31.4. Civic uses.
retirement residence on a 100,000 square foot site is 50,000 square
feet.
(2) Any action that would result in occupancy of the project by persons
less than 60 years of age requires approval of a conditional use
permit by the City Council following a recommendation by the
Planning Commission.478
G. Two-family residential. Where permitted, two-family residential
development is subject to the following regulations:
(1) The second dwelling unit shall be located to the rear of the site and
shall be separated from the primary dwelling unit by 25 feet.
(2) The second dwelling unit shall be served by a driveway at least 10
feet in width, leading from the public way adjacent to the lot.479
(3) Both structures shall meet all other setback requirements of the
zoning district.
A. Clubs. Clubs located adjacent to residential uses shall maintain a
bufferyard of not less than 15 feet along the common boundary with
such residential use.
B. Day-care centers (general).
(1) Each day-care center (general) must be validly licensed by either
the State of Nebraska or the appropriate governmental agency.
(2) Each facility shall provide a minimum of 50 square feet of outdoor
play area per child, fully enclosed by a fence or wall that is at least
42 inches but not more than 72 inches in height. Play areas shall be
easily accessible from the main facility and be free of hazards,
including potential traffic hazards.
(3) Conditional use permit applications for general day-care centers
shall specify the number and projected ages of children to be cared
for at the facility, and the number of projected full- and part-time
staff.480
C. Group-care facilities and group homes.
(1) Each group-care facility or group home must be validly licensed by
either the State of Nebraska or the appropriate governmental
agency.
478. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
479. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
480. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-31.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-31.4
1:871
§ 410-31.5. Commercial uses.
(2) Group homes are permitted in the CBD District only on levels above
street level, except that a facility specifically designed for
occupancy by disabled residents may be developed at street level,
subject to approval as a conditional use by the Planning
Commission.
A. Auto service, repair, equipment repair, travel center, truck stop, and
body repair uses. [Amended 2-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05]
(1) Where permitted in commercial districts, all repair activities,
including oil drainage, lifts, and other equipment, must take place
within a completely enclosed building. Outdoor storage is
permitted only where incidental to auto repair and body repair,
provided that such storage is completely screened so as not to be
visible from residential areas or public rights-of-way. Screening is
subject to provisions of Article 33 of this chapter.
(2) Any spray painting must take place within structures designed for
that purpose and be approved by the Building Official.
(3) All entrances and exits serving a gasoline or diesel service station,
convenience store offering fuel sales, or automobile repair shop
shall be at least 150 feet from a school, public park, religious
assembly use, hospital, or residential use, as measured along any
public street. Such access shall be at least 40 feet away from the
right-of-way line of any intersection.
(4) All fuel pumps shall be set back at least 15 feet from any street line.
B. Automobile, RV, and equipment rental and sales.
(1) All outdoor display areas for rental and sales facilities shall be
hard-surfaced, unless screened from casual view as provided by
§ 410-33.6.
(2) Body repair services are permitted as an accessory use to
automobile rental and sales facilities, provided that such repair
services shall not exceed 25% of the gross floor area of the
building.
C. Bed-and-breakfasts.
(1) When permitted in residential districts, bed-and-breakfasts shall
include a maximum of four guest units and the residence of the
facility owner.
(2) Bed-and-breakfasts permitted in the CBD District must provide any
sleeping facility only on levels above street level, except that units
specifically designed and reserved for occupancy by handicapped
people may be located on the street level.
§ 410-31.4 SEWARD CODE § 410-31.5
1:872
D. Campgrounds.
(1) Minimum size. Each campground established after the effective
date of this chapter shall have a minimum size of one acre.
(2) Setbacks. All campgrounds shall maintain a fifty-foot front yard
setback and a twenty-five-foot bufferyard from all other property
lines.
(3) Each campground must maintain water supply, sewage disposal,
and water and toilet facilities in compliance with all City
ordinances; or, alternately, be limited to use by self-contained
campers, providing their own on-board water and disposal systems.
E. Construction sales and service. Retail home improvement stores and
centers may include outdoor storage of materials and must comply with
the following conditions:
(1) Architectural design and materials shall be consistent with the
current or projected character of the surrounding area.
(2) All outside storage or display of merchandise or other materials or
equipment shall be screened from view at eye level from a public
street or adjacent property.
(3) All storage buildings with overhead doors, drive openings, or open
bays and all loading areas shall be fully screened from view at eye
level from a public street or adjacent property.
(4) Minimum screening shall be consistent with screening standards
set forth in § 410-33.6.
(5) All areas not occupied by buildings or landscaping shall be paved
with concrete or asphalt, or surfaced with gravel or similar
treatment to reduce dust.
F. Convenience storage. When permitted outside of the I-2 District,
convenience storage facilities shall be subject to the following
additional requirements:
(1) Activities within the facility shall be limited to the rental of storage
cubicles and the administration and maintenance of the facility.
(2) All driveways within the facility shall provide a paved surface with
a minimum width of 25 feet.
(3) All storage must be within enclosed buildings and shall not include
the storage of hazardous materials.
(4) No storage buildings may open into required front yards.
(5) Facilities must maintain landscaped bufferyards of 30 feet adjacent
to any public right-of-way and 20 feet adjacent to other property
lines, unless greater setbacks are required by Article 33.
§ 410-31.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-31.5
1:873
G. Kennels.
(1) The minimum lot size shall be two acres.
(2) No dog runs or exterior kennels shall be located nearer than 50 feet
to any property line and 100 feet to the property line of any
residential use or district. [Amended 9-17-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-26]
(3) All kennel facilities shall be screened around such facilities or at
property lines to prevent distracting or exciting animals. Screening
shall be of a type provided by Article 33, establishing landscape
and screening standards.
H. Restricted (adult entertainment) businesses. Adult entertainment
businesses shall be subject to the following restrictions, and no person
shall cause or permit the establishment of any adult entertainment
business contrary to said restrictions:481
(1) No adult entertainment business shall be open for business
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
(2) A new adult entertainment business shall not be allowed within
1,000 feet of an existing adult entertainment business.
(3) A new adult entertainment business shall not be located within 500
feet of any residentially zoned district or 1,000 feet of a preexisting
school, public park, or place of worship.
(4) The provisions of this subsection shall apply to any adult
entertainment businesses in existence at the time the ordinance
codified in this chapter takes effect. All nonconformance shall come
into compliance on or before January 1, 2005, and no such
nonconforming use shall be permitted to expand in size or scope
and the rights granted in this chapter shall terminate upon
cessation of business, sale or transfer of ownership of the adult
entertainment business.
(5) Measurement of distances. For the purpose of this subsection,
measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the main entrance of such
adult entertainment business to the point on the property line of
such other business, school, church, public park or areas zoned for
residential use which is closest to the main entrance of such adult
entertainment business.
(6) No adult entertainment business shall be conducted in any manner
that permits the observation of models or any material depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas by display, decoration, sign, show window or
481. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 329, Sexually Oriented Businesses.
§ 410-31.5 SEWARD CODE § 410-31.5
1:874
§ 410-31.6. Industrial uses.
other opening from any public way or from any property not
licensed as an adult use. No operator of an adult entertainment
business or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent,
owner, or employee of such business shall engage in any activity
or conduct or permit any other person to engage in any activity or
conduct in or about the premises which is prohibited by this code
or any laws of the state or the United States.
(7) No part of the interior of the adult entertainment business shall be
visible from any pedestrian sidewalk, walkway, street, or other
public or semi-public area.
(8) An adult entertainment business shall post a sign at the entrance of
the premises, which shall state the nature of the business and shall
state that no one under the age of 18 years is allowed on the
premises. The sign shall comply with the City's sign regulations.482
This section shall not be construed to prohibit the owner from
establishing an older age limitation for coming on the premises.
(9) Nuisance operation. Any adult entertainment business operated,
conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter
shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public
nuisance, and the City Attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of
prosecuting a criminal action under this chapter, commence an
action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement,
removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner prescribed by law,
and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or
courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or
remove such establishment and restrain and enjoin any person
from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment
business contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
A. Resource extraction. Resource extraction, where permitted, is subject
to the following additional requirements:
(1) Erosion control. A resource extraction use may not increase the
amount of storm run-off onto adjacent properties as determined by
review of the Zoning Administrator. Erosion control facilities,
including retention and sediment basins, are required of each
facility, if necessary, to meet this standard.
(2) Surface drainage. The surface of the use may not result in the
collection or ponding of water, unless specifically permitted as part
of a conditional use permit.483
482. Editor's Note: See Part 7, Signs, of this chapter.
483. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-31.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-31.6
1:875
(3) Storage of topsoil. Topsoil shall be collected and stored for
redistribution following the end of the operation.
(4) Elimination of hazards. Excavation shall not result in a hazard to
any person or property. The following measures are required:
(a) Restoration of slopes to a gradient not exceeding 33% as soon
as possible.
(b) Installation of perimeter safety screening and/or fencing.
(c) Installation of visual screening adjacent to any property within
a residential or public use district consistent with bufferyard
standards contained in Article 33. Resource extraction uses in
the AG District shall be subject to the same bufferyard
requirements as those in the I-2 District.
(5) Restoration of landscape. The topography and soil of the resource
extraction site shall be restored and stabilized within nine months
of completion of the operation. The site shall be seeded, planted,
and contoured in a way that prevents erosion. Alternately, the site
may be used as a lake or body of water, subject to approval by the
City Council with the recommendation of the Planning Commission
and the appropriate Natural Resources District.
B. Salvage services and long-term vehicle storage and dismantling.
(1) Screening.
(a) The perimeter of each new facility shall be fully enclosed by
opaque, freestanding fencing or screen walls. The minimum
height of this enclosure shall be eight feet. Any such enclosure
shall be constructed behind required landscaped bufferyards.
(b) Each existing salvage services facility shall be screened as
provided above within one year of the effective date of this
chapter.
(c) The above requirement shall also apply to uses adjacent to
residential zoning districts or residential uses that include the
long-term storage and dismantling of vehicles.
(2) Storage of materials within any salvage services facility may not be
higher than the height of the surrounding screen fence or wall.
(3) No new salvage services use may be established within 500 feet of
the nearest property line of a preexisting residential zoning district
or of any pre-established civic use.
C. Vehicle storage. [Added 2-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05]
(1) Setback: All vehicle storage facilities shall be set back a minimum
of 300 feet from the right-of-way of Highways 15 and 34.
§ 410-31.6 SEWARD CODE § 410-31.6
1:876
§ 410-31.7. Performance standards in Industrial Districts.
The following performance standards apply to all industrial uses permitted
within an Industrial Zoning District:
(2) Fencing: All vehicle storage facilities will have a secure fencing
system made from approved materials set forth herein.
(3) Screening: All vehicle storage facilities when adjacent to a lower
density zoning district shall utilize screening as set forth in Article
33.
(4) Mobilization: All vehicles in a vehicle storage facility shall be
operable and able to legally travel upon the streets and highways of
the City of Seward and State of Nebraska.
A. Physical appearance. All operations shall be carried on within an
enclosed building except that new materials or equipment in operable
condition may be stored outside. Normal daily inorganic wastes may be
stored outside in containers, provided that such containers are not
visible from the street.
B. Fire hazard. No operation shall involve the use of highly flammable
gases, corrosive materials, strong acids or bases, liquids, or inherent
fire hazards. This prohibition shall not apply to the normal use of
heating or motor fuels and welding gases when handled in accordance
with the regulations of Seward County and the City of Seward.
C. Maximum permitted sound levels adjacent to residential zoning
districts. No operation in the I-1 District shall generate sound levels in
excess of 65 dbA between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., and 55
dbA between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., measured at the
boundary of a residential district. All noises shall be muffled so as not to
be objectionable because of intermittence, beat frequency, or shrillness.
D. Sewage and wastes. No operation shall discharge into a sewer,
drainageway, or the ground any material, which is radioactive,
poisonous, detrimental to normal sewer plant operation, or corrosive to
sewer pipes and installations.
E. Air contaminants. No material may be discharged into the air from any
source in such quantity as to cause injury, detriment, nuisance, or
annoyance to any considerable number of people or to the public in
general; or to endanger the health, comfort, or safety of any
considerable number of people or to the public in general; or to damage
other businesses, vegetation, or property.
F. Odor. The emission of odors determined by the Planning Commission to
be obnoxious to most people shall be prohibited. Such odors shall be
measured at the property line of the operation.
§ 410-31.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-31.7
1:877
§ 410-31.8. Telecommunications towers. [Amended 4-3-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-10]
In any district where radio, television, microwave, cellular, or other
communications towers are allowed as a permitted or conditional permit
use, such towers are subject to the following additional requirements:
G. Gases. No release of noxious or poisonous gases shall be permitted
except as provided in this section. Measurements taken at the property
line of the operation shall not exceed five parts per million for sulfur
dioxide or carbon monoxide or one part per million for hydrogen sulfide.
H. Vibration. All machines shall be mounted to minimize vibration. No
measurable vibration shall occur at the property line of the operation
which exceeds a displacement of 0.003 inch.
I. Glare and heat. All glare generated by a use shall be shielded or
directed so as not to be visible at the property line of the operation. No
heat may be generated from an operation that raises the air
temperature at the property line of the operation by more than 5° F.
above the ambient air temperature.
J. Storage of chemical products. If allowed by conditional use permit, any
above- or below-ground storage of liquid petroleum products or
chemicals of a flammable or noxious nature shall not exceed 150,000
gallons when stored on one lot less than one acre. Such storage shall
not exceed 25,000 gallons in any one tank. Storage of liquid petroleum
products or chemicals of a flammable or noxious nature in excess of
25,000 gallons shall be located at least 50 feet from any structure
intended for human habitation and at least 200 feet from any
Residential, Office, or Commercial Zoning District. [Amended
4-3-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-10]
A. Tower siting.
(1) It is the policy of the City of Seward to encourage co-location of
new communications towers with existing towers or as part of
suitable existing structures. All applications for approval of a
communications tower location shall include evidence that all
potential alternatives for location on existing towers have been
explored and exhausted. Applicants may not be denied space on an
existing tower within the City of Seward and its jurisdiction unless
mechanical, structural, regulatory factors, or legitimate business
expansion plans prohibit co-location.
(2) The applicant for a communications tower location is required to
demonstrate as part of its application that the tower must be
located on the proposed site in order to satisfy its function in the
company's system. The applicant must also demonstrate that the
proposed height is the minimum height necessary for the
successful functioning of the tower.
§ 410-31.7 SEWARD CODE § 410-31.8
1:878
B. Tower setbacks, design, and height.
(1) Freestanding towers shall be located so that the distance from the
base of the tower to any adjoining property line or the supporting
structure of a separate neighboring tower is a minimum of 100% of
the tower height. The Planning Commission may recommend and
the City Council approve a reduction to the setback with a
conditional use permit if they determine that such reduction does
not constitute a hazard to safety or property on adjacent properties
or rights-of-way.
(2) The tower installation shall be designed to be aesthetically and
architecturally compatible with the built environment of the City of
Seward. The City encourages efforts to hide towers or restrict their
visibility from public rights-of-way or neighboring properties.
Associated support buildings shall be designed with materials that
are consistent with those in the surrounding neighborhood. Metal
exteriors shall generally not be permitted for accessory support
buildings.
(3) All tower installations shall maintain landscaped peripheral yards
with a minimum depth of 35 feet from surrounding property lines.
One tree consistent with the provisions of Article 33 shall be
planted for every 500 square feet of required peripheral yard area.
(4) As part of the conditional use permit approval process, the City
Council may permit the tower to exceed the height restrictions
otherwise allowable in the district.
(5) Towers shall have a color generally matching the surroundings or
background that minimizes their visibility, unless a different color
is required by the FCC or FAA.
(6) Lights, signals and signs. No signals, lights or signs shall be
permitted on towers unless required by the FCC or the FAA. Should
lighting be required, at the time of construction of the tower in
cases where there are residential users located within a distance
which is 300% of the height of the tower from the tower, then dualmode
lighting shall be requested from the FAA. Lighting on towers
shall not exceed the minimum requirements of the FAA or other
regulatory agencies.
(7) Adequate security measures are required at the base of the tower
to prevent vandalism or hazards resulting from casual access to the
facility.
C. City site selection criteria in evaluating applications for
communications towers.
(1) Consistent with the policy of this chapter, the telecommunications
company proposing to construct an antenna support structure, or
mount an antenna on an existing structure, shall demonstrate,
§ 410-31.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-31.8
1:879
using technological evidence, that the antenna must go where it
is proposed in order to satisfy its function in the company's grid
system. Further, the company must demonstrate by technological
evidence that the height requested is the minimum height
necessary.
(2) Applications for necessary permits will only be processed when the
applicant demonstrates that it is either an FCC-licensed
telecommunications provider or has in place necessary agreements
with an FCC-licensed telecommunications provider for use or lease
of the support structure.
(3) Personal wireless service facilities should be located and designed
to minimize any impacts on residential property values. Sites
should be placed in locations where the existing topography,
vegetation, buildings or other structures provide the greatest
amount of screening.
(4) Location and design of sites in all districts should consider the
impact of the site on the surrounding neighborhood and the visual
impact within the zone district. In residential districts and
residential land use areas, the minimum lot size for towers shall be
three acres.
D. Priorities for siting.
(1) The following establishes the order of priorities for locating new
communications facilities:
(a) Public property (excluding prairie, conservation or wildlife
areas, or historic structures).
(b) Appropriate existing structures, such as buildings, towers,
water towers, and smokestacks in other zoned districts.
(c) AG, I-1 or I-2 Districts that do not adjoin or adversely impact
residential neighborhoods.
(d) Private nonresidential property in C-2 or C-3 Districts.
(e) Private, nonresidential properties in C-1 or UC Districts.
(f) Placement of antennas and towers on multifamily residential
structures exceeding 30 feet in height in districts zoned R-3
and R-4.
(g) Residential districts only if locations for which a need has been
demonstrated are not available on existing structures or in
nonresidential districts; and only on or in existing churches,
parks, schools, utility facilities or other appropriate public
facilities.
§ 410-31.8 SEWARD CODE § 410-31.8
1:880
§ 410-31.9. Miscellaneous uses.
(2) An applicant for a new antenna support structure to be located in a
residential zoning district shall demonstrate that a diligent effort
has been made to locate the proposed communications facilities on
a government structure, a private institutional structure, or other
appropriate existing structures within a nonresidential zoning
district, and that due to valid considerations, including physical
constraints, or technological feasibility, no appropriate location is
available. The telecommunications company is required to
demonstrate that it contacted the owners of structures in excess of
30 feet within a one-quarter-mile radius of the site proposed, asked
for permission to install the antenna on those structures, and was
denied for reasons other than economic ones. The information
submitted by the applicant shall include a map of the area to be
served by the tower, its relationship to other antenna sites in the
applicant's network, and an evaluation of existing buildings taller
than 30 feet, towers and water tanks within one-quarter mile of the
proposed tower.
A. Landfills.
(1) Compliance with codes. Each landfill must comply with all relevant
City, county, state, or federal codes and statutes.
(2) Prevention of hazards. No facility shall present a hazard to
surrounding residents or properties.
(3) Drainage and water supply. No landfill may modify or prevent the
flow of major natural drainageways within the jurisdiction of the
City of Seward. Landfills shall not produce a measurable increase
in pollution in any public water-based recreational facility or in any
waterway or well that is a part of a public or private water supply.
(4) Minimum separation from residential uses. No nonputrescible
landfill may be established within 300 feet of a developed
residential or public use. No landfill involving the disposal of
putrescible or septic wastes shall be established within one-quarter
mile of any residential, public, or commercial zoning district; or any
state or federal highway.
(5) Restoration of site. The site of any landfill must be restored,
stabilized, planted, and seeded within six months after the end of
the operation. Dissipation of waste products must be accomplished
in a manner approved by the State of Nebraska's Department of
Environmental Quality.
(6) Toxic waste. The disposal of hazardous, toxic, or radioactive wastes
as defined by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency shall be
prohibited within the City of Seward and its extraterritorial
jurisdiction.
§ 410-31.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-31.9
1:881
§ 410-31.10. Accessory uses.
B. Wind energy conservation systems (WECS).
(1) The distance from all lot lines or any building or power line to any
tower support base of a WECS shall be equal to the sum of the
tower height and the diameter of the rotor. A reduction of this
requirement may be granted as part of a conditional use permit
approval if the City Council, after recommendation by the Planning
Commission, finds that the reduction is consistent with public
health, safety, and welfare.484
(2) The distance between the tower support bases of any two WECS
shall be the minimum of five rotor lengths, determined by the size
of the largest rotor. A reduction of this requirement may be granted
as part of a conditional use permit approval if the City Council,
after recommendation by the Planning Commission, finds that the
reduction does not impede the operation of either WECS.485
(3) Any tower or rotor shall maintain a distance of at least 100
horizontal feet from any structure, power line, or antenna located
on another property.
(4) The WECS operation shall not interfere with radio, television,
computer, or other electronic operations on adjacent properties.
(5) A fence eight feet high with a locking gate shall be placed around
any WECS tower base; or the tower climbing apparatus shall begin
no lower than 12 feet above ground.
(6) The height of the WECS may exceed the height restrictions of the
base district by up to 50%. The bottom tip of any rotor must be at
least 10 feet above any area accessible to pedestrians.
A. Home-based businesses; home occupations. Home-based businesses
and home occupations are permitted as an accessory use in residential
units and must register and obtain a permit from the office of the
Building Inspector on an annual basis, subject to the following
conditions:
(1) External effects.
(a) There shall be no change in the exterior appearance of the
building or premises housing the home occupation other than
signage permitted within this section.
(b) No noise, odors, bright lights, electronic interference, storage
or other external effects attributable to the home occupation
484. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
485. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-31.9 SEWARD CODE § 410-31.10
1:882
shall be noticeable from any adjacent property or public rightof-
way.
(c) The home occupation shall be carried on entirely within the
principal residential structure, or within an accessory
structure that does not exceed 480 square feet in area or 15
feet in height.
(d) Mechanical or electrical equipment supporting the home
occupation shall be limited to that which is self-contained
within the structure and normally used for office, domestic or
household purposes.
(e) No outdoor storage of materials or equipment used in the
home occupation shall be permitted, other than motor vehicles
used by the owner to conduct the occupation. Parking or
storage of heavy commercial vehicles to conduct the home
occupation is prohibited.
(f) No home occupation shall discharge into any sewer,
drainageway, or the ground any material which is radioactive,
poisonous, detrimental to normal sewer plant operation, or
corrosive to sewer pipes and installations.
(2) Employees. The home occupation shall employ no more than one
full-time or part-time employee on site other than the residents of
the dwelling unit, provided that one off-street parking space is
made available for the use of that nonresident employee.486
(3) Extent of use. For all residential and agricultural zoning districts,
the smaller of 25% of the floor area of the dwelling or 480 square
feet may be devoted to the home occupation, inclusive of any
detached accessory buildings used for the home occupation.
(4) Signage. Each home-based business shall be permitted to have one
nonilluminated wall sign not to exceed six square feet in area.
(5) Traffic generation and parking.
(a) Home-based businesses may generate no more than 10 vehicle
trips per day, corresponding to the amount of traffic normally
generated by a dwelling unit.
(b) Deliveries or service by commercial vehicles or trucks rated at
10 tons' gross empty weight is prohibited for any home-based
business located on a local street.
(c) Parking needs generated by a home-based business shall be
satisfied with off-street parking. No more than one vehicle used
in connection with any home occupation shall be parked on the
property. Such parking shall not be located in a required front
486. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-31.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-31.10
1:883
yard. No more than two on-street parking spaces shall be used
by the home occupation at any one time.
(6) Prohibited home-based businesses or home occupations. The
following activities are prohibited as home-based businesses, even
if they meet the other requirements set forth in this section:
[Amended 1-19-2005 by Ord. No. 9-05]
(a) Animal hospitals.
(b) General retail sales.
(c) Restaurants.
(d) Repair shops or service establishments that service major
electrical appliance repair, motorized vehicles repair, small
engines, and related items.
(e) Stables or kennels.
(f) Welding, vehicle body repair, or rebuilding or dismantling of
vehicles.
B. Permitted accessory uses: residential use types.
(1) Conditional use permit: [Added 1-19-2005 by Ord. No. 9-05487]
(a) Barber and beauty shops (see § 410-44.3.)
(2) Residential uses may include the following accessory uses,
activities, and structures on the same lot:
(a) Private garages and parking for the residency use.
(b) Recreational activities and uses by residents.
(c) Home occupations, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(d) Noncommercial convenience services for the primary use of
residents of multifamily uses or mobile home parks, including
laundromats, clubhouses, and post offices.
(e) Garage sales, provided that the frequency of such sales at any
one location is limited to one sale of no more than three days'
duration in a month, and three sales during any twelve-month
period.
C. Permitted accessory uses: civic use types. Guidance services and health
care use types are permitted in the I-1 Limited Industrial Zoning
Districts only as accessory uses to a primary industrial use.
D. Permitted accessory uses: other use types. Other use types may include
the following accessory uses, activities, and structures on the same lot:
487. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-31.10 SEWARD CODE § 410-31.10
1:884
§ 410-31.11. Outdoor storage outside of I-1 and I-2 Districts.
Outdoor storage is prohibited in all zoning districts except the I-1 Limited
Industrial and I-2 General Industrial Zoning Districts, except as provided in
this section.
(1) Parking for the principal use.
(2) Manufacturing or fabrication of products made for sale in a
principal commercial use, provided such manufacturing is totally
contained within the structure housing the principal use.
(3) Services operated for the sole benefit of employees of the principal
use.
E. Permitted accessory uses: agricultural use types.
(1) Garden centers and roadside stands, subject to the regulations set
forth in § 410-31.2.
(2) Other uses and activities necessarily and customarily associated
with the purpose and functions of agricultural uses.
(3) Buildings that directly serve and are required for the conduct of
crop and animal production are exempt from requirements for
building permits and inspections. Structures that house other uses
are subject to the requirements of this chapter, even if located on
property zoned or primarily zoned or used for agricultural
purposes.
A. Agricultural use types. Outdoor storage is permitted only where
incidental to agricultural uses.
B. Residential uses and property. Except as otherwise provided by this
chapter, any goods, equipment, materials, machinery, and parts thereof
stored on any residentially zoned property must be stored in completely
enclosed buildings or in spaces screened by fencing and/or evergreen
shrubbery providing at least an 80% screen and having a height of no
less than six feet nor more than eight feet.
C. Civic use types. Outdoor storage is permitted only where incidental to
maintenance facilities, or in completely enclosed buildings or in spaces
screened by fencing and/or evergreen shrubbery providing at least an
80% screen and having a height of no less than six feet nor more than
eight feet.
D. Commercial use types.
(1) Outdoor storage is permitted where incidental to agricultural sales
and service, auto rentals and sales, construction sales and service,
equipment sales and service, stables and kennels, and surplus
sales.
§ 410-31.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-31.11
1:885
§ 410-31.12. Temporary uses.
(2) Outdoor storage is permitted where incidental to auto services,
equipment repair, long-term vehicle storage, and body repair,
provided that such storage is completely screened at property lines
by an opaque barrier, as set forth in § 410-33.6. This provision shall
apply to any auto services, equipment repair, or body repair use
established after the effective date of this chapter.
E. Industrial and miscellaneous use types.
(1) Outdoor storage is permitted where it is incidental to industrial
uses within the AG and I-1 Zoning Districts. Any such outdoor
storage is subject to screening requirements set forth in Article 33.
(2) Outdoor storage is permitted where incidental to landfills.
A. Purpose. These provisions are intended to permit occasional, temporary
uses and activities, when consistent with the objectives of the Unified
Land Development Ordinance and compatible with surrounding uses.
They are further intended to prevent temporary uses from assuming the
character of permanent uses.
B. Temporary use types. The following temporary uses are permitted,
subject to the regulations contained within these sections:
(1) Model homes or apartments, if contained within the development
to which they pertain.
(2) Development sales offices. Such offices may remain in place until
90% of the lots or units within the development are sold and may
not be located within a mobile home or manufactured home/
structure.
(3) Public assemblies, displays, and exhibits.
(4) Commercial circuses, carnivals, fairs, festivals, or other transient
events, provided that events are located on property owned by the
sponsoring nonprofit organization, or are located within an AG,
C-1, C-2, CBD, I-1 or I-2 Zoning District. Such uses shall not exceed
three weeks in duration.
(5) Outdoor art shows and exhibits.
(6) Seasonal sales, including Christmas tree or other holiday-related
merchandise sales lots, provided that such facilities are not located
in a residential zoning district.
(7) Construction site offices, if located on the construction site itself.
(8) Outdoor special sales, provided that such sales operate no more
than three days in the same week and five days in the same month;
and are located in commercial or industrial zoning districts.
§ 410-31.11 SEWARD CODE § 410-31.12
1:886
§ 410-31.13. Shipping containers. [Added 11-20-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-19]
Shipping containers placed on any site shall comply with the provisions of
this section, except that portable moving containers/moving pods placed on
private property for no more than 30 days in any twelve-month period shall
not be regulated by this chapter.
(9) Construction batch plants in the I-1 District, provided that:
(a) No plant may be located within 600 feet of a developed
residential use, park or school.
(b) The facility is located no more than one mile from its job site.
The Zoning Administrator may extend this distance to two
miles, if such extension avoids use of local streets by plantrelated
vehicles.
(c) Hours of operation do not exceed 12 hours per day.
(d) The duration of the plant's operation does not exceed 180 days.
(10) Additional temporary uses that the Zoning Administrator
determines to be similar to the previously described uses in this
section.
C. Required conditions of all temporary uses.
(1) Each site shall be left free of debris, litter, or other evidence of the
use upon its completion or removal.
(2) The Zoning Administrator may establish other conditions that he/
she deems necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding land
uses.
A. Agricultural districts. Shipping containers are allowed in Ag districts,
provided that the use is an accessory use to the primary use, and is in
conformance with current permitted zoning uses. Shipping containers
used only for storage do not require a building permit or engineering
foundation.
B. Residential districts. Shipping containers are not allowed in residential
districts. A temporary shipping container can be approved by the
Zoning Administrator or designee, when accessory to a project that has
a valid residential building permit for up to 180 consecutive days for
temporary storage after the building permit is issued.
C. Commercial districts (C-2 Highway Commercial and BP Business Park).
(1) Shipping containers are allowed in C-2 and BP districts under a
special use permit, included with but not limited to the following
requirements:
(a) An approved site plan.
§ 410-31.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-31.13
1:887
(b) Are located in the rear yard of the property for new
construction.
(c) Are not permanently affixed to the ground or installed with an
engineering foundation.
(d) Shipping containers shall only be used for storage of
nonhazardous material and not be used for residential uses,
commercial sales or service, or other use types.
(e) Comply with the screening standards set forth in § 410-33.6.
(f) Shipping containers in existence prior to the adoption of these
regulations will be regulated under Article 43, Nonconforming
Lots, Structures, and Uses.
(2) Shipping containers are not allowed in commercial districts when
the primary use is a nonconforming use.
D. Industrial districts.
(1) Shipping containers are allowed in industrial districts, provided
that the use is in conformance with current permitted zoning uses.
Shipping containers used only for storage do not require a building
permit or engineering foundation.
(2) Shipping containers are not allowed on industrially zoned
properties on which the primary use is a nonconforming use.
E. Construction sites. Shipping containers are allowed on construction
sites in commercial districts, the Urban Corridor Mixed-Use District,
the Central Business District, and industrial districts where there is an
active building permit if accessory to a project with a valid commercial
building permit. The Zoning Administrator or designee may allow
placement of a container at a commercial or industrial building site for
up to one year for temporary storage after the building permit is issued.
F. Similar containers. Look-alike shipping container buildings or metal
buildings marketed as "containers" or "portable storage units" are
regulated as shipping containers to which this section shall apply.
G. Shipping containers on public streets. Placing a shipping container on a
City street or right-of-way is not allowed.
H. Development standards.
(1) A building permit is required prior to placement of a shipping
container(s) larger than 200 square feet in area, ensuring effective
anchoring/foundation according to the then most current edition of
the International Building Code. The application shall show the
proposed cargo container is accessory to the permitted use of the
property and meets the placement criteria for the zone.
§ 410-31.13 SEWARD CODE § 410-31.13
1:888
(2) The setback, height, and lot coverage requirements in the
underlying zoning district shall apply.
(3) The screening standards set forth in § 410-33.6 shall apply.
§ 410-31.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-31.13
1:889

ARTICLE 32
Supplemental Development Regulations
§ 410-32.1. Purpose.
The supplemental site development regulations establish basic
requirements for developable lots, including frontage requirements. They
recognize the existence of special conditions that cannot comply literally
with the site development regulations set out for each zoning district.
Therefore, these regulations qualify or modify the district regulations of this
chapter and provide for specific areas of exception.
§ 410-32.2. Required street frontage.
Except as permitted below, any lot used in whole or part for residential
purposes shall provide a minimum frontage of 20 feet along at least one
public street, or shall possess an exclusive, uninterrupted private easement
of access or right-of-way of at least 20 feet wide to a public street. There
shall not be more than one single-family housing unit for such frontage or
easement. A common easement of access at least 40 feet in width may be
provided for two or more single-family units or for one or more duplex, twofamily,
townhouse, or multiple-family housing units.
§ 410-32.3. Lot size exceptions.
In any district permitting residential use types, a single-family use type may
be located on any lot or plot of official record but nonconforming in size as
of the effective date of this chapter, regardless of its area or width.
§ 410-32.4. Setback adjustments.
A. Lots adjoining alleys. In calculating the depth of a required side or rear
yard setback for a lot adjoining a dedicated public alley, one-half of the
alley may be credited as a portion of the yard. However, no residential
structure may be nearer than five feet to the near side of the alley.
B. Encroachments on required yards. Every part of a required yard shall
be open and unobstructed from finished grade upward, except as
specified herein. [Amended 11-1-2005 by Ord. No. 54-05]
(1) Architectural projections, including roofs that cover porches,
enclosed porches, window sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves, flues
and chimneys, and ornamental features may project two feet into a
required yard.
(2) Uncovered decks, and ornamental features that have no structural
element more than three feet above or below the adjacent ground
level may project six feet into a required front yard. However, all
such projections must be set back at least three feet from an
adjacent side lot line; or 15 feet from any street property line.
§ 410-32.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-32.4
1:891
(3) Window wells, fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, and
balconies opening to fire towers may project a maximum of three
feet into required yards, provided that they do not obstruct the
light and ventilation of adjacent buildings.
(4) For buildings constructed upon a front property line, a cornice may
project into the public right-of-way. Maximum projection is the
smaller of four feet or 5% of the right-of-way width.
(5) Swimming pools shall be subject to the same location and setback
requirements as accessory buildings.488
C. Setback adjustments.
(1) Corner lots.
(a) Required setbacks shall not reduce the buildable width of any
corner lot to less than 24 feet. Appropriate setback
adjustments shall be allowed to maintain this minimum width.
(b) No setback adjustment shall permit encroachment into the
vision clearance triangle.
(2) Conditional use permit approvals. The City Council, following the
recommendation of the Planning Commission, may grant an
exception from the setback requirement for a zoning district for a
conditional use as part of its approval of that use. The limit or
extent of this exception shall be a specific part of the conditional
use permit. [Amended 7-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-21]
D. Double-frontage lots. Residentially zoned double-frontage lots on a
major street, and with no access to that street, may have a twenty-fivefoot
minimum front yard setback along said street. All other doublefrontage
lots must provide full front yard setbacks from each adjacent
street.
E. Satellite antennas.
(1) Antennas with a surface area over 6.3 square feet which are
accessory to a primary use and are designed to receive and
transmit electromagnetic signals, or to receive signals from
satellites, shall not be located within any front yard of the primary
use.
(2) Antennas with a surface area of over 6.3 square feet are subject to
the following additional regulations: [Amended 11-1-2005 by
Ord. No. 54-05]
(a) Such antennas shall be located no less than 10 feet from the
property line of an adjacent property line.
488. Editor's Note: Original Subsection 11.3204.b.6, Garage setbacks, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 4-3-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-10. Original Subsection
11.3204.c, Setbacks on arterial streets, was repelaed 11-1-2005 by Ord. No. 54-05.
§ 410-32.4 SEWARD CODE § 410-32.4
1:892
§ 410-32.5. Accessory buildings and garages. [Amended 11-1-2005
by Ord. No. 54-05]
(b) The maximum height shall be 15 feet and the maximum
diameter shall be 11 feet.
F. Vision clearance triangles. Except in the CBD District, no structure or
obstruction, including fences, walls, or landscape materials, shall be
built to a height of between 24 inches and 10 feet above the established
curb grade on the part of the lot within a vision clearance triangle. The
vision clearance triangle shall be a triangle defined by: [Amended
4-3-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-10]
(1) Twenty feet back from the intersection of curblines and right-ofway
edges of alleys.
(2) Seventy-five feet from the intersection of the center lines of
intersecting local streets.
(3) Ninety feet from the intersection of the center lines of intersecting
collector or arterial streets.
A. Setbacks and setback flexibility. Accessory buildings are subject to all
site development regulations of their zoning district, except as provided
below:
(1) Rear yard. The minimum rear yard setback for accessory buildings
shall be 7.5 feet. The sum of the width of the alley and the rear yard
setback shall be at least 20 feet if the accessory building is a garage
with a vehicular entrance door that is directly oriented toward an
alley. Double-frontage lots shall require front yard setbacks along
both street frontages as required by the individual zoning district.
Easements may be incorporated into these required setbacks. No
accessory building shall be located within any easement or right-ofway
along the rear property line.
(2) Street yards. No accessory building shall be located within 20 feet
from any street right-of-way line.
(3) Garage setbacks. Any garage that fronts on a public street must be
set back at least 20 feet from such street, regardless of the setback
requirement within the zoning district. This shall not be interpreted
to waive a larger required minimum setback required by the zoning
district.
B. Maximum size of residential accessory buildings.
(1) The maximum size of a detached accessory building for a singlefamily
detached, single-family attached, or duplex residential uses
in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-M Districts shall not exceed the
square feet for lots less than one acre in size and 1,200 square for
lots exceeding one acre in size. An accessory building may exceed
§ 410-32.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-32.5
1:893
§ 410-32.6. Height exceptions.
These provisions allow exceptions to the height limit of any zoning district
in certain situations.
these maximums subject to approval of a conditional use permit
and other requirements of this section.489
(2) All accessory buildings on a site, taken together, must comply with
the building coverage requirements for the zoning district.
C. Height of accessory buildings. In residential districts, the maximum
height shall be 16 feet for any accessory building. Maximum height for
a detached garage and/or other accessory building in an AG or RR
District shall be 35 feet.
D. Other requirements for accessory buildings: physical separation,
effects on other properties, hazards, and sequencing of construction.
(1) Separation from other buildings. No accessory building shall be
placed within five feet of any other building on its own property.
(2) Attached accessory buildings. Any accessory building physically
attached to the principal building shall be considered part of the
principal building and subject to the development regulations of its
zoning district, except as modified in this section.
(3) Effect on adjacent properties. If an adjacent lot is built upon, the
accessory building must be entirely to the rear of the line of any
principal building on such adjacent lot.
(4) Hazards. Any accessory use that creates a potential fire hazard
shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from any residential
structure. Such uses include but are not limited to detached
fireplaces, barbecue ovens, or storage of flammable materials.
(5) No accessory building shall be built upon any lot until construction
of the principal building has begun.
A. Vertical projections.
(1) Chimneys, cooling towers, building mechanical equipment,
elevator bulkheads, fire towers, grain elevators, non-parabolic
receiving antennas, tanks, solariums, steeples, penthouses not
exceeding 25% of total roof area, flagpoles, stage towers or scenery
lofts, and water towers may be built to any height in accordance
with existing and future ordinances.
(2) Any such equipment or vertical projections attached to a building
and exceeding the height limit shall be screened to prevent
visibility from a public right-of-way or adjacent property using
489. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-32.5 SEWARD CODE § 410-32.6
1:894
§ 410-32.7. Exceptions for innovative development design.
materials or design features that are consistent with the overall
design of the main building.
(3) No such projection may be built which in the event of failure could
constitute a hazard or fall onto either a public right-of-way or
property or another private property.
B. Civic buildings. Buildings housing civic use types may be built to a
maximum height of 60 feet. Such buildings located in residential
districts shall be set back one foot in addition to required setbacks from
each property line for each foot of height over the maximum height of
the zoning district.
C. Wind energy conservation systems (WECS). Wind energy conservation
systems are subject to the regulations of § 410-31.9B.
D. Conditional use permit approvals. The City Council, following the
recommendation of the Planning Commission, may grant an exception
from the height limit for a zoning district for a conditional use as part of
its approval of that use. The limit or extent of this exception shall be a
specific part of the conditional use permit.490
A. Purpose. As part of the approval process of innovative development
designs, including conservation subdivisions, traditional neighborhood
developments, or planned unit developments, the City may authorize
greater flexibility in setbacks in order to produce innovative residential
environments, to provide for more efficient use of land, to protect
topography and to encourage the preservation of common area and
open space.491
B. Site area per unit. Unless otherwise provided, the site area per unit for
an innovative development as a whole shall be that of the zoning district
in which such subdivision is located. For the purpose of computing site
area per unit, the area of public streets and private ways within the
subdivision must be excluded. Residential use types may be combined
within the innovative subdivision, provided that the subdivision as a
whole complies with the required maximum density of the zoning
district.492
C. Perimeter yards.
(1) Structures must maintain normal street yard setbacks from any
public streets that form the perimeter of the development.
(2) Structures must maintain a twenty-foot minimum side yard setback
from any property line that forms the boundary of the development.
490. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
491. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
492. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-32.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-32.7
1:895
§ 410-32.8. Fence regulations.494
D. Area and yards for individual lots.
(1) Individual lots within an innovative development are permitted
special minimum lot area and yard setback requirements set forth
elsewhere in this chapter. An innovative subdivision must be
planned and developed as a common development.
(2) Any private garage oriented to or facing a public street or private
way internal to the innovative subdivision must be set back a
minimum of 20 feet from that public street or private way.493
E. Coverage and landscaping requirements. Individual lots in an
innovative development are exempt from maximum building and
impervious coverage limitations and street yard landscaping
requirements established for the zoning district. However, the
subdivision as a whole, including streets, walks, and accessways, must
comply with the building and impervious coverage regulations for its
zoning district.
A. Location restriction.
(1) Unless otherwise provided by this chapter or other sections of the
Seward Municipal Code, no fence shall be built on any lot or tract
outside the surveyed lot lines.
(2) No fence shall be built by a private party on public land without the
specific prior approval of the City. Removal of any such fence shall
be at the expense of its owner.
B. Applicability. The regulations contained in this section apply to all
fences with a height above grade of 30 inches and over.
C. Sight obstruction at street intersections. No fence or hedge permitted
or required by this section or other sections of the Seward Municipal
Code shall be built to a height of more than two feet above the
established curb grade on the part of the lot within a vision clearance
triangle.495
D. Facing. The finished surfaces of any fence shall face toward adjacent
properties and street frontage.
E. Effect on adjacent properties and drainage. Fences shall be erected and
maintained so as to avoid limiting or obstructing the flow of water in
natural drainagecourses, or drainageways created within easements.
F. Fence construction on utility easements. Any fence erected on a tract of
land subject to an easement for the construction, maintenance,
493. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
494. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 225, Building Construction, Art. XIII, Fence Regulations.
495. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-32.7 SEWARD CODE § 410-32.8
1:896
operation, or replacement of any water, sanitary or storm sewer, gas
line, electric power, telephone, or other utility poles, or other cables
or lines shall be designed and constructed to be readily removable to
permit the use of the easement. Such fences shall be subject to removal
by request whenever necessary to permit access. The cost of removal
or replacement shall be the responsibility of the owner of the fence.
G. Residential fences. Fences constructed within residential districts or on
land used for residential purposes are subject to the following
provisions:
(1) Height. The maximum average height of a fence shall be 78 inches.
This height limit does not apply to supports, posts, or attached
ornaments. The maximum height for any fence outside of a
required front yard shall be six feet.
(2) Setbacks. All residential fences in front yards shall be a minimum
of two feet behind adjacent sidewalks.
(3) Materials. Fences shall be constructed of wood, chain-link, PVC/
resin, stone or masonry materials, or ornamental metals only. Wood
fences shall utilize standard building lumber only. Barbed-wire and/
or electrified fences are not permitted, and are defined as any fence
that includes in its material barbs, blades, razors, electric current
or other features specifically designed to injure or abrade an
individual or animal who attempts to negotiate the fence. Wire
mesh fences may be permitted to enclose tennis courts and game
and recreation areas on public land and residential lots.
H. Civic, office, commercial, and industrial fences. Fences constructed in
commercial and industrial districts are subject to the following special
provisions:
(1) The maximum height of a fence for any permitted use in any
nonresidential zoning district shall be eight feet.
(2) Civic uses in residential districts. The maximum height of fences
installed as part of primary and secondary educational facilities,
day care, and park and recreation use types, or any other use that
provides secured outdoor space for the use of children within
Residential Zoning Districts, shall be eight feet.
(3) The Board of Adjustment may approve greater fence heights on a
case-by-case basis if it concludes that such permission furthers the
health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City of Seward.
(4) Barbed wire shall not be used in the construction of any fence
outside of the I-2 General Industrial Zoning District. Barbed wire
may be used in the construction of fencing in an Industrial District,
provided that the bottom strand of the barbed wire shall be at least
six feet above ground level. Electrified fences are not permitted
within the jurisdiction of the City of Seward.
§ 410-32.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-32.9
1:897
§ 410-32.9. Appeals.
Denial, revocations, or cancellations of a building permit based on the
provisions of this article may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment, as set
forth in § 410-44.8.
§ 410-32.9 SEWARD CODE § 410-32.9
1:898
Part 5
Landscaping And Screening
ARTICLE 33
Landscaping and Screening Standards
§ 410-33.1. Purpose.
The landscaping and screening regulations provide additional guidance on
the development of sites within Seward by addressing landscaping and
screening requirements. They are designed to improve the appearance of
the community, buffer potentially incompatible land uses from one another,
and conserve the value of properties within the City of Seward and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction. The landscape and screening provisions are
further intended to expedite development approval by including
predictable, uniform standards for landscaping.
§ 410-33.2. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all new development on each lot
or site upon application for a building permit, except for the following:
§ 410-33.3. Landscaping requirements.
Landscaping shall be required adjacent to each street property line and
shall extend to a minimum depth inward on private property as set forth in
the development regulations and summarized in Table 33A.
A. Reconstruction or replacement of a lawfully existing use or structure
following a casualty loss.
B. Remodeling, rehabilitation, or improvements to existing uses or
structures which do not substantially change the location of structures,
parking, or other site improvements.
C. Additions or enlargements of existing uses or structures which increase
floor area or impervious coverage area by less than 20% of the building
established on the site on the effective date of this chapter. Where such
cumulative additions or enlargements are 20% or greater, these
provisions shall apply only to that portion where the new development
occurs.
§ 410-33.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-33.3
1:899
Table 33A
Required Landscape Depth Adjacent to Street Property Lines
Column 1
Zoning
District
Column 2
Minimum Depth of Landscaping Adjacent to Street
Property Lines
AG 35 feet
RR 25 feet
R-1 20 feet
R-2 20 feet
R-3 15 feet
R-4 15 feet
R-5 30 feet
UC 10 feet or 10% of street yard for lots less than 120 feet
deep
C-1 10 feet or 10% of street yard for lots less than 120 feet
deep
C-2 10 feet or 10% of street yard for lots less than 120 feet
deep
CBD No requirement
BP 25 feet
I-1 10 feet or 10% of street yard for lots less than 120 feet
deep
I-2 No requirement
§ 410-33.4. Landscaping materials and installation standards.
A. Official list of recommended and prohibited plant materials. Plantings
shall be used in required landscaped areas or bufferyards consistent
with the Official List of Recommended and Prohibited Plant Materials,
provided through the Office of the Zoning Administrator. All plant
materials shall conform in size, species and spacing with this article.
B. Use of inorganic landscaping materials. No artificial trees, shrubs,
plants or turf shall be used to fulfill the minimum requirements for
landscaping. Inorganic materials, such as stone or decorative pavers,
may be used, provided that such material does not comprise more than
35% of the minimum required landscaped area. Other concrete and/or
asphalt pavement surfaces may not be used within the minimum
required landscaped area, except for driveways and walkways.
§ 410-33.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-33.5
1:900
§ 410-33.5. Bufferyard provisions.
These provisions apply when a use is established in a more intensive zoning
district (District A) that is adjacent to a less intensive zoning district
(District B). The owner, developer, or operator of the use within District
A shall install and maintain a landscaped bufferyard on his/her lot or site,
as set forth in this section. Bufferyard requirements apply only to those
districts indicated in Table 33B. Bufferyards are not required of singlefamily,
two-family, duplex, or townhouse use types in the more intensive
zoning district.
Table 33B
Bufferyard Requirements
(feet)
District B
(Less Intensive Adjacent District)
District A
(More Intensive
District)
(Note 3)
AG, RR
(Note 1)
R-1, R-2, R-3
(Note 1)
R-4
(Note 1)
R-4 20 20 —
UC 15
(Note 2)
15
(Note 2)
15
(Note 2)
CBD — — —
C-1 15 20 20
C-2, BP 25 25 20
I-1 40 40 30
I-2 100 100 100
Notes:
Note 1: Applies only to residential uses or preliminary plats previously
established in the zoning district.
Note 2: Buffering requirement applies to adjacencies between commercial
and office use types and preexisting residential land uses in adjacent
districts. Buffering requirement also applies to a commercial or office use
type established in a UC District and adjacent to a preexisting residential
use in the UC District. Vertical screening may also be required as set forth
in Article 33.
Note 3: Buffer requirements do not apply to single-family, duplex, or
townhouse residential uses established in District A.
§ 410-33.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-33.5
1:901
§ 410-33.6. Screening standards.
A. The bufferyard dimensions set forth in Table 33B apply to zoning
districts which share a common lot line or are adjacent but separated
by an intervening alley.
B. When a street separates adjacent zoning districts requiring a
bufferyard, the size of the bufferyard shall be one-half the required
bufferyard set forth in Table 33B.
C. Each required bufferyard must be entirely landscaped and free of paved
areas, accessways, storage, or other disturbances.
A. Application. Screening is required between adjacent zoning districts
indicated in Table 33B when one or more of the following conditions in
the more intensive zoning district is directly visible from and faces
toward the boundary of the less intensive zoning district:
(1) Outdoor storage areas or storage tanks, unless otherwise screened.
(2) Loading docks, refuse collection points, and other service areas.
(3) Major machinery or areas housing a manufacturing process.
(4) Major on-site traffic circulation areas or truck and/or trailer
parking.
(5) Sources of glare, noise, or other environmental effects.
(6) Bailing or stockpiling of cardboard or other shipping or packaging
materials.
(7) Surface parking lots with 150 or more stalls directly adjacent to
less intensive districts.
B. Opaque barrier. A six-foot opaque barrier shall be provided which
visually screens the conditions listed in Subsection A from less intensive
uses as follows:
(1) A solid wood, PVC, and/or masonry fence or wall at least six feet in
height.
(2) A landscaping screen, using evergreen or deciduous materials,
capable of providing a substantially opaque, hedge-like barrier and
attaining a minimum height of six feet within three years of
planting.
(3) A landscaped earth berm with a maximum slope of three to one,
rising no less than six feet above the existing grade of the lot line
separating the zoning districts.
(4) Any combination of these methods that achieves a cumulative
height of six feet.
§ 410-33.5 SEWARD CODE § 410-33.6
1:902
§ 410-33.7. Screening in place of bufferyards. [Added 12-16-2003 by
Ord. No. 39-09]
On lots of record with a width less than 60 feet, screening consistent with
§ 410-33.6 and approved by the Zoning Administrator may be substituted
for bufferyards and requirements set forth in § 410-33.5.
§ 410-33.8. Parking lot landscaping and screening.
Unless otherwise noted, each unenclosed parking facility with a paved
surface of 6,000 square feet or more shall comply with the following
regulations:
§ 410-33.9. Tree plantings.
C. Effect on drainage. Screening shall not adversely affect surface water
drainage.
D. Permitted interruptions of screening. Screening may be interrupted to
provide access drives to service areas or for loading purposes to
buildings. Such breaks or interruptions shall not exceed 20% of the
length of the required screened area.
A. Each unenclosed parking facility shall provide a minimum landscaped
buffer of 10 feet along any street property line.
B. Each parking facility that abuts a residential district shall provide a tenfoot
landscaped buffer along its common property line with the
residential district.
C. Any parking facility which abuts property in a residential district shall
provide a fence, wall, landscape screen, or earth berm not less than
four feet in height for the length of the common boundary. A grade
change, terrace, or other site feature which blocks the sight line of
headlights into a residential property may satisfy this requirement,
subject to the determination of the Zoning Administrator.
D. Each unenclosed parking facility of over 6,000 square feet within any
street yard shall provide interior landscaped area equal to no less than
5% of the total paved area of the parking facility. Parking facilities
within the I-1 and I-2 Districts shall be exempt from this requirement.
E. Interior landscaping shall be credited toward the satisfaction of overall
landscaping requirements set forth in this section.
F. Landscaping or screening installed in any required landscaped area
shall not obstruct the view from the off-street parking facility to any
driveway approach, street, alley, or sidewalk. Landscaping shall further
not obstruct any views among parking spaces and circulation ways, or
visibility between vehicles and pedestrians.
§ 410-33.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-33.9
1:903
§ 410-33.10. Applicability; maintenance; administration.
A. In any landscaped area for commercial uses only required by the
minimum depth requirements, the bufferyard requirements, or the
parking lot interior landscaping requirements, one tree of an approved
species with a minimum caliper size of two inches shall be planted and
maintained for each 500 square feet of required landscaped area.
Existing trees approved for preservation shall be counted toward
satisfaction of this requirement.
B. Any tree of an approved species planted or maintained with a caliper of
three inches or above shall count as 1.5 trees toward the satisfaction of
the requirements of this section. An approved existing tree with a
caliper of eight inches or above preserved on a site shall count as 2.00
trees toward the satisfaction of the requirements of this section.
A. Time of application. The provisions contained in this article shall be
applied for each individual lot or site when an application for a building
permit on such lot is made. A landscape plan shall be submitted with
each application for a building permit. Such plan shall be reviewed by
the Zoning Administrator for compliance with the provisions of this
article.
B. Maintenance of required landscaping.
(1) Upon installation of required landscape materials, each owner shall
take appropriate actions to ensure their continued health and
maintenance. Required landscaping that does not remain healthy
shall be replaced consistent with this article and the approved
landscaping plan for the project.
(2) Underground irrigation shall be provided for all required
landscaped areas in multifamily, commercial, or office
developments.
C. Obstruction of view. Landscaping or screening installed in any
landscaped area shall not obstruct the view from or to any driveway
approach, street, alley, or sidewalk, and shall be consistent with the
provisions of the City's vision clearance triangle regulations.496
D. Earth berm locations. All earth berm locations shall be reviewed by the
Zoning Administrator or his/her designee to determine how the berms
shall relate to drainage and public utilities.
E. Exceptions. A development may continue to comply with the bufferyard
and screening requirements in effect at the time of issuance of its
original permit, regardless of whether an adjacent lot or site is
subsequently rezoned to a less intensive district which would otherwise
require compliance with bufferyard or screening provisions.
496. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-33.9 SEWARD CODE § 410-33.10
1:904
Part 6
Parking And Loading Regulations
ARTICLE 34
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 410-34.1. Purpose.
The off-street parking regulations require that developments provide
parking in proportion to the need created by each use. The regulations
further establish standards for the functional design of parking facilities.
These regulations are intended to accommodate vehicles in a functionally
satisfactory manner and to minimize external effects on neighboring
properties.
§ 410-34.2. Applicability; exemptions.
§ 410-34.3. Schedule of off-street parking requirements.
A. Applicability. Off-street parking shall be provided for any new building
constructed; for new uses or conversions of existing buildings; or for
enlargements of existing structures.
B. Exemptions. Any use within the CBD Downtown Seward District is
exempt from the off-street parking requirements. Any off-street parking
facility constructed in the CBD District after the effective date of this
chapter must comply with the design standards set forth in this article.
A. Parking facilities for each use shall be provided in accordance with the
minimum requirements set forth in Table 34A.
B. Computation.
(1) When a computation of required parking results in a fraction of 0.5
or greater, the requirement shall be rounded up to the next whole
number. Any parking computation for any use other than singlefamily
residential and requiring such a calculation shall have a
minimum requirement of three parking stalls.
(2) Unless otherwise indicated, parking requirements are based on
gross floor area.
(3) When parking requirements are computed on the basis of capacity,
capacity shall be determined by the Building Code or other official
determinations of occupancy in effect for the City of Seward at the
time the use is established.497
497. Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Building Construction.
§ 410-34.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-34.3
1:905
Table 34A: Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements
Agricultural Use Types
Horticulture 1 space per 1,000 square feet of
sales area
Crop/Animal production No requirement
Residential Use Types
Single-family residential 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Duplex residential 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Multifamily residential 1.5 spaces per efficiency or
1-bedroom unit; 2 spaces per
2-bedroom unit; 2.5 spaces for 3-ormore
bedroom unit
Downtown residential No requirement
Group residential or
boardinghouse
1 space for each resident
Mobile home residential 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Retirement residence 1.5 spaces per independent-living
unit; 0.5 space per assisted-living
unit
Civic Use Types
Administration 1 space per 300 square feet of gross
floor area
Cemetery No requirement
Clubs 1 space per 4-person capacity in
largest assembly area
College/University 1 space per 3 full-time students,
except as otherwise provided in a U/
MU District
Convalescent services 1 space per 4 beds
Cultural services 1 space per 500 square feet of gross
floor area
Day-care services 1 space per 5-person capacity + 1
space per employee of largest shift
Group-care facility 1 space per 4-person capacity + 1
space per employee of largest shift
Group home 1 space per 4-person capacity + 1
space per employee of largest shift
Guidance services 1 space per 300 square feet
Health care 1 space per 300 square feet + 1
space per employee of largest shift
§ 410-34.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-34.3
1:906
Table 34A: Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements
Hospitals 1 space per 2 beds + 1 space per
employee of the largest shift
Maintenance facilities See Schedule A
Parks and recreation Established by an approved site
master plan
Postal facilities See Schedule A
Primary education 1 space per employee of largest shift
+ 10 stalls for visitors
Public assembly 1 space per 4-person capacity
Religious assembly 1 space per 4-person capacity in
largest assembly area
Safety services 1 space per employee of maximum
shift + 1 stall per 1,000 square feet
Secondary education 1 space per employee of maximum
shift + 1 space for each 3 11th and
12th grade students
Utilities 1 space per employee of maximum
shift
Commercial Use Types
Agricultural sales/service See Schedule A
Auto and equipment rental
and sales, equipment
repair
See Schedule A
Auto service* 4 times service capacity
Body repair* 5 spaces per repair stall
Business support services 1 space per 500 square feet
Campground 1 space per camping unit
Cocktail lounge 1 space per 50 square feet of
customer service area
Commercial recreation 1 space per 4-person capacity; for
bowling alleys, 4 spaces per lane
Communication services 1 space per 500 square feet
Construction sales See Schedule A
Consumer services 1 space per 200 square feet
Convenience storage 1 space per 20 storage units
Equipment sales/service See Schedule A
Food sales (all types) 1 space per 200 square feet
§ 410-34.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-34.3
1:907
Table 34A: Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements
General retail services 1 space per 200 square feet
Liquor sales 1 space per 200 square feet
Lodging, bed-and-breakfast 1 space per unit
Personal improvement 1 space per 200 square feet
Personal services 1 space per 250 square feet
Pet services 1 space per 500 square feet
Restaurants (drive-in) 1 space per 50 square feet of
customer service area
Restaurants (general) 1 space per 3-person capacity in
dining area
Stables; kennels 1 space per employee + 1 stall per
5,000 square feet of site area
Surplus sales See Schedule A
Trade services 1 space per 500 square feet
Travel centers 1 space per 200 square feet in
building + 1 space for each fueling
station
Truck stop 1 space per 200 square feet in
building + 1 space for each fueling
station
Veterinary services 1 space per 500 square feet
Office Use Types
Corporate offices 1 space per 250 square feet
General offices 1 space per 250 square feet
Financial services 1 space per 250 square feet
Medical offices Greater of 1 space per 250 square
feet or 5 spaces per staff doctor or
dentist on duty
Miscellaneous Use Types
Broadcasting tower See Schedule A
Nonputrescible landfill See Schedule A
All landfills See Schedule A
Industrial Use Types
Agricultural industries See Schedule A
Light industry See Schedule A
General industry See Schedule A
Heavy industry See Schedule A
§ 410-34.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-34.3
1:908
§ 410-34.4. Parking facility location.
Table 34A: Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements
Railroad facilities See Schedule A
Resource extraction 1 space per employee on largest
shift
Salvage services See Schedule A
Warehousing See Schedule A
Construction yards See Schedule A
Note:
* Auto service and body repair subject to other restrictions
applicable under this chapter.
Schedule A
This schedule sets forth minimum off-street parking requirements
for uses with elements that have different functions and
operating characteristics.
Function of Element Requirement
Office or administration 1 space per 300 square feet
Indoor sales, display or service
area
1 space per 500 square feet
Outdoor sales, display or
service area
1 space per 2,000 square feet
Equipment servicing or
manufacturing
1 space per 1,000 square feet
Indoor or outdoor storage or
warehousing
1 space per 5,000 square feet
A. Residential parking.
(1) With the exception of downtown residential uses, off-street parking
for residential uses shall be located on the same lot or site as the
use.
(2) Off-street parking areas for any multifamily or group residential
uses shall be at least six feet from any main building. [Amended
4-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-12]
(3) For multifamily residential uses, separately leased detached
garages may not be used to satisfy parking requirements for such
use. Parking incorporated into the design of multifamily buildings,
or within parking structures, shall be counted toward fulfillment of
parking requirements.
§ 410-34.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-34.4
1:909
§ 410-34.5. Parking for people with disabilities.
§ 410-34.6. Off-street parking design standards.
B. Nonresidential parking. Off-street parking for nonresidential uses shall
be located on the same lot or site as the use, or within 300 feet of that
use if the parking site is within a zoning district that permits the offstreet
parking use type. Control of ownership or use rights to the
remote off-street parking must be demonstrated as a condition of
permission.
A. Each off-street parking facility shall provide the number of parking
spaces set forth in Table 34B, designed and designated for use by
people with disabilities. Every eighth parking space shall be vanaccessible.
Design criteria and dimensions shall be in accordance with
Federal Register, Volume 56, No. 144. Parking facilities for singlefamily,
duplex, two-family, and mobile home residential uses are exempt
from this requirement.
B. Spaces designated for people with disabilities shall have a minimum
width of 12 feet. Each handicapped space shall provide a barrier-free
route to an accessible building entrance, which shall not require users
to walk or wheel behind parked cars. Such spaces shall be designated
with an upright sign exhibiting the universal symbol for accessibility by
the handicapped. All such spaces shall be designed in compliance with
the standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act.
Table 34B
Accessible Parking Requirements
Number of Stalls
Number of Required Accessible
Spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
1,001 and over 20, plus 1 for each 100 stalls over
1,000
A. Dimensions.
§ 410-34.4 SEWARD CODE § 410-34.6
1:910
(1) Standard parking stalls shall be nine feet wide and 18 feet long.
(2) Where parking stalls are located adjacent to landscaped areas, the
paved depth of such stalls may be decreased by two feet to provide
for a vehicle overhang area. The vehicle overhang area may not
encroach into a required landscaped area or public sidewalk or
right-of-way.
B. Pavement and drainage.
(1) All off-street parking facilities, including approaches and
maneuvering areas, shall be surfaced with concrete, asphalt,
asphaltic concrete, or brick and shall be maintained with materials
sufficient to prevent mud, dust, or loose material, except as
provided below:
(a) Sites within the AG and RR Districts are exempt from this
requirement.
(b) In residential areas, all parking spaces and driveways used for
parking shall be paved, including driveways that lead to paved
parking spaces.
(2) Off-street parking facilities shall be designed and built to prevent
the free flow of water onto adjacent properties. Parking lot design
which discharges water onto a public right-of-way is subject to
review and approval by the Public Works Director.
C. Landscape and screening requirements. Landscape requirements for
off-street parking facilities are set forth in § 410-33.8.
D. Entrances and exits.
(1) Adequate access to each parking facility shall be provided by
means of clearly defined and limited driveways or access points.
Such driveways shall be designed to direct nonresidential traffic
away from residential areas.
§ 410-34.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-34.6
1:911
(2) Parking facilities other than driveways for single-family, duplex,
two-family, or mobile home residential uses must permit vehicles to
enter streets in a forward position.
(3) Head-in parking from any public right-of-way shall be permitted
only in the CBD District, or as part of a specific planned unit
development design.
E. Design and pedestrian access.
(1) Parking lots providing over 200 stalls should be divided into
smaller parking fields not exceeding 100 stalls to reduce the visual
impact of large parking expanses. Divisions should be made with
landscape strips, peninsulas or grade changes.
(2) Commercial or office parking lots shall be designed to separate
pedestrians from vehicles to the maximum degree possible and to
provide protected pedestrian paths within parking areas which
lead to store, building or shopping center entrances.
(3) Sidewalks and walkways in commercial developments should link
to the City's sidewalk and trail system where available, and shall
provide a safe pedestrian route from adjacent public sidewalks and
trails.
F. Safety features.
(1) Parking facilities shall be designed to provide visibility of and
between pedestrians and vehicles when circulating within or
entering or leaving the facility; and shall not create blind, hidden or
hazardous areas.
(2) Circulation patterns shall be designed in accord with accepted
standards of traffic engineering and safety.
G. Maintenance. All parking facilities shall be maintained to assure the
continued usefulness and compatibility of the facility. Acceptable
maintenance includes keeping the facility free of refuse, debris, and
litter; maintaining parking surfaces in sound condition; and providing
proper care of landscaped areas.
H. Adjustment for conditional uses and planned mixed-use projects.498
(1) For uses subject to a conditional use permit approval, the Planning
Commission may adjust the minimum requirements of this article,
in order to provide design, usability, attractiveness, or protection to
adjoining uses in a manner equal to or greater than the minimum
requirements of this article.
(2) In mixed-use projects, different uses may have complementary
parking requirements. This can result in a parking requirement
498. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-34.6 SEWARD CODE § 410-34.6
1:912
§ 410-34.7. Bicycle parking.
§ 410-34.8. Off-street loading.
that is less than the sum of parking required for each use added
separately. The Planning Commission may authorize an adjustment
to the total parking requirement for separate uses located as part
of a common development, or for separate uses located on adjacent
sites and served by common parking facilities. All parking facilities
subject to the mixed-use adjustment must be located in a common
facility, equally accessible and usable to all served uses.
A. Parking requirements.
(1) Each parking facility providing 50 spaces or more shall provide
parking accommodations for bicycles as provided by the Table
34C:499
Table 34C
Bicycle Parking Requirements
Number of Parking Stalls Required Bicycle Spaces
50 to 100 5
101 to 150 8
151 to 200 10
Over 200 2 additional spaces for each 50
parking stalls
(2) Bicycle parking facilities shall include bicycle racks secured to
prevent easy removal, bicycle lockers, or bicycle posts or bollards
expressly designed for secure storage.
(3) The location of bicycle parking facilities shall be at least as
convenient to the main entrance of the primary use as the most
convenient automobile parking not reserved for use by disabled
people.
(4) Bicycle parking should be located to prevent hazards or
obstructions to the normal flow of pedestrians into a use.
A. Loading requirement. In any district with every building or part thereof
hereafter erected, having a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or
more, which is to be occupied by manufacturing, storage, warehouse,
goods display, retail store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital,
mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning or other uses similarly requiring the
receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise, there
shall be provided and maintained on the same lot with such building at
499. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-34.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-34.8
1:913
§ 410-34.9. Stacking requirements for drive-through services.
least one off-street loading space plus one additional such loading space
for each 20,000 square feet or major fraction thereof of gross floor area,
so used, in excess of 10,000 square feet.
B. Design standards.
(1) Each loading space shall be at least 12 feet wide by 40 feet long,
with a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet.
(2) Paving of loading spaces and access areas shall be permanent,
durable, and free of dust.
(3) Off-street loading areas are subject to the landscaping and
buffering requirements for parking facilities set forth in this article.
C. Schedule of loading spaces. Loading spaces for each use requiring them
shall be provided in accordance with the minimum requirements set
forth in Table 34D.
Table 34D
Off-Street Loading Requirements
Gross Floor Area of Use
(square feet)
Number of Required Loading
Spaces
5,000 or less None
5,001 to 25,000 1
25,001 to 75,000 2
Larger than 75,000 3
A. Commercial establishments providing drive-in or drive-through
services shall provide minimum on-site stacking distance as provided by
Table 34E.500
Table 34E
Off-Street Stacking Requirements
Type of Operation Minimum Stacking Space
Financial services with drive-up
teller
4 vehicles per window or kiosk
Financial services with drive-up
ATM
3 vehicles per ATM station
Self-service or automatic car
wash
Entrance: 3 vehicles per bay
Exit: 1 vehicle per bay
500. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-34.8 SEWARD CODE § 410-34.9
1:914
§ 410-34.10. Parking for major recreational vehicles. [Amended
5-18-2004 by Ord. No. 12-04]
Table 34E
Off-Street Stacking Requirements
Type of Operation Minimum Stacking Space
Fast-food restaurant* Without menu boards: 3 vehicles in
front of service windows
With separate menu boards and
service windows: 4 vehicles behind
the menu board plus 4 behind the
first service window
Photo processing, dry cleaning,
or other drive-up personal
services
2 vehicles per service window
Gas stations 2 vehicles per gas dispenser pump
Gated parking lot, community
entrance or overhead door
1 vehicle per gate or door on local
streets
2 vehicles per gate or door on
collector streets
Conveyor-operated auto washing
facility
Entrance: 5 vehicles
Exit: 2 vehicles
NOTES:
Minimum vehicle lane shall be 12 feet wide; vehicle length = 20 feet.
* May be increased based on site plan review.
B. The City Council may approve a reduced number of parking spaces for a
specific projects after receiving the recommendation of the Zoning
Administrator, provided that the applicant presents a plot plan
demonstrating that an area on site is reserved for the designated
number of spaces as required by code and agrees to improve that area
for parking within 60 days of the time the Council deems such parking
shall be improved.
C. All drive-through services must provide adequate alternative runaround
access for vehicles not in a drive-through queue.
A. Applicability. For purposes of these regulations, "major recreational
equipment" shall include boats and boat trailers and travel trailers, 20
feet or more in length and six feet in height, recreational vehicles, pickup
campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive
vehicles) and motorized dwellings. Recreational vehicles include a
vehicular-type unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for
§ 410-34.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-34.10
1:915
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use, designed to be selfpropelled
or mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. Trucks, tractor
cab units, trailers, and vehicles over 10 tons' gross empty weight shall
be defined as "heavy commercial vehicles." (See § 410-34.11.)501
B. Location of parking for major recreational equipment.
(1) During the period from December 1 to April 1 of the following year,
all major recreational equipment parked in a residential zoning
district shall be parked or stored in a carport or enclosed building;
or behind the line of the nearest portion of the primary building on
the site to the street. Major recreational equipment may be parked
in the front yard for a period of up to 48 hours for loading or
unloading.
(2) During the balance of the year, major recreational equipment may
be parked outside of an enclosed structure or carport in the
required front yard on a concrete driveway or its equivalent at least
two feet behind the sidewalk. In the absence of a sidewalk or if the
sidewalk is adjacent to the curb, equipment shall be parked a
minimum of 16 feet behind the curb and with the following
conditions:
(a) Space is unavailable in the rear yard or outside the side yard
and there is no reasonable access to either the rear yard or
side yards. A corner lot is always considered to have
reasonable access to the rear yard; a fence is never considered
to prevent reasonable access.
(b) Enclosed parking is not possible in conformance with the
requirements of the district.
(c) Parking is permitted for storage only. No equipment shall be
used for dwelling purposes for more than 14 days in any
calendar year, and cooking is not permitted at any time.
(d) Equipment may not be permanently connected to utility lines,
including sewer, water, gas, or electricity. Equipment may be
connected to electrical supply temporarily to charge batteries.
(e) Equipment shall not be used for the storage of goods,
materials, or equipment other than those items considered to
be part of the unit or essential for its immediate use.
(f) The unit may be parked anywhere on the premises during
loading and unloading, and the use of electricity and water is
permitted when necessary to prepare the unit for use.
(g) The unit shall be owned by the resident of the property where
the unit is parked for storage.
501. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-34.10 SEWARD CODE § 410-34.10
1:916
§ 410-34.11. Parking of heavy commercial vehicles. [Added
5-18-2004 by Ord. No. 12-04]
Parking and storage of heavy commercial vehicles within residential
districts is subject to the following additional conditions. These conditions
are in addition to those requirements for the parking of major recreational
equipment.
§ 410-34.12. Temporary parking lots. [Added 12-7-2004 by Ord. No.
38-04]
A developer may apply to the City Council for a waiver of surfacing
requirements as outlined in § 410-34.6 for a period not to exceed two years.
(h) Visitor parking may be allowed for a period of up to seven days.
(3) Major recreational equipment shall not be parked on public rightsof-
way except for a reasonable period for the loading and unloading
of vehicles. ("Reasonable period of time" shall be defined as not to
exceed 48 hours) in a ten-day period.
A. Parking for heavy commercial vehicles in residential districts is subject
to the approval of a conditional use permit by the City Council.
B. Parking for heavy commercial vehicles is permitted only in the following
locations:
(1) In street yards behind the required front yard and/or street side
yard setback line for the zoning district.
(2) In side yards outside of the required side yard setback lines for the
zoning district.
(3) In yards outside of the required side yard setback lines for the
zoning district.
The City Council may impose additional restrictions on such
parking as part of the terms of its conditional use permit approval.
C. Exception for construction. The parking regulations set forth herein
shall not apply to heavy commercial vehicles used by contractors or
subcontractors, while construction is in progress.
§ 410-34.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-34.12
1:917

Part 7
Signs
ARTICLE 35
Sign Regulations
§ 410-35.1. Purpose.
The sign regulations provide standards for communicating information in
the environment of the City of Seward and its jurisdiction. The regulations
recognize the need to protect public health, safety, and welfare; to maintain
the City's attractive appearance; to provide for adequate business
identification, advertising, and communication of information; and to
encourage the fair enforcement of sign regulations.
§ 410-35.2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall be used for terms contained in this article
that are not otherwise defined in the Seward Municipal Code or in this
Unified Land Development Ordinance:
ABANDONED SIGN — A sign, including sign face and supporting structure,
which refers to a discontinued business, profession, commodity, service, or
other activity or use formerly occupying the site; or which contains no sign
copy on all sign faces for a continuous period of six months.
ATTACHED SIGN — A sign that is structurally connected to a building or
depends upon that building for support.
AUXILIARY DESIGN ELEMENTS — Terms that describe secondary
characteristics of a sign, including its method of illumination and other
features within the bounds of its basic shape.
AWNING and AWNING SIGN — A temporary or movable shelter supported
entirely from the exterior wall of a building and composed of non-rigid
materials, except for a supporting framework. An awning sign is a message
printed on such a shelter.
BANNER — Material with a printed message or graphic secured or mounted
on a structure in such a way as to allow wind movement.
BUILDING MARKER — An historic or commemorative plaque; or a building
name or cornerstone carved into a masonry surface.
BUSINESS CENTER IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign that identifies a
building or group of commercial buildings in single ownership or control,
sharing parking and access.
CANOPY (OR ARCADE) SIGN — A sign that is attached or made an integral
part of a canopy.502
502. Editor's Note: See the illustration included at the end of this section.
§ 410-35.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-35.2
1:919
CLEARANCE — The distance from the bottom of a sign face elevated above
grade and the grade below.
DETACHED SIGN — A sign that is self-supporting and structurally
independent from any building.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign that serves only to designate the location or
direction of any area or place.503
DOUBLE-FACED SIGN — A sign consisting of no more than two parallel or
near-parallel faces supported by a single structure. The angle created by
the two faces of a double-faced sign shall not exceed 15°.
ELECTRONIC INFORMATION SIGNS — Signs which use an array of
electrically illuminated lights, generally controlled by a computer or other
electronic programming device, to display information or supporting
graphics. Information may include news, events, or information about
businesses or attractions. Signs whose information is limited to time and
temperature are not considered electronic information signs.
FLAG SIGN — A sign that is emblazoned on a flag and intended to be
displayed in a free-flowing manner. Flags of the United States, the State of
Nebraska, and any institution in the University of Nebraska system shall not
be considered flag signs for the purpose of this article.
FLASHING SIGN — A sign that has a lighting source or lighting element
that periodically illuminates or is not maintained stationary or constant in
intensity and/or color at all times when the sign is in use, usually in a
manner so as to draw the attention of the viewer. This definition specifically
excludes electronic information signs.
FRONTAGE — The length of a property line of any one premises abutting
and parallel to a public street, private way or court.
GROUND SIGN — A detached on-premises sign built on a freestanding
frame, mast or pole(s) with a clearance no greater than three feet.
ILLUMINATION — Lighting sources installed for the primary purpose of
lighting a specific sign or group of signs.
MARQUEE — A permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by a
building and extending over a public right-of-way.504
MAXIMUM PERMITTED SIGN AREA — The maximum permitted combined
area of all signs allowed on a specific property.505
MONUMENT SIGN — An on-premises freestanding sign with the
appearance of a solid base.506
MOVING SIGN — A sign that conveys its message through rotating,
changing or animated elements.
503. Editor's Note: See the illustration included at the end of this section.
504. Editor's Note: See the illustration included at the end of this section.
505. Editor's Note: See the illustration included at the end of this section.
506. Editor's Note: See the illustration included at the end of this section.
§ 410-35.2 SEWARD CODE § 410-35.2
1:920
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign that was legally erected prior to the
adoption of this chapter or any amendment thereto but which violates the
regulations of this chapter.507
OBSOLETE SIGNS — Signs that identify a business or occupant that is no
longer in operation at the premises.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN — A panel for the display of information
relating to a business, product, event, or other subject of advertising or
publicity. Outdoor advertising signs may advertise on-premises or offpremises
businesses or products, but are not included in the definition of
"premises identification sign." Special regulations or permissions apply to
outdoor advertising signs in certain geographic locations within the City of
Seward and its jurisdiction.
POLE SIGN — An on-premises sign built on a freestanding frame, mast or
pole(s) with a clearance greater than three feet.508
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign supported by frames or posts rigidly attached
to bases not permanently attached to the ground or a building and capable
of being moved from place to place.
PREMISES — A tract of one or more lots or sites that are contiguous and
under common ownership or control.
PREMISES IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign which pertains to the use of
a premises and which contains information about the owner or operator of
that use; the type of business being conducted or the principal brand name
of a commodity sold on the premises; and other information relative to the
conduct of the use.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign, other than a wall sign, that is attached to and
projects from a building face.509
RESIDENTIAL SIGN — A small detached or attached sign located on a
residential premises, conveying a message communicated by the owner of
the property.
ROOF SIGN — Any sign or part of sign erected upon, against, or directly
above a roof or on top of or above the parapet or cornice of a building.510
INTEGRAL ROOF SIGN — A roof sign positioned between an eave line
and the peak or highest point on a roof, substantially parallel to the face
of a building.
A.
ABOVE-PEAK ROOF SIGN — A roof sign positioned above the peak of a
roof or above a parapet or cornice.
B.
507. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
508. Editor's Note: See the illustration included at the end of this section.
509. Editor's Note: See the illustration included at the end of this section.
510. Editor's Note: See the illustration included at the end of this section.
§ 410-35.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-35.2
1:921
SIGN — A symbolic, visual device fixed upon a building, vehicle, structure,
or parcel of land which is intended to convey information about a product,
business, activity, place, person, institution, candidate or political idea.
SIGN TYPE — A functional description of the use of an individual sign;
includes owner identification, advertising, directional, electronic message,
and temporary.
STREET FACADE — Any separate external face of a building, including
parapet walls and omitted wall lines, oriented to and facing a public street,
private way, or court. Separate faces oriented in the same direction or
within 45° of one another are considered part of the same street facade.
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign designed or fabricated of materials that
advertise or communicate messages that change frequently or that become
outdated; is made of materials of relatively low durability; is intended to be
removed or replaced within a period of six months or less; or is portable.
Temporary signs generally fall into two categories: temporary civic signs
and temporary commercial signs.
WALL SIGN — A sign attached to and parallel with the side of a building.511
WINDOW SIGN — A sign painted on or installed inside a window for the
purpose of viewing from outside the premises.
ZONE LOT — A parcel of land in single ownership that is large enough
to meet the minimum zoning requirements of its zoning district and can
provide such yards and other open spaces that are required by the site
development regulations.
§ 410-35.3. General regulations for signs and street graphics.
A. Compliance. Each sign or part of a sign erected within the zoning
jurisdiction of the City of Seward must comply with the provisions of
511. Editor's Note: See the illustration included at the end of this section.
§ 410-35.2 SEWARD CODE § 410-35.3
1:922
this chapter, other relevant provisions of the City of Seward's Municipal
Code, and applicable building codes.
B. Resolution of conflicting regulations. This chapter is not meant to
repeal or interfere with enforcement of other sections of the City of
Seward's Municipal Code. In cases of conflicts between Code sections,
state or federal regulations, the more restrictive regulations shall apply.
C. Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited in all zoning
districts:
(1) Obsolete signs, as defined in § 410-35.2.512
(2) Signs or sign structures which resemble, imitate, simulate, or
conflict with traffic control signs or devices included in the Manual
of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, which otherwise mislead or
confuse persons traveling on public streets, which create a traffic
hazard, or which violate any of the provisions of Neb. RS 60-6, 127
or 60-6, 128 of the Nebraska Rules of the Road or any other
applicable state statutes.
(3) Banners, balloons, posters. Signs which contain or consist of
banners, balloons, posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners,
or other similarly moving devices, except as specifically provided in
this section. These devices, when not part of any sign, shall also be
prohibited.
(4) Signs which create a safety hazard by obstructing the clear view of
pedestrians or vehicles, or which obscure official signs or signals.
(5) Off-premises signs on public property.
(6) Flashing signs. No flashing, blinking, or rotating lights shall be
permitted for either permanent or temporary signs.
(7) Moving signs. No sign shall be permitted any part of which moves
by any mechanical means.
(8) Painted wall signs: off-premises signs painted on building walls
unless specifically approved as an element of an Historic
Neighborhood Conservation District plan.
(9) Above-peak roof signs.
D. Exempt signs. The following signs are permitted in any zoning district
and are exempt from other provisions of this chapter:
(1) Real estate signs: signs advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the
premises or part of the premises on which the signs are displayed.
One nonilluminated sign, not to exceed six square feet in
residential districts and 32 square feet in commercial or industrial
512. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-35.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-35.3
1:923
districts, shall be permitted on each premises. Such signs shall not
extend higher than three feet above grade level. Such signs shall be
removed within seven days after the disposition of the premises.513
(2) Construction signs: signs identifying the architect, engineer,
contractor or other individuals involved in the construction of a
building and such signs announcing the character of the building
enterprise or the purpose for which the building is intended, but
not including product advertising. One nonilluminated sign not to
exceed 50 square feet shall be permitted per street frontage. Such
sign shall not extend higher than 10 feet above grade level and
shall meet the front yard requirement for a principal structure
unless located on the wall of a building on the premises or on a
protective barricade surrounding the construction. Such signs shall
be removed within one week following completion of construction.
(3) Political campaign signs: signs announcing candidates seeking
public political office or pertinent political issues are permitted on
private property and shall be removed within one week following
the election to which they pertain.
(4) Street banners: signs advertising a public event, providing that
specific approval is granted under regulations established by the
City Council.
(5) Seasonal decorations: signs pertaining to recognized national
holidays and national observances.
(6) Public signs: signs of a noncommercial nature and in the public
interest, erected by or upon the order of a public officer in the
performance of his public duty, such as safety signs, danger signs,
trespassing signs, traffic signs, memorial plaques, signs of
historical interest and other similar signs, including signs
designating hospitals, libraries, schools and other institutions or
places of public interest or concern.
(7) Integral signs: signs for churches or temples, or names of
buildings, dates of erection, monumental citations, commemorative
tablets and other similar signs when carved into stone, concrete or
other building material or made of bronze, aluminum, or other
permanent type of construction and made an integral part of the
structure to which they are attached.
(8) Window signs: such signs that are displayed inside of a window or
within a building; provided, however, that neon window signs shall
be permitted only in those districts where neon signs are
permitted.
(9) Works of graphic art painted or applied to building walls that
contain no advertising or business identification messages.
513. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-35.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-35.3
1:924
(10) Residential signs not to exceed six square feet.514
(11) Neighborhood or subdivision identification signs under 50 square
feet.
(12) Signs that are not visible from a public right-of-way, private way, or
court or from a property other than that on which the sign is
installed.
(13) Directional signs, provided that such signs:
(a) Do not exceed four square feet in maximum size or three feet in
maximum height.
(b) Are limited to one sign at each driveway or access point with a
public street; and one sign at any critical decision point
internal to a development.
E. Temporary commercial signs.
(1) Permit required. All temporary signs not listed in Subsection D but
falling within the definition of "temporary signs" shall be classified
as "temporary commercial signs." All temporary commercial signs
shall obtain a temporary sign permit from the City of Seward prior
to any repair, alteration, relocation, or maintenance of such a sign.
(2) Size and time limitations of temporary signs. The location of both
temporary civic and temporary commercial signs shall comply with
the following regulations:
(a) The total amount of temporary banner signage permitted on
any premises shall be the smaller of 5% of the area of all street
facades or 100 square feet. Street facades include any building
facades visible from and oriented to public streets.
(b) The maximum size of detached temporary signs or portable
signs shall be 50 square feet in area. Temporary commercial
signs shall be no smaller than eight square feet.
(c) A temporary sign permit shall be in effect for a period of 30
days on two separate occasions from the date of issuance.
(3) Location requirements for temporary signs.
(a) Temporary signs shall not be attached to any sign pole or light
pole on public or private property; or public utility poles or
trees on either public or private property.
(b) Temporary commercial signs are prohibited in any public rightof-
way or property, including streets, sidewalks, parks, and
public facilities.
514. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-35.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-35.3
1:925
§ 410-35.4. Basic design elements.
(c) Temporary signs shall not be located within the vision
clearance triangle defined by § 410-32.4F.
(d) Temporary signs shall not interfere with any public right-ofway,
driveway or accessway, or any means of access to or
egress from any building.
(e) Any attached temporary sign shall be attached only to vertical
facades of the primary building and shall not be attached to
roofs, roof extensions, cornices, overhangs, or other building
extensions.
(f) Detached temporary signs cannot be placed on public property.
(4) Condition of temporary signs.
(a) All temporary signs shall be maintained in sound condition.
Any sign that exhibits deterioration of structure or materials
may be removed, subject to the provisions of this section.
(b) The Zoning Administrator shall order the removal of any sign
not in compliance with any provisions of this section. If the
owner of the premises on which such sign is located, or the
owner of the sign if unlawfully located on public property, fails
to remove such sign, the Zoning Administrator shall be
authorized to remove the sign. Any costs of removal of a sign
on private property shall be assessed to the owner of the
property. Any such removal shall also result in the immediate
cancellation of any outstanding temporary sign permit.
F. Vision clearance triangle. No sign may project into or be placed within a
vision clearance triangle defined by § 410-32.4F.515
G. Maintenance. All signs shall be maintained in a good state of repair,
including, but not limited to, the structural components, the lighting, if
any, the portion attaching the sign to the ground or structure, and the
surface features.
A. Wall signs and graphics. Wall signs and graphics are subject to the
following general regulations:
(1) A wall sign shall not extend more than 18 inches from the wall to
which it is attached.
(2) A wall sign must be parallel to the wall to which it is attached.
(3) A wall sign may not extend beyond the corner of the wall to which it
is attached; except where attached to another wall sign, it may
extend to provide for the attachment.
515. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-35.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-35.4
1:926
(4) A wall sign may not extend beyond its building's roof line.
(5) A wall sign in the CBD District attached to a building on its front
property line may encroach upon a public right-of-way by no more
than 18 inches. Such a wall sign shall provide minimum clearance
of eight feet, six inches. [Amended 11-1-2005 by Ord. No.
53-05]
(6) For the purpose of calculating permitted sign areas pursuant to this
article, signs painted on the walls of buildings shall be considered
wall signs.
(7) Where permitted, canopy signs are counted as wall signs when
calculating total permitted sign area.
B. Projecting signs and graphics. Projecting signs and graphics are
subject to the following general regulations: [Amended 11-1-2005 by
Ord. No. 53-05]
(1) The maximum projection of any projecting sign shall be as follows:
(a) Three feet over public sidewalks less than 12 feet wide.
(b) Five feet over public sidewalks 12 feet wide or more, or over
private property.
(2) Each projecting sign must maintain at least the following vertical
clearances:
(a) Over sidewalks: 12 feet; except that a canopy may reduce its
vertical clearance to seven feet six inches.
(b) Outside of parking areas or driveways, but within three feet of
such areas; or within 50 feet of the right-of-way lines formed by
a street intersection: 15 feet.
(c) Over parking lots: 15 feet.
(d) Over driveways: 18 feet.
(3) Projecting signs must minimize visible support structures,
including guy wires, cables, turnbuckles, angle iron, or other
similar external support structure.
C. Pole signs. Pole signs, where permitted, are subject to the following
general regulations:
(1) Each pole sign must maintain at least the following vertical
clearances:
(a) Over sidewalks: eight feet, six inches.
(b) Outside of parking areas or driveways, but within three feet of
such areas; or within 50 feet of the right-of-way lines formed by
a street intersection: 10 feet.
§ 410-35.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-35.4
1:927
§ 410-35.5. Other design elements.
(c) Over parking lots: 14 feet.
(d) Over driveways: 18 feet.
(2) Permitted pole signs may revolve at a rate not to exceed six
revolutions per minute.
D. Awning signs. Awning signs, where permitted, are subject to the
following regulations:
(1) The copy area of an awning sign shall not exceed 25% of the total
face area of the awning. The combined area of all front-facing
awning panels shall not exceed 35% of the total wall area.
(2) Awnings shall not extend above the eave or parapet of the building
facade and shall be a minimum of seven feet six inches above the
sidewalk or grade, whichever is higher. Awnings shall not extend
over any area utilized by motor vehicles.
(3) Awnings may project no more than nine feet from the facade of the
wall to which they are mounted. Any extension beyond six feet shall
have plans stamped by a licensed architect or professional
engineer, certifying the ability of the wall and associated structures
to carry all imposed loads.
E. Electronic information signs. Electronic information signs, where
permitted, are subject to the following regulations: [Amended
11-1-2005 by Ord. No. 53-05]
(1) No electronic information sign shall be programmed in a way that
suggests or resembles a traffic control device, such as a traffic
signal.
A. Illumination. Lighting, when installed, must be positioned in such a
manner that light is not directed onto an adjoining property or onto a
public street or highway.
B. Marquees and marquee signs. Signs placed on, attached to, or
constructed on a marquee are subject to the maximum projection and
clearance regulations of projecting signs.
C. Permanent banners.
(1) A banner sign projecting from a building may not exceed the wall
height of the building.
(2) Maximum projection for any banner is five feet from the building,
with a minimum clearance of 10 feet.
(3) Flag signs and banner signs count against the sign area permitted a
premises.
§ 410-35.4 SEWARD CODE § 410-35.5
1:928
§ 410-35.6. Nonconforming signs.
§ 410-35.7. Permit procedures.
D. Clocks. For the purposes of this article, clocks are not considered a
moving sign.
A. Conformance required. Except as may be hereinafter specified, no sign
shall be erected, placed, maintained, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed or structurally altered which does not comply with all of
the regulations established by this chapter.
B. Maintenance. All signs shall be maintained in a good state of repair,
including, but not limited to, the structural components, the lighting, if
any, the portion attaching the sign to the ground or structure, and the
surface features.
C. Nonconformance and amortization of premises identification signs.
Where a sign exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
the ordinance codified in this chapter that could not be built under the
terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, use, height,
setback, or other characteristics of the sign or its location on the lot,
such sign may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful,
subject to the following provisions:
(1) No such sign may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases
its nonconformity; however, reasonable repairs and alterations may
be permitted.
(2) Should such a sign be destroyed by any means to an extent of 60%
or more of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall not
be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter.
(3) Within any zoning district, all premises identification signs or other
signage that pertains to the premises on which such sign is located
shall comply fully with the provisions of this chapter, unless
otherwise provided, within 15 years after the effective date of this
chapter. This amortization provision does not apply to outdoor
advertising signs, provided that such signs remain in continuous
use. Any nonconforming outdoor advertising sign that remains
unused for a continuous period of 180 days shall forfeit its right to
continue as a nonconforming use.
A. Applicability.
(1) A sign permit, approved by the Building Official, shall be required
before the erection, construction, alteration, placing, or locating of
all signs conforming with this chapter.
§ 410-35.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-35.7
1:929
§ 410-35.8. Area, height and setback measurements.
(2) A permit shall not be required for repainting without changing
permanent wording, composition, or colors; or for nonstructural
repairs.
B. Plan submittal. A copy of plans and specifications shall be submitted to
the Building Official for each sign regulated by this chapter. Such plans
shall show sufficient details about the size of the sign, location and
materials to be used and such other data as may be required for the
Building Official to determine compliance with this chapter. When
requested by the Building Official, the applicant shall furnish a
certification of the structural integrity of the sign and its installation by
a registered professional engineer with specialization in structures.
C. Appeals. Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the
Building Official to approve or disapprove a sign permit, as provided by
this chapter, may appeal such decision to the Board of Adjustment as
provided by § 410-44.8 of this Unified Land Development Ordinance.
D. Application fees. Each application for a sign permit shall be
accompanied by any applicable fees, which shall be established by the
City Council from time to time by resolution.
A. Maximum permitted sign area. Maximum permitted sign area for a
premises is set forth as a numerical limit or as a function of the frontage
of the premises on a street or private way. For properties with frontage
on more than one street or private way, the total frontage shall be
calculated as the longest frontage plus 1/2 the length of all additional
frontages.
B. Sign area.
(1) Sign area includes the entire area within the perimeter enclosing
the extreme limits of the sign, excluding any structure essential for
support or service of the sign, or architectural elements of the
building.
(2) The area of double-faced signs is calculated on the largest face
only.
(3) The sign area for ground signs, monument signs, and architectural
sign bands is calculated as the area enclosing the extreme limits of
the copy only.
(4) In the case of individual letters mounted to a wall, only the total
area of the letters themselves is included within the sign area.
C. Height. The height of a sign is measured from the average grade level
below the sign to the topmost point of the sign or sign structure.
D. Setback. The setback of a sign is measured from the property line to the
line projected to the ground plane of the nearest portion of the sign.
§ 410-35.7 SEWARD CODE § 410-35.9
1:930
§ 410-35.9. Permitted sign types by zoning district.
Table 35A, included as an attachment to this chapter, sets forth the sign
types permitted within each zoning district of the City of Seward.
§ 410-35.10. Auxiliary design elements.
Table 35B, included as an attachment to this chapter, sets forth auxiliary
design elements permitted within each zoning district of the City of Seward.
§ 410-35.11. Maximum permitted sign area.
Table 35C, included as an attachment to this chapter, sets forth the
maximum sign area permitted within each zoning district of the City of
Seward.
§ 410-35.12. Permitted signs by numbers, dimensions and location.
Table 35D, included as an attachment to this chapter, sets forth the
maximum permitted number of signs per premises; the maximum permitted
dimensions of each sign; and the required setbacks for detached signs.
§ 410-35.13. Outdoor advertising signs in commercial and
industrial districts.
Within the total amount of sign area permitted to them, some parcels at
specific locations in the C-3, I-1 and I-2 Zoning Districts may elect to devote
a portion of their sign budgets to installation of an outdoor advertising sign,
subject to the conditions contained in this section. This provides a variation
from the maximum size of an individual detached sign set forth in Table
35C.516
A. Location. Eligible properties must be located within an AG, C-2, I-1 or
I-2 District along Nebraska Highway 15 or U.S. Highway 34.
B. Impact on business identification and other signage. Utilization of this
provision does not entitle any parcel to additional permitted sign area,
and the area of the sign counts against the total sign area permitted the
parcel. The outdoor advertising sign shall count as a detached sign for
the purpose of calculating the total number of permitted detached
signs.
C. Maximum size and height.
(1) The size of an outdoor advertising sign shall not exceed 500 square
feet.
(2) The maximum height of such a sign shall be 35 feet.
D. Separation factors.
516. Editor's Note: Table 35C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 410-35.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-35.13
1:931
§ 410-35.14. Sign master plan for large projects.
For projects with an overall site area in excess of six acres, an applicant
may submit a sign master plan, detailing the size, location, and design of all
signs on the site. The sign master plan may adjust the strict application of
these standards, but must clarify the exact nature of the adjustments. Such
a sign master plan shall be approved by the City Council after review and
recommendation by the Planning Commission. This review follows the same
process as review of a PUD District.
(1) Where permitted along Nebraska Highway 15, outdoor advertising
signs in excess of the maximum size permitted by Table 35D517 shall
be separated by 2,000 feet from any other outdoor advertising sign
of any size and 300 feet from any other detached sign.
(2) Any such outdoor advertising sign shall be separated by 200 feet
from any property in a residential zoning district, including RR
through R-4 and RM Districts.
E. Other standards.
(1) New installations of stacked signs or other installations of two
signs facing the same direction on a single structure are
prohibited.
(2) The area around the base of the sign shall be maintained by the
sign owner or property owner in clean condition. A radius of 10 feet
around the base of the sign shall be landscaped in accordance with
the provisions of Article 33.
(3) Nothing in this section shall be taken to abrogate or limit the ability
of a property owner to devote a sign that is fully consistent with the
regulations and dimensions set forth by Tables 35C and 35D518 for
an advertising message. This section only addresses terms under
which a larger than otherwise permitted outdoor advertising sign
may be installed.
517. Editor's Note: Table 35D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
518. Editor's Note: Tables 35C and 35D are included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 410-35.13 SEWARD CODE § 410-35.14
1:932
ARTICLE 36
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-35.14
1:933

Part 8
Subdivision Regulations
ARTICLE 37
Basic Conditions
§ 410-37.1. Purpose.
The purposes of this Part 8 are to:
§ 410-37.2. Jurisdiction and applicability.
§ 410-37.3. Interpretation, conflicts and severability.
A. Serve the public health, safety, and general welfare of the City and
residents of Seward and its surrounding jurisdiction.
B. Provide for the orderly development and growth of the City by
prescribing rules and standards ensuring the functional arrangement of
streets, public improvements, open spaces, community facilities, and
utilities.
C. Promote the creation of well-planned and attractive residential,
commercial, and industrial developments within the City and its
jurisdiction.
D. Avoid excessive costs to the taxpayers of Seward or the residents of the
jurisdiction of the City for the provision of public services and utilities,
while maintaining high standards for these services.
E. Protect the unique environment of the City of Seward by avoiding
environmental damage whenever feasible and appropriate; and by
encouraging flexibility in the design of subdivisions.
F. Provide the City of Seward with the ability to grow incrementally
through the eventual annexation of new developments.
A. The provisions of this Part 8 shall be applicable to all property within
the corporate limits of the City of Seward and its two-mile
extraterritorial jurisdiction.
B. No owner of real property within the City of Seward and its jurisdiction
may subdivide or plat such property into lots for buildings or any other
use, streets, or other forms of dedication for public use without gaining
approval pursuant to this Part 8. In addition, no individual may sell,
offer to sell, or construct buildings on any lots or parts of real property
that are not subdivided as required by state law or this Part 8.
C. The provisions of this Part 8 apply to all zoning districts. However,
specific standards and requirements may be modified for developments
in the TND Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District.
§ 410-37.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-37.3
1:935
A. These regulations shall be held to provide the minimum requirements
necessary for the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare. If
any provision conflicts with any other provision of the Unified Land
Development Ordinance, any other ordinance of the City of Seward, or
any applicable state or federal law, the more restrictive provision shall
apply.
B. Nothing in these provisions shall relieve any property owner or user
from satisfying any condition or requirement associated with a previous
approval, conditional use permit, variance, development permit, or
other permit issued under any local, state, or federal ordinance or
statute.519
519. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-37.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-37.3
1:936
ARTICLE 38
Subdivision Approvals and Procedures
§ 410-38.1. Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for subdivision
applications and for review and action on applications by the Planning
Commission and the City Council. The procedures are designed to assure
adequate review and consideration of subdivision applications, while
providing for an orderly and expeditious approval process. This article
provides procedures for the approval of three types of subdivisions:
administrative subdivisions, minor subdivisions, and major subdivisions.
§ 410-38.2. Administrative subdivisions.
A. Scope. The administrative subdivision procedure may be used to adjust
an interior lot line, to create no more than four lots, or to combine two
or more lots without replatting, provided the following conditions are
met:
(1) In the case of an administrative lot line adjustment:
(a) The lots involved must be designated within the same zoning
district and the proposed adjustment will not create or result in
a violation of the Unified Land Development Ordinance.
(b) The lots involved must be existing platted lots.
(c) The adjustment alters lot lines of no more than four lots.
(2) In the case of an administrative platting or lot consolidation:
(a) The lots involved must be designated within the same zoning
district and the proposed platting or lot consolidation will not
create or result in a violation of the Unified Land Development
Ordinance.
(b) The lots involved must be existing platted lots.
(c) The lots must be under unified ownership.
(d) The proposed platting creates no more than four lots, or the
proposed consolidation consolidates no more than four lots.
(3) A lot is limited to only one instance of an administrative
adjustment, platting and/or consolidation.
(4) The subdivision is served by existing utilities and does not require
the extension of streets, utilities, or public improvements.
(5) Each lot resulting from the subdivision procedure will conform fully
to all requirements of the zoning district that pertain to the lots;
and each lot is developable according to the site development
regulations of the Unified Land Development Ordinance.
§ 410-38.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-38.2
1:937
§ 410-38.3. Minor subdivisions.
B. Application and approval procedure. An application for an
administrative subdivision may be approved under the following
procedure:
(1) The applicant submits an application on a form provided by the City
of Seward and including the supporting documents required for
administrative subdivisions in Table 38A, included as an
attachment to this chapter. These documents shall include a plat of
all lots and parcels that are affected by the action, prepared by a
licensed surveyor. The plat document shall also include existing
public improvements that serve the site; and shall include a
demonstration that required setbacks may be met. A fee as set from
time to time by the City Council, together with filing fees, shall
accompany the application.520
(2) Following submission, the Zoning Administrator and Public Works
Director shall review each application according to the following
criteria:
(a) Compliance with the conditions contained in Subsection A
above.
(b) Consistency with the Comprehensive Development Plan of the
City of Seward.
(c) Potential adverse environmental effects or effects on
neighboring properties.
(3) Following such review, the Zoning Administrator may approve the
administrative subdivision. Such approval shall be denoted by a
signed certificate of approval that must be filed along with the plat
with the Seward County Register of Deeds.
(4) The Zoning Administrator retains the right to disapprove or not act
on the administrative subdivision application. In the event of such
action, the application may proceed through the minor or major
subdivision process. If the subdivision complies with the conditions
of a minor subdivision application, it may be directed to that
approval process. Otherwise, the proposed subdivision shall be
deemed a major subdivision and proceed through the appropriate
review and action process.
(5) Following approval of an administrative subdivision, the Zoning
Administrator shall file the plat and certificate of approval with the
Seward County Register of Deeds.
(6) The City Clerk/Zoning Administrator shall keep a complete and
accurate record of all administrative subdivision approvals.
520. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-38.2 SEWARD CODE § 410-38.3
1:938
A. Scope. The minor subdivision procedure may be used when a proposed
subdivision meets all of the following conditions:
(1) The subdivision adjusts the lot lines of no more than four new lots
without creating additional lots; or creates no more than four lots
from any single parcel, tract or lot.
(2) The subdivision is served by existing utilities and does not require
the extension of streets, utilities or public improvements.
(3) Each lot resulting from the subdivision procedure will conform fully
to all requirements of the zoning district that pertain to the lots;
and each lot is developable according to the site development
regulations of the Unified Land Development Ordinance.
(4) No part of the parcel has been the subject of a previous
administrative or minor subdivision approval.
(5) No lot resulting from the minor subdivision shall be smaller than
60% of the size of the smallest lot on the block containing the
subdivision.
B. Application and approval procedure. An application for a minor
subdivision may be approved under the following procedure:
(1) The applicant submits an application on a form established by the
City and including the supporting documents required for
administrative subdivisions in Table 38A.521 These documents shall
include a plat of all lots and parcels that are affected by the action,
prepared by a licensed surveyor. A fee as set from time to time by
the City Council, together with filing fees, shall accompany each
application.522
(2) Following submission, the Zoning Administrator shall review each
application according to the following criteria:
(a) Compliance with the conditions contained in Subsection A
above.
(b) Consistency with the Comprehensive Development Plan of the
City of Seward.
(c) Potential adverse environmental effects or effects on
neighboring properties.
(d) Effects of the subdivision on public services. In order to
determine this effect, the Zoning Administrator may submit the
application to relevant school districts, utilities, and public
safety agencies as required.
521. Editor's Note: Table 38A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
522. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-38.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-38.3
1:939
§ 410-38.4. Major subdivisions.
(3) Following such review, the Zoning Administrator shall forward the
application, along with his/her recommendation, to the Planning
Commission.
(4) The Planning Commission, following proper notice, shall hold a
public hearing on each minor subdivision and, following such
public hearing, shall take action on the application. If the
subdivision is approved by the Planning Commission, the approval
shall be documented by a certificate of approval, executed by the
Zoning Administrator and the Chairperson of the Planning
Commission. This certificate shall be filed along with the approved
plat with the Seward County Register of Deeds. A record of all
subdivisions and certificates of approval shall also be maintained
by the City Clerk.
(5) The Planning Commission retains the right to disapprove or not act
on the minor subdivision application. In the event of such action,
the application may proceed through the major subdivision
process.
(6) Following approval of a minor subdivision, the Zoning
Administrator shall file the plat and certificate of approval with the
Seward County Register of Deeds.
(7) The City Clerk/Zoning Administrator shall keep a complete and
accurate record of all minor subdivision approvals.
A. Applicability. The major subdivision procedures apply to all subdivisions
which are not approved or eligible for approval under the
administrative or minor subdivision procedures. In general, these
include subdivisions that:
(1) Are not approved under the administrative or minor subdivision
procedure.
(2) Create more than four lots.
(3) Require development or extension of public improvements.
B. Stages in the approval process. The approval process for major
subdivisions consists of three stages: the pre-application stage, the
preliminary plat approval stage, and the final plat approval stage.
C. Pre-application procedures.
(1) Before filing an application for preliminary plat approval, the
applicant shall meet with the Zoning Administrator regarding
general requirements and issues relating to the proposed
subdivision.
§ 410-38.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-38.4
1:940
(2) At the pre-application conference, the applicant shall submit a
concept plan. The concept plan shall include:
(a) A location map showing the relationship of the proposed
subdivision to existing and proposed streets and public
facilities.
(b) A schematic plan illustrating the proposed layout of streets,
lots, and other features and their relationship to existing and
proposed site topography.
(3) Within 15 working days, the Zoning Administrator shall inform the
applicant about the consistency of the concept plan with the
objectives and policies of the City's Comprehensive Plan and
Unified Land Development Ordinance.
(4) The pre-application conference does not require a formal
application or payment of a fee.
D. Preliminary plat application.
(1) Application requirements. After the pre-application conference, the
applicant shall prepare and submit an application for preliminary
plat approval. The applicant shall prepare and file 20 copies of a
proposed preliminary plat. The application for preliminary plat
approval shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator at least 30
calendar days before the Planning Commission meeting at which
the application will be considered. The application shall consist of a
form established by the Zoning Administrator; the supporting
documents required for major subdivisions in Table 38A;523 and
payment of a filing fee and a notification fee as set from time to
time by the City Council. The plat shall not be accepted until the
filing fee has been paid.524
(2) Draft subdivision agreement. The preliminary plat application shall
include a draft of a subdivision agreement prepared by the City
following a format established by the City of Seward. The
subdivision agreement establishes the mutual responsibilities of
City and subdivider, including financing of public improvements;
the nature of performance bonds and guarantees that the
developer will offer; and the financing arrangements proposed for
the subdivision. The City may elect to waive this requirement if it
finds that such a subdivision agreement is unnecessary.
(3) Preliminary plat approval procedure.
(a) After submission of a complete application for a preliminary
plat, the Zoning Administrator shall review the application. As
part of the review, the Zoning Administrator will circulate the
523. Editor's Note: Table 38A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
524. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-38.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-38.4
1:941
application to local utilities, the school district in which the
subdivision is located, public safety agencies, and any other
applicable provider of public services deemed necessary. Each
reviewing agency shall submit written comments to the Zoning
Administrator within a fifteen-day period.
(b) Following the comment period, the Zoning Administrator shall
submit a written recommendation for action to the Planning
Commission.
(c) The Planning Commission, following proper notice, shall hold a
public hearing on each major subdivision and, following such
public hearing, shall take action on the application. The
Planning Commission may recommend approval, conditional
approval, or denial of the preliminary plat to the City Council.
In addition, the Commission may delay action on the
application in order to resolve outstanding issues.
(d) Following action by the Planning Commission, a written
recommendation summarizing the Commission's action shall
be transmitted to the City Council.
(e) The City Council, following proper notice, shall hold a public
hearing on each major subdivision and, following such public
hearing, shall take action on the application.
(f) Approval of a preliminary plat by the City Council shall not
constitute approval of a final plat. The approval shall be
considered an expression of conditional approval to guide the
preparation of a final plat, to be considered subsequently by
approving authorities. The preliminary approval shall confer
upon the applicant the following rights:
[1] The general terms and conditions under which the plat
was approved will not change.
[2] The applicant may submit for approval a final plat for the
whole or a part of the preliminary plat on or before the
expiration date of the preliminary approval. For some
subdivisions, the preliminary and final plats may be
submitted and approved simultaneously.
[3] The preliminary plat approval shall stay in force for an
indefinite period of time from the date of approval by the
City Council. The City Council may, at its discretion,
establish a specific effective period or expiration date for a
preliminary plat.
E. Final plat application process.
(1) Application requirements. The applicant shall prepare and submit
an application for final plat approval. The application for final plat
§ 410-38.4 SEWARD CODE § 410-38.4
1:942
approval shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator at least 21
calendar days before the Planning Commission meeting at which
the application will be considered. The application shall consist of a
form established by the City of Seward; the supporting documents
required for final plat approval of major subdivisions in Table
38A;525 and payment of a filing fee as set from time to time by the
City Council. The final plat shall not be accepted for filing until the
filing fee has been paid.
(2) Final subdivision agreement. The final plat application shall include
the final subdivision agreement to be executed between the City
and the applicant. The terms of this agreement shall be acted upon
along with action on the final plat.
(3) Performance bond. The subdivision agreement shall specify the
amount of the performance bond for public improvements to be
filed prior to receiving final plat approval or, alternately, shall
contain a statement that required improvements have been
satisfactorily completed. The performance bond, if required, must
be presented in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney prior to
final approval of the subdivision.
(4) Final plat approval.
(a) The Zoning Administrator and Planning Commission shall
review the final plat for consistency with the approved
preliminary plat and for compliance with the Unified Land
Development Ordinance and other applicable local, state, or
federal statutes and regulations. If the final plat meets all
conditions of the ordinance and is substantially consistent with
the terms of the preliminary plat approval, the Commission
shall have no recourse but to approve the final plat.
(b) If the Planning Commission finds in its review that the
submitted final plat is inconsistent with the preliminary plat,
does not comply with the conditions of relevant ordinances and
statutes, or requires a waiver of any section of the Unified Land
Development Ordinance, it shall hold a public hearing on the
final plat. Following such public hearing, the Commission shall
transmit its recommendation on the final plat to the City
Council.
(c) The City Council shall take final action on the application. The
City Council is further empowered to grant waivers of a section
of the Unified Land Development Ordinance after a waiver
request has received a recommendation from the Planning
Commission.
F. Filing the final plat.
525. Editor's Note: Table 38A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 410-38.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-38.4
1:943
(1) Following City Council approval of a final plat, the Chairman of the
Planning Commission and the Mayor of the City of Seward shall
sign a certificate of approval, which shall be a part of the
reproducible documents of the subdivision plat required with
submission of the final plat.
(2) The passage of an ordinance by the City Council accepting the plat
shall constitute final approval of the platting of the area shown on
the final plat. The Zoning Administrator shall record the plat in the
office of the Register of Deeds of Seward County and shall file an
executed print on Mylar or similar film in the office of the City
Clerk/Zoning Administrator as satisfactory evidence of such
recording before the City shall recognize the plat as being in force.
(3) The subdivider must file the fully executed plat along with all
applicable covenants and other documentation within 90 days of
the execution of the plat by the Chairman of the Planning
Commission and the Mayor. Filings shall be with the Seward
County Register of Deeds and the State Survey Depository Record.
§ 410-38.4 SEWARD CODE § 410-38.4
1:944
ARTICLE 39
Subdivision Design Criteria and General Standards
§ 410-39.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide flexible design alternatives in
order to assure that subdivisions in the Seward area create functional
and attractive environments, minimize adverse effects, become assets to
the City's urban and natural setting, and adapt to their specific situation.
This article defines specific types of subdivisions that have varying design
characteristics, applicable to various settings within the City of Seward and
jurisdiction. It outlines specific design criteria that should be incorporated
into the concepts of various types of subdivisions.
§ 410-39.2. Site design and constraints.
A. Consideration of plans. The design of developments shall consider all
existing local and regional plans for Seward and its jurisdiction. These
include the Comprehensive Development Plan for the City of Seward.
B. Grading plan required.
(1) A grading plan is required for erosion and sediment control on all
construction sites greater than five acres in size. Prior to grading or
site-disturbing activity, the developer shall apply to the Building
Department for a grading permit. The application for a grading
permit shall include:
(a) A location map showing the location and extent of grading
activity.
(b) A sediment and erosion control plan.
(2) After submission of a complete application for a grading permit, the
Zoning Administrator shall review the application. As part of the
review, the Zoning Administrator shall circulate the petition to any
agency with statutory authority for the management of
drainageways and stormwater management.
(3) A grading permit shall be issued within 10 working days if the
Zoning Administrator has received assurances from applicable
state agencies that the sediment and erosion control plan is
compatible with statute, and further that it is compatible with the
objectives and policies of the City's Comprehensive Development
Plan and Unified Land Development Ordinance. If the submitted
sediment and erosion control plan is deemed inadequate, the
applicant will be given a list of mitigation measures that must be
included to ensure conformance. The Zoning Administrator shall
issue a grading permit to the applicant upon certification that
mitigation measures will be taken as prescribed, consistent with
applicable state and federal regulations regarding soil and
sediment erosion, and environmental water quality.
§ 410-39.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-39.2
1:945
C. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System stormwater permit.
The subdivider shall obtain coverage under the general National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit (Number NER
100000) for stormwater discharge. A copy of the general permit is
available at the office of the Public Works Superintendent. The
subdivider shall apply for authorization to discharge by submitting a
notice of intent (NOI) using Form CSW-NOI. The subdivider shall
comply with the terms and conditions of the general permit. A copy of
the NOI shall be submitted to the Public Works Superintendent along
with the agreement prior to the beginning of any construction
activities. This item shall be considered incidental to the project and
shall not be subject to a separate fee.
D. Preservation of natural features and drainage patterns.
(1) To the maximum extent possible, development shall be located to
preserve natural features of the site, to avoid areas of
environmental sensitivity, and to minimize negative impact and
alteration of natural features and drainage patterns.
(2) The subdivider shall give maximum consideration to the
preservation of the following areas as open space, to the extent
consistent with reasonable utilization of land:
(a) Wetlands and other unique environmental areas, as defined in
Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972
and delineated on wetlands maps prepared by the United
States Fish and Wildlife Service. Construction and fill activity
shall be prohibited on wetlands in excess of one acre in size.
Development and fill upon wetlands smaller than one acre in
size should be avoided whenever possible, but regulated by
permit authority of applicable state and federal agencies.
(b) Significant stands or mature specimens of trees shall be
designated by required tree surveys.
[1] Nonresidential and attached residential. No tree taller
than 20 feet or larger than 12 inches in diameter
(measured six inches above the ground) shall be removed
except when approved by the Zoning Administrator or his/
her designee. Trees removed subject to City approval shall
be replaced as noted in Table 39A. The owner of a site with
natural landscaping that is unhealthful (for example,
spaced too closely) may be permitted to plant replacement
trees in the parkway or elsewhere in the City, if approved
by the Zoning Administrator.
§ 410-39.2 SEWARD CODE § 410-39.2
1:946
Table 39A
Tree Replacement Schedule
Diameter of Removed
Tree
(inches)
Number of Replacement
Trees
12 to 25 4 trees at 2" or 2 trees at 4"
26 or greater 6 trees at 2" or 3 trees at 4"
[2] Single-family residential. Placement of the building must
avoid trees taller than 20 feet or larger than 12 inches in
diameter, measured 54 inches above the ground. Any such
tree removed or damaged shall be replaced by a species
compatible with existing trees, on a one-to-one basis. The
number of replacement trees will be limited by what can
be reasonably accommodated within the available lot area.
(c) Floodplain lands, other than areas that have already
experienced substantial development.
(d) Slopes in excess of 15% as measured over a ten-foot interval.
Development on slopes over 15% may be permitted only if an
erosion and slope stabilization plan is submitted and approved
with the development and if appropriate measures are taken in
compliance with this approved plan. The City may, at its
discretion, require the review and certification of such a plan
by a licensed professional engineer.
(e) Habitats of endangered species. Development shall avoid fill or
disturbance of habitat sites as identified on federal or state
lists administered by the United States Fish and Wildlife
Service of the United States Department of the Interior, and
applicable state environmental regulatory agencies.
Developers are encouraged to preserve habitat areas as a
connected open space consistent with the parks and
greenways system designated in the Seward Comprehensive
Development Plan.
E. General guidelines for subdivision layout. Subdivisions shall be
designed to comply with the following overall performance objectives:
(1) Avoidance of adverse effects on groundwater and aquifer recharge.
(2) Reduction and minimizing of cut and fill.
(3) Avoidance or reduction of unnecessary impervious surfaces.
(4) Prevention of flooding and encroachment of water onto other
properties.
§ 410-39.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-39.2
1:947
(5) Provision of adequate access to lots, including alternative routes to
lots and sites within the subdivision and minimizing of culs-de-sac
over 600 feet.
(6) Mitigation of negative environmental effects on surrounding
properties, including effects of shadow, noise, odor, traffic,
drainage, and utilities.
(7) Respect for the urban character and traditional layout of Seward,
including providing continuity to established street and community
facility networks; establishing linkages and connections between
new development and existing parts of the City; and preserving
historically and architecturally significant sites and buildings,
determined as those sites or districts either listed on or determined
to be eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places,
as determined by the State Historic Preservation Officer.
(8) Dedication of arterial, collector, and key local streets on the
general alignments specified in the Comprehensive Development
Plan.
F. Site design objectives and approval. The Planning Commission and City
Council shall take the above site design objectives into account during
their review and approval of subdivision applications.
§ 410-39.2 SEWARD CODE § 410-39.2
1:948
ARTICLE 40
Circulation System Design
§ 410-40.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to assure the development of functional and
safe circulation patterns within new subdivisions, in order to encourage
economical and effective movement of motor vehicles, bicycles, and
pedestrians; provide access for public safety vehicles; and encourage the
development of circulation systems that enhance the quality of life within
new and existing neighborhoods in the City of Seward and its planning
jurisdiction.
§ 410-40.2. General standards.
The design of circulation systems should conform to the following general
standards and requirements:
A. Roadway system design.
(1) The road system shall be designed to permit safe and orderly
movement of traffic, to meet but not exceed needs of the present
and future served population; to be simple and logical; to respect
natural features, topography, and landscape; and to present an
attractive streetscape.
(2) The system shall conform with the City's Comprehensive
Development Plan. For streets not shown on the Comprehensive
Development Plan, the arrangement of streets shall provide for the
logical extension of existing streets.
(3) The street network of a subdivision should provide for logical,
continuous extensions of streets to subsequent later developments.
Such extensions shall make provision, when necessary, with a
temporary turnaround with a radius of at least 50 feet.
(4) The system shall provide adequate traffic flow through a
subdivision and provide at least two routes from each lot within the
subdivision to the rest of the City, except as explicitly permitted by
the approving authorities. Additionally, the system should be
designed to discourage through traffic from using local streets.
(5) The system should provide good internal street network
connectivity. Internal connectivity shall be measured by a
Connectivity Index, calculated as:
CI = L/N
§ 410-40.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-40.2
1:949
§ 410-40.3. Street hierarchy and design.
Where:
N = The number of nodes (including intersections and culde-
sac heads) in a subdivision.
L = The number of street links defined by those nodes.
A desirable target for street connectivity is an index of over 1.20.
B. Pedestrian and bicycle systems.
(1) A continuous pedestrian system shall be provided within each
nonindustrial subdivision, designed to conduct pedestrians
between every point in the subdivision in a safe manner.
(2) In conventional subdivisions, the pedestrian system will ordinarily
be provided by sidewalks placed parallel to and on both sides of
each street, with exceptions permitted to preserve natural
features, create visual interest, or maintain greenways and
pedestrianways proposed in the Seward Comprehensive
Development Plan.
(3) In innovative developments, the pedestrian system may be an
independent network diverging from streets but providing
continuous pedestrian access between all points.
(4) All aspects of the pedestrian system, including sidewalks and
intersection crossings, must be designed to comply with the
Americans with Disabilities Act.
(5) Bikeways or recreational trails shall be required only if specifically
indicated by the Comprehensive Development Plan. Any land
dedicated for trail development shall be credited toward the
satisfaction of pedestrian system and open space standards set
forth by this chapter.
A. Characteristics of the hierarchy.
(1) Streets shall be classified according to a street hierarchy with
design tailored to function.
(2) The street hierarchy shall be defined by road function and
projected average daily traffic (ADT), as calculated by trip
generation rates prepared by the Institute of Transportation
Engineers or other generally accepted standards.
(3) Each residential street shall be classified and designed to meet
appropriate standards for its entire length.
(4) The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the approving
agencies that the distribution of traffic created by the subdivision
§ 410-40.2 SEWARD CODE § 410-40.3
1:950
will not exceed the design capacity of the proposed street system
and its individual segments.
(5) The categories, functions, and projected traffic loads of the street
hierarchy are set forth in Table 40A.526
B. Cartway width.
(1) Cartway width for each street classification is determined by
parking and curbing requirements based on form or intensity of
adjacent development.
(2) To promote economical development of streets, minimum cartway
width should generally be used. Minimum cartway widths are set
forth in Table 40B.527
C. Curbs, gutters, and shoulders.
(1) Curbing shall be required for the purposes of safety, drainage, and
protection of the pavement edge, as set forth in Table 40C.528
(2) Requirements for curbs vary according to street function and the
nature of adjacent development. Adjacent development is defined
as "urban" or "rural" as follows:
(a) Rural: residential or predominately agricultural land use
where average lot frontage exceeds 150 feet and subdivisions
are not provided with urban services, including municipal
water and/or sanitary sewer. Rural subdivisions are typically
located within an RR District.
(b) Urban: residential land use where average lot frontage is less
than or equal to 150 feet and subdivisions are provided with
municipal water or sanitary sewer service; or adjacent land
uses include commercial, office, industrial, or civic use types.
(3) Where curbing is not required, edge definition and stabilization
shall be provided.
(4) Where curbing is required, shoulders and drainage swales may be
used only if soils or topography make the provision of shoulders
preferable to curbs; or where the character of an area is preserved
by the use of shoulders and drainage swales.
(5) Shoulders, when developed, shall be at least eight feet in width on
each side for all streets; and located within the right-of-way. Swale
width is site-specific. Shoulders shall consist of stabilized turf or
other acceptable material.
526. Editor's Note: Table 40A is included at the end of this article.
527. Editor's Note: Table 40B is included at the end of this article.
528. Editor's Note: Table 40C is included at the end of this article.
§ 410-40.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-40.3
1:951
(6) All curbs shall provide ramps for accessibility by handicapped
people consistent with the requirements of the Americans with
Disabilities Act.
(7) Curb construction shall follow standards established by the City of
Seward.
D. Sidewalks.
(1) Sidewalk requirements are determined by road classification and
intensity of development, as set forth in Table 40C.529
(2) Where sidewalks are not otherwise required by Table 40C, the City
Council may require their installation if necessary to provide
access to generators of pedestrian traffic or major community
features; to continue a walk on an adjacent street; to link parts of
the City; or to accommodate future development.
(3) In conventional development, sidewalks shall be placed generally
parallel to streets within the right-of-way. Exceptions are possible
to preserve important natural features or to accommodate
topography or vegetation; when an applicant shows an alternative
for a safe and convenient pedestrian system; or in conservation or
traditional neighborhood development (TND) subdivisions.
(4) In commercial areas, sidewalks may abut curbs, provided they are
a minimum of five feet wide. In industrial areas, sidewalks are not
mandatory but may be ordered in by the City Council.
(5) Pedestrian rights-of-way at least 15 feet in width may be required
through the center of blocks over 600 feet in length if deemed
necessary by the approving agencies to provide access to schools
or community facilities; or to maintain a continuous pedestrian
network within and between subdivisions and districts of the City
of Seward and its jurisdiction. Such rights-of-way shall be
dedicated to the public in the same manner as streets.
(6) Sidewalks shall provide a clear path of at least four feet in width,
free of any obstructions.
(7) All sidewalks shall be constructed according to current standards
in use by the City of Seward. Sidewalks shall be of concrete
construction four inches thick except at points of vehicular
crossing, where they shall be six inches thick and no less than a
minimum of six sack mix.
(8) All sidewalks, crossings, and other segments of a continuous
pedestrian system must comply with standards of the Americans
with Disabilities Act.
E. Bikeways and recreational trails.
529. Editor's Note: Table 40C is included at the end of this article.
§ 410-40.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-40.3
1:952
(1) Bikeways and recreational trails shall be required in subdivisions
only when specified as part of the Comprehensive Development
Plan.
(2) All off-street recreational trails shall be a minimum of 10 feet in
width for two-way traffic and comply with the Americans with
Disabilities Act. Surfacing of trails shall be acceptable to the City of
Seward. Gradients for bikeways and recreational trails should not
exceed 5%, except for short distances. Minimum dedicated trail
right-of-way shall be 20 feet unless varied by the City Council.
(3) Recreational trails may satisfy part of the requirements of this
chapter for sidewalks or open space.
(4) All residential streets shall utilize bicycle-safe drainage grates at
storm sewer inlets.
F. Alleys. It is the general policy of the City of Seward to discourage the
use of alleys outside of planned unit developments or traditional
neighborhood developments. When permitted in such projects, alleys
shall be paved and shall have a width of not less than 14 feet. Alleys
shall not be used for parking.
G. Right-of-way.
(1) Measurement. The right-of-way of a street shall be measured from
lot line to lot line, and shall be wide enough to contain the cartway,
curbs or shoulder, sidewalks and sidewalk setbacks, other
necessary graded areas, and utilities.
(2) Any right-of-way that continues an existing street shall be no less
than that of the existing street.
(3) The requirements for rights-of-way for functional categories of
roads is set forth in Table 40C.530
(4) Dedications. Dedications of rights-of-way for collector, community,
or arterial streets shall be made consistent with the Comprehensive
Development Plan.
H. Street design standards.
(1) Pavement.
(a) All streets shall be paved to current standards utilized in the
City of Seward except:
[1] Local streets in rural subdivisions. Rural subdivisions may
utilize a gravel or crushed rock surface of sufficient
thickness and with an adequate base to provide a durable
surface. This permission is subject to submission of a
530. Editor's Note: Table 40C is included at the end of this article.
§ 410-40.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-40.3
1:953
petition by the platting owners binding themselves and
all succeeding property owners to agree that all paving
would be completed by a special assessment project if the
subdivision were annexed by the City. Such petition shall
waive any required resolution of necessity, any applicable
limitations of the amount that could be assessed against
subdivision property owners, including intersection costs,
and other costs normally paid by the City in special
assessment projects. When hard-surfaced, local streets in
rural subdivisions may utilize forty-five-inch P.C.C.P.
nonreinforced paving or five-inch hot mix asphaltic paving.
[2] Courts or lanes, which may utilize six-inch concrete,
provided that such courts or lanes remain in private or
private cooperative ownership. The subdivision agreement
and plat should clearly indicate that such streets are
private and are not subject to City maintenance or
acquisition.
(b) Street pavement thickness shall relate to the role of the street
in the hierarchy, subgrade conditions, and pavement type.
(2) Continuity of arterial or collector streets. No subdivision shall
prevent the extension of arterial or collector streets through and
beyond the subdivision. The subdivider may plan and design
collector streets not designated in the Comprehensive
Development Plan, subject to the approval of the City Council.
(3) Culs-de-sac.
(a) Cul-de-sac streets designed to have one end permanently
closed generally should not exceed 600 feet in length and shall
be designed so that vision from entrance to end is not
restricted. A longer length is permissible within conservation
developments or in the case of unconventional developments,
such as golf course subdivisions.
(b) The closed end of a cul-de-sac within a conventional
subdivision shall have a turnaround with a street property line
diameter of at least 100 feet in residential subdivisions. This
diameter may be increased by the Planning Commission if
deemed necessary in the case of a commercial or industrial
subdivision. In very low density settings, the Planning
Commission may allow the use of hammerhead designs or
other nonstandard designs.
(4) Street grades. Maximum permitted street grades are set forth in
Table 40B.531 In typical circumstances, the minimum permitted
street gradient shall be 1.0%. In exceptional circumstances, the
Public Works Superintendent may permit street gradients of less
531. Editor's Note: Table 40B is included at the end of this article.
§ 410-40.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-40.3
1:954
§ 410-40.4. Lighting and wiring.
than 1.0%; however, under no circumstances may the gradient be
less than 0.4%.
(5) Street intersections.
(a) Streets shall intersect as nearly at right angles as possible,
unless limited by topography, existing street alignments, or
other clearly defined constraints.
(b) In most cases, no more than two streets should intersect at a
single intersection. Exceptions may be made within TND or
planned unit developments.
(c) Local streets shall minimize intersections with major arterials.
(d) New intersections along one side of an existing or proposed
street shall, if possible, align with intersections on the other
side of the street. Offsets between adjacent intersections shall
measure at least 150 feet between center lines. The use of Tintersections
is encouraged on local streets within the interior
of a subdivision.
(e) Intersection design standards are set forth in Table 40B.532
(6) Block size. The length, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be suited
to the proposed land use and design of the proposed subdivision.
Blocks within urban subdivisions shall not exceed 600 feet in
length, unless necessitated by exceptional topography or other
demonstrable constraints. Blocks within rural subdivisions shall
not exceed 1,320 feet.
(7) Specific design standards are established by the City of Seward's
Subdivision Design Manual.
(8) Other design standards shall be as set forth in Table 40D.533
A. All electric, telephone, television, cable TV, and other communication
lines shall be provided by underground wiring within easements or
public rights-of-way, except where, in the opinion of the approving
authorities, such location is not feasible. Poles for permitted overhead
lines shall be placed in rear lot line easements; or in other locations
designed to lessen their visual impact.
B. New lots adjacent to existing overhead service may utilize that service;
however, new local service connections shall be underground.
C. Year-round screening of any aboveground utility apparatus is required.
Screening shall be consistent with the landscape and screening
532. Editor's Note: Table 40B is included at the end of this article.
533. Editor's Note: Table 40D is included at the end of this article.
§ 410-40.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-40.4
1:955
§ 410-40.5. Tables. [Amended 12-21-2004 by Ord. No. 40-04]
Table 40A
Street Hierarchy
Residential
Street Type Function
Guideline
Maximum ADT
Lane or court Street providing private access
to no more than 12 housing
units.
120 to 150
Local Provides frontage to lots and
carries traffic with origin or
destination on street itself.
Carries least traffic at lowest
speed. East-west orientation
provides best solar access.
Local residential streets usually
do not interconnect with
adjoining neighborhoods or
subdivisions.
250 to 1,000
Collector Conducts and distributes traffic
between local streets and major
streets in the community.
Carries larger volume of traffic.
Residential collectors
interconnect and provide
through access between
residential neighborhoods.
Collector streets should
preserve one through traffic
lane in each direction, without
encroachment by parking.
Collectors may be included in
the City's surface
transportation program system
for federal aid.
1,000 to 2,500
Frontage road A street that generally runs
parallel to a controlled-access
arterial and provides access to
individual properties along its
length.
1,000 to 2,500
standards set forth in Article 33 of this chapter. [Added 12-21-2004
by Ord. No. 40-04]
§ 410-40.4 SEWARD CODE § 410-40.5
1:956
Table 40A
Street Hierarchy
Residential
Street Type Function
Guideline
Maximum ADT
Minor arterial Provides community-wide
access between residential
neighborhoods and to other
activity centers in Seward,
including downtown and major
commercial facilities. Direct
access may be provided to
other arterial streets. Parking
should generally be prohibited
on other arterials. Other
arterials should be excluded
from residential areas. These
streets are part of the surface
transportation program system
for federal aid.
2,500 to 7,500
Major arterial Inter-regional road in the street
hierarchy. Conveys traffic
between activity centers, often
at high speeds and with limited
access. Should be excluded
from residential areas. These
streets are part of the surface
transportation program system
for federal aid.
7,500+
Table 40B
Cartway Width, Grade, and Intersection Standards
Residential
Street Type
Moving
Lanes
Maximum
Grade
Cartway
Width
(feet)
Minimum
Curb Radius
(feet)
Lane or court
(private)
2 11-foot 10% (5%*) 25 20 (Note 1)
Cul-de-sac 2 11-foot 10% (5%*) 32 25 (Note 1)
Urban local 2 11-foot 10% (5%*) 32 25 (Note 1)
TND or PUD
local
2 10-foot 10% 32 25 (Note 1)
Rural local 2 12-foot 10% 28 25 (Note 1)
Collector 2 12-foot 8% (5%*) 32 35 (Note 1)
§ 410-40.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-40.5
1:957
Table 40B
Cartway Width, Grade, and Intersection Standards
Residential
Street Type
Moving
Lanes
Maximum
Grade
Cartway
Width
(feet)
Minimum
Curb Radius
(feet)
Frontage 2 12-foot 8% (5%*) 30 25 (Note 1)
Arterial (Note 2) 6% (Note 2) (Note 2)
* Maximum street grade within 50 feet of an intersection.
Note 1: Intersections shall be rounded at the curbline, with the street
having the highest radius requirement as shown in Table 40B determining
the minimum standard for all curblines.
Note 2: Arterial street width, grade, and curb radius are determined
by state standards and the designation of individual street or roadway
segments.
Table 40C
Cartway Width, Sidewalk, and Right-of-Way Standards
Street Type
Cartway
Width
(feet)
Curb/
Shoulder
Sidewalk
(Note 2)
Total ROW
(feet)
Private lane or
court
25 Not
required
Required 50
Cul-de-sac 32 Required Required 60 at
approach
100
diameter
Rural local 28 Not
required
Not
required
66
Urban local 32 Curb Both sides 60
TND or PUD 32 Curb Both sides 60
Community
boulevard (divided)
18
18-foot
median
Project
specific
Both sides 85
Community
boulevard
(undivided)
36 Project
specific
Both sides 66
Collector
Rural collector
28 Not
required
Not
required
66
§ 410-40.5 SEWARD CODE § 410-40.5
1:958
Table 40C
Cartway Width, Sidewalk, and Right-of-Way Standards
Street Type
Cartway
Width
(feet)
Curb/
Shoulder
Sidewalk
(Note 2)
Total ROW
(feet)
Urban collector 32 Curb Both sides 60
Frontage 30 Curb 1 side 40
Urban and rural
arterial
36 to 48
(Note 1)
(Note 1) (Note 1) 66 to 80
minimum
* Right-of-way widths for these classes of street may be modified within
traditional neighborhood developments, planned developments, or
conservation subdivisions.
Notes:
Note 1: Arterial street width, grade, and curb radius are determined
by state standards and the designation of individual street or roadway
segments.
Note 2: The edge of the sidewalk closest to the street is normally located
eight feet in from the curbline. Sidewalks may meander and diverge from
this distance but should at no point be located closer than four feet to the
inside of the curb or edge of pavement.
Note 3: Required sidewalks in Industrial Zoning Districts are not
mandatory but the City Council may order in sidewalks in any zoning
district.
Table 40D
Street Design Requirements
Street Type
Minimum
Radius of
Horizontal
Curves
(feet)
Minimum
Sight
Distance
on Vertical
Curves
(feet)
Maximum
Slope
PCC
Pavement
Thickness
(inches)
Lane or court 150 150 10% 6
Local
Urban 200 150 10% 6 with
reinforcing
wire; 7
without wire
Rural 200 150 10% 6 or gravel
§ 410-40.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-40.5
1:959
Table 40D
Street Design Requirements
Street Type
Minimum
Radius of
Horizontal
Curves
(feet)
Minimum
Sight
Distance
on Vertical
Curves
(feet)
Maximum
Slope
PCC
Pavement
Thickness
(inches)
TND/PUD 150 150 10% 6 with
reinforcing
wire; 7
without wire
Collector 300 250 8% 7 without
wire
Frontage 300 250 8% 7 minimum
or
determined
by road
design
Arterial 400 350 8% 8 by road
design
§ 410-40.5 SEWARD CODE § 410-40.5
1:960
ARTICLE 41
Public Improvements and Infrastructure
§ 410-41.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to assure that all subdivisions developed in the
City of Seward and its jurisdiction are adequately furnished with necessary
public services. These services include adequate water, wastewater
management, and stormwater drainage utilities; and park and open space
resources.
§ 410-41.2. Water.534
A. Connection.
(1) All installations shall be properly connected to an approved and
functioning community water system, constructed in conformance
with the applicable design standards of the City.
(2) All residential subdivisions inside of the corporate limits of Seward
shall be connected to an existing public water supply system if such
a system is available within 300 feet of the subdivision.
(3) Developments with more than 15 units and located within 0.5 mile
of an existing public water system must provide adequate
justification as to why they are unable to connect to such a system.
For developments with more than 15 units and located more than
0.5 mile from a public water supply, the water supply strategy shall
be considered by the approving authorities on a case-by-case basis.
(4) In a preexisting subdivision that is served by well and/or septic
systems that would otherwise require connection under the
provisions of this section, the Board of Adjustment may grant
permission to build on previously undeveloped lots of record,
subject to compliance with Title 124 of the Nebraska
Administrative Code, satisfactory percolation tests reviewed by the
Public Works Superintendent, and other applicable requirements.
(5) All proposals for new water supplies, extensions, or main
installation shall be approved by the City of Seward.
B. Capacity.
(1) The water supply system shall be adequate to handle the necessary
flow, based on complete development of the subdivision.
(2) The demand rates for all uses, including emergency fire demand,
shall be included in the computation of total water demand.
(3) Fire protection shall be furnished for any development connected
to the municipal water system. Computation of minimum fire flows
534. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 390, Water.
§ 410-41.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-41.2
1:961
shall be based on calculations of the American Insurance
Association.535
(4) Hydrants shall be spaced for necessary fire flow and provided with
adequate means of drainage as approved by the Public Works
Superintendent and Fire Chief. All mains serving hydrants shall be
at least eight inches in diameter, should be looping mains, and
should have appropriate state approvals. All fire hydrant leads shall
be a minimum of six inches in diameter.
(5) Installation of water systems shall conform to current design
standards in use within the City of Seward, as set forth by the
Subdivision Design Manual.
(6) A certification from a registered professional engineer shall be filed
with the City of Seward certifying that the water supply system of
the subdivision is designed and constructed in accordance with the
requirements of this section; and all applicable standards of the
State of Nebraska. This certification shall be affixed to an accurate
set of "as-built" system plans. The subdivision's engineer shall
furnish five sets of as-built drawings and one electronic file
compatible with the current version of AutoCAD®.
(7) All state requirements shall be met and approvals from the
Department of Health and Human Services Regulations and
Licensure Division shall be obtained for all water systems.
C. Private or community well systems. If the development does not meet
the required criteria for connection to a public water system or for
reasons of topography, economic feasibility, or other special condition
proposes water service by a community and/or private well, the
developer shall request a variance according to the following
provisions:
(1) The developer shall submit with the preliminary plat application an
economic feasibility study report and an environmental impact
study report, prepared by a professional engineer, which document
the cost of providing City water service to the subdivision versus
the cost of the proposed well system.
(2) If a well system is approved by the City with the preliminary plat
approval, the system shall be designed and built in accordance with
regulations of the Public Works Superintendent and the Nebraska
Department of Health and Human Services Regulations and
Licensure Division. Both agencies shall approve its construction
before the City issues certificates of occupancy for any buildings in
the subdivision.
(3) If a public water supply system is proposed to be provided to an
area within a ten-year period from the time of platting, as indicated
535. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-41.2 SEWARD CODE § 410-41.2
1:962
§ 410-41.3. Sanitary sewers.536
in an officially adopted document of the City or other authorized
agency, the City may require installation of a capped system or dry
lines. Alternately, the City may require a payment in lieu of the
improvement, to be credited toward the extension and connection
of the subdivision to a future public water supply.
(4) City approval to install a community and/or private well system
shall be allowed, subject to the following additional provisions:
(a) The system, including all distribution lines, hydrants, valves,
and appurtenances, shall conform to current design standards
in use within the City of Seward and shall remain the property
of the developer and/or homeowners' association.
(b) The developer and all successive lot owners shall agree to
connect to the City water system if installed to the subdivision.
Such connection shall not be required for 10 years after the
date of construction of the initial well system.
(c) With connection to the City water system, all existing lot
owners shall be required to disconnect from and abandon the
preexisting well system in conformance with all local and state
standards and shall share equally in the cost of such
disconnection. Disconnection and abandonment shall be
completed within six months after connection to the City water
system.
A. Connection.
(1) All installations shall be properly connected to an approved and
functioning sanitary sewer system prior to issuance of a certificate
of occupancy.
(2) All residential subdivisions inside of the corporate limits of Seward
shall be connected to an existing public sanitary sewer system if
such a system is available within 300 feet of the subdivision.
(a) Developments with more than 15 units and located within 0.5
mile of an existing public sanitary sewer system must provide
adequate justification as to why they are unable to connect to
such a system. For developments with more than 15 units and
located more than 0.5 mile from a public sanitary sewer
system, the waste disposal strategy shall be considered by the
approving authorities on a case-by-case basis.
(b) In a preexisting subdivision that is served by well and/or septic
systems that would otherwise require connection under the
provisions of this section, the Board of Adjustment may grant
536. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 325, Sewers.
§ 410-41.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-41.3
1:963
permission to build on previously undeveloped lots of record,
subject to compliance with Title 124 of the Nebraska
Administrative Code, satisfactory percolation tests reviewed
by the Public Works Superintendent, and other applicable
requirements.
(3) If the City creates a benefit fund for the purpose of financing public
extensions of sanitary interceptor sewers to newly developing
areas, each subdivision to be benefited by such extensions shall
contribute to such a fund. Subdivisions within the City limits of
Seward at the time of platting, or subdivisions currently served by
existing sanitary sewer service, shall be exempt from this
requirement. Contributions to the fund shall be computed on the
basis of proportionate costs and benefits of necessary extensions.
Assessments shall be made on a per-lot basis for single-family
development; a per-unit basis for multifamily residential
development; and a site-area basis for nonresidential development.
(4) All proposals for new public sanitary sewer systems or extensions
of existing systems shall be approved by appropriate public
agencies.
(5) All state requirements shall be met and approvals from the
Department of Environmental Quality or other appropriate state
agencies shall be obtained for all wastewater disposal systems.
B. Capacity.
(1) The sanitary sewer system shall be adequate to handle the
necessary flow, based on complete development of the subdivision,
including peak flows.
(2) Installation of sanitary sewer systems shall conform to current
design standards in use within the City of Seward as set forth by
the Subdivision Design Manual.
(3) A certification from a registered professional engineer shall be filed
with the City of Seward certifying that the sanitary sewer system of
the subdivision is designed and constructed in accordance with the
requirements of this section; and all applicable standards of the
State of Nebraska. This certification shall be affixed to an accurate
set of "as-built" system plans. The subdivision's engineer shall
furnish five sets of as-built drawings and one electronic file
compatible with the current version of AutoCAD®.
C. Private wastewater disposal systems. If the development does not meet
the required criteria for connection to a public sanitary sewer system
and gravity sewer service connections, or if, for reasons of topography,
economic feasibility, or other special conditions, the developer proposes
service by a private wastewater disposal system, the developer shall
request a variance according the following provisions:
§ 410-41.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-41.3
1:964
(1) Subsurface or septic systems are not permissible on any lot created
after the effective date of this chapter if the gross density of the
subdivision is higher than one unit per 70,000 square feet; if
individual lots are smaller than one acre; or in any urban
subdivision.
(2) The developer shall submit with the preliminary plat application an
economic feasibility study report and an environmental impact
study report, prepared by a professional engineer, which document
the cost of providing City sewer service to the subdivision versus
the cost of the proposed private disposal system.
(3) The preliminary and final plat shall indicate the envelope for home
sites on each lot. Percolation tests must be done on areas outside
the envelopes of home sites. The preliminary plat application shall
also show the location of wells and septic fields for each lot and/or
for the subdivision as a whole, and shall submit percolation tests
for each lot, taken at the proposed adsorption field sites to
determine the size of the field required for each lot.
(4) The City shall consider all these submittals in determining whether
to permit installation of private wastewater disposal systems for
the subdivision.
(5) If a private wastewater disposal system is approved by the City
with the preliminary plat approval, the system shall be designed
and built in accordance with regulations of the Nebraska
Department of Environmental Quality and the City of Seward's
Subdivision Design Manual. The developer's professional engineer
shall furnish the City with five certified copies of as-built plans and
one electronic copy compatible with AutoCAD® showing service
line locations and final sewer and maintenance access locations,
lengths, elevations, and grades.
(6) If a sanitary sewer system is to be provided to an area within a tenyear
period, as indicated in an officially adopted document of the
City, the county, or other authorized agency, the City may require
installation of a capped system or dry lines. Alternately, the City
may require a payment in lieu of the improvement, to be credited
toward the extension to the subdivision of a future sanitary sewer
system.537
(7) City approval to install a community and/or private wastewater
disposal system shall be allowed, subject to the following additional
provisions:
(a) The system, including all sewer mains and appurtenances,
shall conform to current design standards in use within the
537. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-41.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-41.3
1:965
§ 410-41.4. Stormwater management.
City of Seward and shall remain the property of the developer
and/or homeowners' Association.
(b) The developer and all successive lot owners shall agree to
connect to the City sanitary sewer system if installed to the
corner of their lot. Such connection shall not be required for 10
years after the date of construction of the initial wastewater
system.
(c) With connection to the City sanitary sewer system, all existing
lot owners shall be required to disconnect from and abandon
the preexisting well system in conformance with all local and
state standards and shall share equally in the cost of such
disconnection. Disconnection and abandonment shall be
completed within six months after connection to the City sewer
system.
A. Design.
(1) All subdivisions shall have a stormwater management system that
is adequate to prevent the undue or unplanned retention of
stormwater on the site. Undue retention does not include:
(a) Retention through planned facilities.
(b) Retention not substantially different from preexisting
conditions.
(2) The design of the stormwater management system shall be
consistent with general and specific concerns and standards of the
Comprehensive Development Plan and the drainage control
programs of applicable public agencies. Design shall be based on
environmentally sound site planning and engineering techniques
and the City of Seward Stormwater Design Standards.
(3) To the maximum degree possible, drainage from subdivisions shall
conform to natural contours of land and not disturb preexisting
drainageways.
(4) Adjacent properties shall not be unduly burdened with surface
water from the subdivision. Specifically:
(a) There may be no unreasonable impediment of water from
higher adjacent properties across the subdivision, causing
damage to lower properties.
(b) No action shall unreasonably collect and channel stormwater
onto lower properties. The volume or rate of post-development
runoff shall not exceed the amount of pre-development runoff,
and is to be managed in a manner consistent with Nebraska
statutes and existing case law regarding such flows.
§ 410-41.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-41.4
1:966
§ 410-41.5. Parks and public facilities.
(5) Design shall use the best available technology to minimize off-site
runoff, encourage natural filtration, simulate natural drainage, and
minimize discharge of pollutants. Best available technology may
include retention basins, swales, porous paving, and terracing.
(6) No surface water may be channeled into a sanitary sewer system.
(7) Where possible, a subdivision's drainage system shall coordinate
with that of surrounding properties or streets.
(8) All stormwater design shall be reviewed and approved by the
Public Works Superintendent. The preliminary plat submission
must include preliminary drainage computations and
demonstrations that the proposed stormwater management system
meets the requirements of this section. A certification from a
registered professional engineer shall be filed with the City of
Seward certifying that the stormwater management system of the
subdivision is designed and constructed in accordance with the
requirements of this section; and all applicable standards of the
State of Nebraska. This certification shall be affixed to an accurate
set of "as-built" system plans.
B. Erosion control. With the submission of the preliminary plat, the
subdivider shall submit an erosion control plan, prepared and certified
by a licensed professional engineer, for any land-disturbing activity. All
grading activities must be carried out consistent with this approved
erosion control plan.
C. Seeding. The area of the plat, with the exception of street rights-of-way,
on which existing vegetation has been destroyed as a result of grading
shall be seeded with a seeding formula as approved by the City during
the first growing season immediately following the completion of
grading operations.
A. Purpose. In order to serve the educational and recreational needs of
new residents within the subdivision and promote the public health,
welfare, community character and property values, residential
subdividers are required to donate resources to make improvements to
the City of Seward's parks system as a condition of subdivision
approval.
B. Park reservations.
(1) General requirements.
(a) The amount of park facilities for new residents is partly based
on data and policy in the adopted City of Seward
Comprehensive Plan. The plans reflect a local adaptation of
standards of the National Recreation and Park Association
(NRPA). The Comprehensive Plan is the result of a system-wide
§ 410-41.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-41.5
1:967
technical analysis and citizen participatory planning process,
which identified near-term and long-range needs for the local
parks system.
(b) Given these findings, the City of Seward has determined the
following:
[1] Neighborhood park dedication. The City of Seward's
standard for neighborhood park service is two acres per
1,000 people. Consistent with this standard and the
Comprehensive Development Plan, a subdivision shall
dedicate for a neighborhood park up to 0.006 acre per
single-family detached dwelling unit and 0.004 acre per
unit for other types of housing. Alternately, the subdivider
shall pay a fee equivalent to the cost of 0.006 acre per
single-family detached dwelling unit and 0.004 acre per
unit for other types of housing, to be used specifically by
the City for the acquisition and development of park and
recreational facilities which directly benefit the
subdivision.
[2] Location. Land donated for new parks shall be located
based generally on the City's Comprehensive Development
Plan and Official Map and shall specifically consider the
design of each development and natural features present.
The amount of land required shall not include wetlands,
floodways, floodplains or stormwater detention facilities.
(2) Park donation substitutes. If parkland would be more appropriately
located off-site, the City Council may agree to accept cash in lieu of
land from a residential subdivider. The amount of land required
from a residential subdivider may be reduced depending on the
amount of the improved land, up to two acres established as a
private park by the subdivider, provided that such land is
determined to be of equivalent value and available by right to all
residents of the development. The subdivider shall present
evidence, through physical design and legal documentation, that
the private facility shall be equally available to all residents of the
development.
(3) Criteria for requiring a contribution of cash in lieu of park and
recreation land.
(a) General requirements. Where the subdivision is small and the
resulting site is too small to be practical or when the available
land is inappropriate for parks and recreation land use, or
when land for a park and recreation use cannot be made
contiguous to land dedication for a school site, the City Council
shall determine whether the subdivider shall be required to
pay a cash contribution in lieu of the required land donation.
§ 410-41.5 SEWARD CODE § 410-41.5
1:968
(b) Park accounting trust and use of fees. The cash contributions
in lieu of land for parks and recreation use shall be held in trust
by the City of Seward for expenditure by the City as
determined by the City Council. Such cash contributions shall
be used solely for the acquisition of land for parks and
recreation that will be available to serve the immediate or
future needs of the residents of the subdivision or
development, or for the improvement of recreation facilities
and other parks already existing which will benefit the
subdivision.
C. Topography and grading. The slope, topography and geology of the
dedicated site and its surroundings must be suitable for its intended
purposes. A subdivider shall allow the City to have access to the
proposed sites for the purpose of conducting soil boring tests.
D. Timing and conveyance. Unless otherwise determined through a
subdivision agreement, a subdivider shall convey to the City (or such
other governmental body, corporation or such owner as determined by
the City) the land required under this section at the time of final
approval by the City Council of the subdivision or resubdivision plat or
final development plan, by the delivery of the following documents:
(1) A good and sufficient trustee's or warranty deed conveying fee
simple title free and clear of all liens and encumbrances (except
liens or encumbrances dischargeable by cash accompanying said
deed), except for current real estate taxes.
(2) A deposit of money equal to 100% of the most ascertainable taxes
for the year, pro-rated to the date that the deed is delivered.
(3) A plat of survey containing thereon the legal description of the
property to be conveyed and any other matters which may be
required by the City Administrator, as advised by the Zoning
Administrator, City Attorney, and the consulting Public Works
Superintendent.
E. Timing of payment. Cash contributions required under this section shall
be paid as follows:
(1) Fees paid prior to final plat.
(a) Unless otherwise provided by the terms of a developer
agreement entered into between the City and the subdivider,
all fees required pursuant to this section, including fees arising
from the development of land located in the City's two-mile
planning jurisdiction that may be subject to an
intergovernmental agreement, shall be due and owing prior to
the final plat approval by the City Council.
§ 410-41.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-41.5
1:969
§ 410-41.6. Easements.
(b) However, if the subdivider's lands are the subject of an
annexation agreement, payment shall be made at the times and
in the manner provided in said annexation agreement.
(2) Procedures for fee collection and administration. It shall be the
duty of the City Clerk, or other official designated by the City
Council, to establish regulations and procedures for the collection
and administration of the cash contributions required under this
section.
F. Development agreements.
(1) Development agreements may establish time and manner of
compliance. The City may enter into a development agreement with
any subdivider that sets forth the time and manner of compliance
with the terms of this section and implementation of any other
provisions of these regulations. Such development agreements may
be included as part of the subdivision agreement required for
subdivisions subject to the provisions of § 410-42.4.
(2) Prior development agreements.
(a) If any development agreement has previously been entered
into between the City and a subdivider, and that agreement
remains in full force and effect, the provisions of that
agreement shall control, and this section shall have no force
and effect, provided that the subdivider complies with the
terms of such agreement. However, if such subdivider is not
complying with the terms of that agreement, then the
provisions of this section shall apply and the City shall utilize
the criteria set forth herein to determine the appropriate
exaction amount, less credits, if any.
(b) Further, if the development contemplated by a subdivider has
either increased in number of units or has otherwise increased
the demand for park and recreation facilities, then the
developer agreement previously entered into between the
subdivider and the City shall be amended and the subdivider
shall provide additional land, or a pro-rata fee, based on the
provisions of this section, less credits, if any.
A. Utility easements.
(1) Urban subdivisions. Easements for utilities shall be provided for in
the subdivision dedication allowing for the construction,
maintenance, repair, and replacement of utilities. Such easements
shall be at least 15 feet in width, centered on the lot lines, and 10
feet in width along the rear property line where not adjacent to
additional lots, and shall be provided along:
§ 410-41.5 SEWARD CODE § 410-41.6
1:970
(a) All rear property lines.
(b) Side property lines where necessary to provide a continuous
easement. Easement requirements may be waived with proof
that such easements are not required by utility service
providers.
(2) Easements of greater width may be required along lot lines or
across lots. Easements of lesser width may be approved if accepted
by utility providers. Easements shall connect with easements on
adjoining properties.
(3) Easements shall be approved in writing by any appropriate public
or private utility provider intending to use such easement for their
facilities. Such approval shall be submitted prior to final plat
approval.
(4) Rural subdivisions. Easements for utilities shall be placed within
street rights-of-way, without requirements for additional utility
easements.
B. Drainage easements. Where a subdivision is crossed by a watercourse,
drainageway, channel, or stream, a stormwater easement or drainage
right-of-way shall be provided. It shall correspond generally with the
extent of such watercourse, together with any additional construction
or expansion necessary to allow it to conduct stormwater adequately.
Easements shall extend not less than 20 feet on each side from the
center line of the waterway. The total width of any easement shall be
sufficient to cover the one-hundred-year floodplain calculated for a fully
developed upstream drainage basin. Parallel streets or parkways may
be utilized to preserve such drainageways.
C. Setback requirements for structures adjacent to creeks and
drainageways.
(1) In addition to other applicable provisions of City ordinances, no
persons shall be granted a permit for the construction of any
structure, exclusive of fences, bank stabilization structures, poles
signs, and non-related parking areas adjacent to any creek or
stream unless such structure is located so that no portion whereof
is any closer to the stream than will allow a maximum 3:1 slope
between the water's edge (during normal flow conditions) of the
stream and the closest point of the structure at-grade.
(2) An exemption from the provisions of Subsection C(1) above may be
granted if all of the following conditions are met and required
certification is filed with the City of Seward:
(a) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect
that adequate bank stabilization structures or slope protection
will be installed in the construction of said structure, having an
estimated useful life equal to that of the structure, which will
§ 410-41.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-41.6
1:971
§ 410-41.7. Dedications.
Before final plat approval is granted to the subdivision, dedications to public
use of all streets, alleys, other public rights-of-way, or other parks and
public lands shall be completed as required by this chapter.
provide adequate lateral support so that no portion of the
structure adjacent to the stream will be endangered by erosion
or lack of lateral support.
(b) Certification shall be affixed to an accurate set of "as-built"
construction plans for the structure, as well as "as-built" plans
of depicting any bank stabilization or slope protection
measures or structures.
(c) In the event that the structure is adjacent to any stream that
has been channelized or otherwise improved by any agency of
government, then such certification providing this exemption
must take the form of a certification as to the adequacy and
protection of the improvements installed by such governmental
unit.
D. Other easements. The subdivision shall provide easements for other
public utilities that cross through it, in a form acceptable to the City or
appropriate public agency.
§ 410-41.6 SEWARD CODE § 410-41.7
1:972
ARTICLE 42
Improvement Financing and Guarantees
§ 410-42.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to ensure the equitable financing and proper
installation and maintenance of required streets, utilities, and other
improvements. The guarantee shall be structured to provide adequate
assurances to the City while not adding unnecessary costs to the developer.
§ 410-42.2. Applicability.
This article applies to subdivisions that require the installation of streets,
utilities, or other public improvements by the City or developer.
§ 410-42.3. Responsibility of subdivider.
The subdivider shall be responsible for the installation and/or construction
of all improvements required by this chapter and shall warrant the design,
materials, workmanship, construction, and performance of such
improvements for two years after the date of completion.
§ 410-42.4. Subdivision agreement.
A. Condition for approval of plat. As a condition for final approval, each
subdivision plat must include a subdivision agreement entered into
between the City of Seward and the subdivider. Additionally, no
contract for the construction of public improvements involving a
subdivision within the extraterritorial jurisdiction but outside the
corporate limits of Seward shall be awarded without the approval of
such an agreement.
B. Components of the agreement. The agreement shall include provisions
for the financing and distribution of responsibilities among the City and
the subdivider for land acquisition, design, and installation of public
improvements. The agreement shall also state specifically how public
services will be provided in the subdivision prior to annexation by the
City.
C. Rules for distributing improvement costs. Generally, the following rules
shall be followed in distributing costs for public improvements:
(1) Public costs. Allowable public costs will be those items that have
demonstrable benefit to the general public. These items may
include:
(a) Pavement width in excess of 28 feet for streets designated as
collector or arterial streets in the Seward Comprehensive
Development Plan or any subsequent amendment thereof. On
collector and arterial streets requiring a higher standard of
paving than normal, the additional cost shall be borne by the
City or other public agency.
§ 410-42.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-42.4
1:973
(b) The incremental cost of water mains over eight inches.
(c) Oversized storm sewers or drainage structures required to
serve other areas in the watershed. Such expenses may also be
assessed on an area basis to properties served by the
improvement.
(d) Sanitary outfall sewers or water lines outside of the limits of a
subdivision that serve areas larger than that of the subdivision,
provided that such extension is consistent with the sequencing
of development specified in the Comprehensive Development
Plan.
(e) The additional costs of sanitary sewers over eight inches in
diameter, when such sewers are required by the City.
(f) Park and recreation facilities consistent with the
Comprehensive Development Plan.
(g) Those costs required to be paid by the City for extension of
water and sewer lines, pursuant to the Seward Municipal
Code.
(2) Private costs. Allowable special assessment costs will be those
items that have direct benefit primarily to adjacent properties.
These items may include:
(a) The entire cost of grading street rights-of-way, including
intersections.
(b) All sanitary sewer lines serving the subdivision up to eight
inches and water lines serving the subdivision up to eight
inches.
(c) All paving and street construction, including curbs and gutters,
up to a cartway width of 28 feet.
(d) A stormwater management system adequate to provide for the
collection, retention, and removal of surface runoff, extending
to the boundaries of the subdivision.
(e) Sidewalks as required by this chapter. Construction of
sidewalks may be delayed until after completion of site grading
and construction, but must be completed prior to occupancy of
the structure.
(f) The private share of trails or bicycle paths included in the
City's system, as identified by the Comprehensive Development
Plan; or trails or bicycle paths whose primary benefit is to
residents of the subdivision.
(g) The contract charge for underground electrical and gas
service.
§ 410-42.4 SEWARD CODE § 410-42.4
1:974
§ 410-42.5. Subdivisions contiguous with City.
Unless otherwise provided as a specific part of the subdivision approval by
the City, all subdivisions now or hereafter laid out adjoining or contiguous
to the corporate limits of the City shall be included within such corporate
limits and become a part of the City of Seward. The residents of the
subdivision shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges and subject to
all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the City of Seward.
§ 410-42.6. Performance guarantees.
(h) An iron rod not less than 5/8 inch in diameter and 24 inches in
length as follows:
[1] Set three feet deep at the intersection of all lines forming
angles in the boundary of the subdivision and at all street
intersections.
[2] At lot corners and changes in direction of block and lot
boundaries.
(i) Those costs required to be paid by the developer for extension
of water and sewer lines, pursuant to the Seward Municipal
Code.
(3) The subdivider, in lieu of installing and constructing said
improvements at his/her expense, may, along with all owners of
property to be affected by such improvements and all perfected lien
holders, petition the Council to cause the construction of such
improvements. This petition shall waive any required resolution of
necessity, any applicable limitations of the amount, which could be
assessed against subdivision property owners, including
intersection costs, and other costs normally paid by the City in
special assessment projects.
A. As a condition of the final approval of the plat and prior to its recording
with the Seward County Register of Deeds, the City Council shall
require and accept the following:
(1) The furnishing of a performance bond, letter of credit, cash escrow,
or other guarantee in a form acceptable to the City, in an amount
not to exceed 100% of the estimated cost of the improvement
installation.
(2) A specification of the time allowed for the installation of
improvements. This period may be extended by the City Council.
B. The performance guarantee amount and requirement, along with the
permitted time for installation, shall be included within the subdivision
agreement negotiated between the City and the developer and
approved with the final plat.
§ 410-42.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-42.7
1:975
§ 410-42.7. Notification of completion and acceptance by City.
A. Notification. Upon substantial completion of all required improvements,
the developer shall notify the Public Works Superintendent in writing,
as well as submit a certification from a registered professional
engineer, attesting to the adequacy of the installation.
B. Inspection and acceptance.
(1) The Public Works Superintendent shall inspect all installations, and
shall approve, partially approve, or disapprove the installation.
Upon completion of improvements, he/she shall file a statement
with the City Council and Zoning Administrator certifying that the
improvements have been completed satisfactorily or listing the
defects in the improvements.
(2) If the installation is approved, the Public Works Superintendent
shall notify the developer of acceptance in writing. Such
acceptance shall release the developer from liability pursuant to
the performance guarantee for the installation. The City has the
right to retain up to 10% of the value of the performance guarantee
for a period of up to one year from the date of acceptance to
remedy any deficiencies which appear during that period.
(3) If improvements are not accepted or not completed within the
specified time, the performance guarantee shall be forfeited and
used by the City to complete satisfactory installation of
improvements.
(4) No residential occupancy permits shall be issued for a subdivision
unless the installation of improvements has been inspected and
approved in full by the Public Works Superintendent.
§ 410-42.7 SEWARD CODE § 410-42.7
1:976
Part 9
Nonconforming Development
ARTICLE 43
Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses
§ 410-43.1. Purpose.
The purposes of this article are:
§ 410-43.2. Applicability to uses and structures.
Regulations for nonconforming uses are in addition to regulations for
nonconforming structures. In the event of a conflict, the most restrictive
regulation shall apply.
§ 410-43.3. Nonconforming lots.
§ 410-43.4. Nonconforming structures.538
These regulations apply to buildings and structures that were constructed
legally under regulations in effect before the effective date of these
regulations or any amendments thereto making a structure nonconforming.
A. To allow for reasonable use of legally created lots of record that do not
meet current minimum requirements for their respective zoning
districts.
B. To provide for reasonable use of legally constructed structures that do
not meet current site development regulations for their respective
zoning districts.
C. To allow for the reasonable continuation of legally established uses that
do not meet current use regulations for their respective zoning
districts.
D. To limit the continuation and provide for the gradual replacement of
nonconforming uses.
A. Preexisting lots of record. Nonconforming lots of record existing at the
time of the adoption of this chapter shall be exempt, unless otherwise
provided, from the minimum lot area and lot width requirements of
each zoning district. Such lots may be developed with any use allowed
by the regulations for the district and must comply with all other site
development regulations set forth by the zoning regulations.
B. Reductions due to public acquisition. If a portion of a legally existing lot
in any district is acquired for public use, the remainder of this lot shall
be considered a conforming lot.
538. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-43.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-43.4
1:977
A. Continuation. A lawful nonconforming structure existing on the
effective date of this section may be continued, repaired, maintained, or
altered, subject to the provisions of this section.
B. Additions or enlargements to nonconforming structures.
(1) A lawful nonconforming structure may be added to or enlarged if
the addition satisfies one or more of the following conditions:
(a) The enlargement or addition, when considered independently
of the existing building, complies with all applicable setback,
height, off-street parking, and landscaping requirements.
(b) The nonconforming building and impervious surface coverages
on the site are not increased and the building, after the
addition, conforms to height and off-street parking regulations
applicable to its zoning district.
(c) The addition projects no further into a required side yard
setback than the existing building; the length of the side wall of
the addition is the smaller of 25 feet or 50% of the length of the
existing nonconforming side wall; and the enlarged building
complies with building and impervious coverage, front and
rear yard setbacks, and height regulations applicable to its
zoning district.
(2) No permitted addition to a nonconforming structure may place a
wall within 10 feet of a window of an adjacent preexisting
residential structure.
(3) Nonconforming buildings shall be limited to one addition or
enlargement pursuant to these regulations.
C. Moving of nonconforming structures. A lawful nonconforming building
or structure shall not be moved in whole or in part to another location
on its lot unless every part of the structure conforms to all site
development regulations applicable to its zoning district.
D. Repair of nonconforming structures. A lawful nonconforming building
damaged by fire, explosion, storm or other calamity, except flood
damages, may be repaired and reconstructed, provided there is no
increase in the degree of nonconformity.
E. Conversion of a conforming building. A conforming building shall not be
changed in any way that will result in a nonconforming development.
F. Applicability of landscaping and screening regulations. A preexisting
structure, building, or development shall be exempt from Article 33,
Landscaping and Screening Standards. However, any expansion of such
structure, building, or development or any adjacent new development
onto property that is or becomes vacant on or after the effective date of
these regulations shall be subject to Article 33.
§ 410-43.4 SEWARD CODE § 410-43.5
1:978
§ 410-43.5. Nonconforming uses.
A. Continuation of nonconforming uses.
(1) Any nonconforming use lawfully existing on the effective date of
these regulations may continue, subject to the limitations of this
section.
(2) Whenever the use of a premises becomes nonconforming through a
subsequent change in the Unified Land Development Ordinance or
zoning district boundaries, such use may be continued or changed
to another nonconforming use of the same or lesser intensity if
approved by the City Council at a public hearing following a public
hearing by the Planning Commission, including its
recommendation to the City Council.
B. Change of nonconforming uses. A nonconforming use may be changed
to another nonconforming use of the same or lesser intensity, as
measured by the impact rating in the Use Matrix,539 provided an
application for such change is first approved by the City Council after
public hearing and recommendation of the Planning Commission.540
C. Enlargement of nonconforming uses. A building or structure housing a
lawful nonconforming use may not be added to or enlarged.
D. Abandonment of nonconforming use.
(1) If any structure or property used as a lawful nonconforming use
becomes vacant or unused for a continuous period of 12 months,
any subsequent use must conform to all use regulations applicable
to the property's zoning district.
(2) If a structure housing a nonconforming use converts to a
conforming use, it forfeits any further claim to nonconforming use
rights.
E. Allowance for repairs. Repairs and maintenance of a structure occupied
by a nonconforming use may be made, provided that no structural
alterations are made other than those required by law.
F. Damage or destruction of structures. Should a structure occupied by a
lawful nonconforming use be damaged to the extent that the cost of
restoration exceeds 60% of the replacement cost of the structure, the
nonconforming use shall no longer be permitted.
G. Nonconforming uses and conditional use permits. A lawful preexisting
use that requires a conditional use permit in its zoning district shall be
presumed to have the appropriate permit and shall be considered a
conforming use. The use shall be subject to the regulations governing
lapses or revocation of permits, set forth in Article 44.541
539. Editor's Note: The Use Matrix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
540. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-43.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-43.5
1:979
541. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-43.5 SEWARD CODE § 410-43.5
1:980
Part 10
Administration And Enforcement
ARTICLE 44
Administrative Procedures and Penalties
§ 410-44.1. Purpose and scope.
The administration and procedures provisions establish the methods for
implementation of the Unified Land Development Ordinance. These
provisions include procedures for reviewing specific uses within certain
zoning districts; amending the zoning regulations; and granting variances.
§ 410-44.2. Site plan review.
A. Purpose. The site plan review procedure provides for the administrative
review, in addition to plan review required by other sections of the
Seward Municipal Code, of projects that have potentially significant
effects on traffic circulation or a significant effect on land uses in
adjacent neighborhoods. The procedure provides for review and
evaluation of site development features and possible mitigation of
unfavorable effects on surrounding property.
B. Administration. The Zoning Administrator or his/her designee shall
review, evaluate, and act on all site plans submitted pursuant to this
procedure. An applicant may appeal a denial of any application to the
Planning Commission and City Council.
C. Uses requiring site plan review. All uses indicated as subject to site plan
review in Table 44A542 are subject to the provisions of this section,
unless otherwise subject to a conditional use permit procedure for
specific zoning districts.543
D. Application requirements. An application for a site plan review may be
filed with the Zoning Administrator by the owner(s) of a property or the
owner's(s') authorized agent. The application shall include the following
information:
(1) Name and address of the applicant.
(2) Owner, address, and legal description of the property.
(3) A description of the nature and operating characteristics of the
proposed use.
(4) A site plan, drawn to a scale sufficient to permit adequate review
and dimensioned as necessary, showing the following information:
542. Editor's Note: Table 44A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
543. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-44.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-44.2
1:981
(a) The date, scale, North point, title, name of owner, and name of
person preparing the site plan.
(b) The location and dimensions of boundary lines, easements, and
required yards and setbacks of existing and proposed buildings
and site improvements.
(c) The location, size, and use of proposed and existing structures
on the site.
(d) The location of all proposed site improvements, including
parking and loading areas, pedestrian and vehicular access,
sewers, sidewalks, utilities, service areas, fencing, screening,
landscaping, and lighting.
(e) Location of any major site feature, including drainage and
contours at no greater than five-foot intervals.
(f) Any other information that may be required for review by the
Zoning Administrator or his/her designee.
E. Administrative action and appeal. The Zoning Administrator or his/her
designee must act upon each complete application within 10 working
days of filing. An applicant may appeal a denial to the Board of
Adjustment within 10 days of the action. The Board of Adjustment shall
consider the appeal at the first available meeting after the filing of the
appeal.
F. Review and evaluation.
(1) The Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee (or the Board of
Adjustment in cases of appeal), shall review and approve the site
plan based on the criteria established in Table 44A544 and
conformance with applicable regulations in these zoning
regulations.
(2) The Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee (or the Board of
Adjustment in cases of appeal), shall make the following findings
before approval of the site plan:
(a) The proposed development, together with any necessary
modifications, is compatible with the criteria established in
Table 44A.
(b) Any required modifications to the site plan are reasonable and
are the minimum necessary to minimize potentially
unfavorable effects.
(c) The site plan conforms to the zoning regulations.
544. Editor's Note: Table 44A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 410-44.2 SEWARD CODE § 410-44.2
1:982
§ 410-44.3. Conditional use permits.546
G. Modification of site plan. The Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee
(or the Board of Adjustment in cases of appeal), may require
modification of a site plan as a prerequisite for approval. Required
modifications may be more restrictive than base district regulations
and may include, but not be limited to, additional landscaping or
screening; installation of erosion control measures; improvement of
access or circulation; rearrangement of structures on the site; or other
modifications deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety,
welfare, community character, property values, and/or aesthetics.
H. Term and modification of approval.
(1) A site plan approval shall become void two years after the date of
approval, unless the applicant receives a building permit and
diligently carries out development prior to the expiration of this
period.
(2) The Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee, may approve an
application to modify a previously approved site plan if he/she
determines that the modification does not affect findings related to
the criteria set forth in Table 44A.545
(3) The Zoning Administrator or his/her designee may revoke a site
plan approval if he/she determines that the development is not
complying with the terms and conditions of the approval. Such
revocation may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment.
I. Approval to run with land. An approval pursuant to this section shall
run with the land until the expiration date of such approval.
A. Purpose. The conditional use permit procedure provides for public
review and discretionary City Council approval for uses within zoning
districts which have unusual site development or operating
characteristics that could adversely affect surrounding properties.
B. Administration. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the
administration of the conditional use permit procedure. The Planning
Commission shall review, evaluate, and make a recommendation on
each application. The City Council shall approve or deny applications
for conditional use permits.
C. Application requirements. An application for a conditional use permit
may be filed with the Zoning Administrator by the owner(s) of a
property or the owner's(s') authorized agent. The application shall
include the following information:
(1) Name and address of the applicant.
545. Editor's Note: Table 44A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
546. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-44.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-44.3
1:983
(2) Owner, address and legal description of the property (shall be
verified with a certified copy of the last deed or document of record
from the Seward County Register of Deeds office).
(3) A description of the nature and operating characteristics of the
proposed use.
(4) Any graphic information, including site plans, elevations, other
drawings, or other materials determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be necessary to describe the proposed use to
approving agencies.
D. Approval process.
(1) The Planning Commission, following 10 days' notice and
publication, shall hold a public hearing on each proposed
conditional use permit application and, following such public
hearing, shall recommend action to the City Council. A vote either
for or against the application by a majority of all Planning
Commission members shall constitute a recommendation to the
City Council. A vote either for or against an amendment by less
than a majority of all Planning Commission members shall
constitute a failure to make a recommendation to the City Council.
(2) The City Council, following 10 days' notice and publication, shall
hold a public hearing on each proposed conditional use permit
application and, following such public hearing, shall act on the
proposed conditional use permit. On applications that receive a
recommendation of approval from the Planning Commission, a
majority vote of those members either elected or appointed to the
City Council is required for approval. On applications that receive a
recommendation of denial from the Planning Commission, a
majority vote plus one of those members either elected or
appointed to the City Council is required for approval.
(3) Protest. If a valid protest petition opposing an amendment is filed
with the City Clerk by eligible property owners, pursuant to Neb.
RS 19-905, a majority vote plus one of those members either
elected or appointed to the City Council is required for approval. A
valid protest petition must meet the following criteria:
(a) Submission of the petition in the office of the City Clerk within
14 days after the conclusion of the public hearing on the
amendment by the Planning Commission.
(b) Notarized signatures by at least one of the following:
[1] The owner or owners of at least 20% of the property
proposed for the conditional use permit.
[2] The owners of 20% of the total area, excepting public
rights-of-way and public property, within the zoning
§ 410-44.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-44.3
1:984
jurisdiction of the City and within 300 feet of the proposed
rezoning.
E. Required notice and publication. Prior to consideration of amending,
supplementing, changing, modifying, or repealing these regulations by
the governing body, notice of public hearings shall be provided by the
following methods:
(1) Notice by posted sign. A notice shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on or near the property upon which action is pending. Such
notice shall be not less than 18 inches in height and 24 inches in
width with a yellow or white background and black letters not less
than 1 1/2 inches in height. Such posted notice shall be so placed
upon such premises that is easily visible from the street and shall
be so posted at least 10 days before the date of such hearing. It
shall be unlawful for any person to remove, mutilate, destroy or
change such posted notice prior to such hearing.
(2) Publication. At least 10 days before the date of hearing, the City
Clerk/Zoning Administrator shall have published in a daily
newspaper having a general circulation in the City of Seward a
notice of the time, place and subject matter of such hearing.
(3) Notification by mail. At least 15 days prior to the date of hearing,
the party initiating the request shall present the City Clerk/Zoning
Administrator a certified address list of those persons who own
property within 300 feet of the subject site. The City Clerk/Zoning
Administrator shall mail notice of the time, place, and subject
matter of the hearing to such property owners at least 10 days
prior to the date of the hearing.
F. Criteria for review. The Planning Commission and City Council shall
review and approve the site plan based on the criteria established in
Table 44A547 and conformance with applicable regulations in this
chapter.
G. Scope of approval.
(1) The Planning Commission and/or City Council may, at their
discretion, apply a conditional use permit to a specific owner or
applicant. The approving agencies may establish special site
development or operational regulations as a condition for approval
of a conditional use permit.
(2) The Planning Commission or City Council, in cases of appeal, shall
not grant a conditional use permit for any home occupation/homebased
business which is otherwise prohibited under § 410-31.10 of
these regulations.
H. Lapse and revocation of permit.
547. Editor's Note: Table 44A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 410-44.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-44.3
1:985
§ 410-44.4. Amendments.
(1) A conditional use permit shall become void six months after its
effective date if the applicant has not carried out development or
occupancy during that period. After such expiration, the applicant
must reapply for another conditional use permit, following the
procedures of this section.
(2) The City Council may revoke a conditional use permit should the
operation of the use subject to such permit violate the conditions
under which the permit was granted.
I. Previously approved conditional use permits.
(1) Any conditional use approved under regulations in effect before the
effective date of this chapter shall be considered to have a valid
conditional use permit, subject to requirements imposed at the
time of its approval.
(2) Any use lawfully established before the effective date of this
chapter and required by this Unified Land Development Ordinance
to have a conditional use permit within its respective zoning
district shall be deemed to have such a valid conditional use permit,
provided that it complies with all other applicable provisions of this
chapter.
A. Purpose. The amendment procedures describe the methods by which
changes may be made in the text of the zoning regulations (text
amendment) and/or the official boundaries of zoning districts
(rezoning).
B. Initiation of amendments.
(1) Text amendments may be initiated by a citizen, the Planning
Commission or City Council.
(2) Rezonings may be initiated by a property owner or authorized
agent, the Planning Commission, or the City Council.
C. Rezoning application requirements. An application for a rezoning may
be filed with the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee. The
application shall include the following information:
(1) Name and address of the applicant.
(2) Owner, address and legal description of the property (shall be
verified with a certified copy of the last deed or document of record
from the Seward County Register of Deeds office).
(3) A description of the reason for the rezoning application and the
nature and operating characteristics of the proposed use.
§ 410-44.3 SEWARD CODE § 410-44.4
1:986
(4) Any graphic information, including site plans, elevations, other
drawings, or other materials determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be necessary to describe the proposed use to
approving agencies.
D. Amendment process.
(1) The Planning Commission, following 15 days' notice and
publication, shall hold a public hearing on each proposed text
amendment or rezoning and, following such public hearing, shall
recommend action to the City Council. A vote either for or against
an amendment by a majority of all Planning Commission members
shall constitute a recommendation to the City Council. A vote either
for or against an amendment by less than a majority of all Planning
Commission members shall constitute a failure to make a
recommendation to the City Council.
(2) The City Council, following 15 days' notice and publication, shall
hold a public hearing on each proposed text amendment or
rezoning and, following such public hearing, shall act on the
proposed amendment or rezoning. On applications that receive a
recommendation of approval from the Planning Commission, a
majority vote of those members either elected or appointed to the
City Council is required for approval. On applications that receive a
recommendation of denial from the Planning Commission, a
majority vote plus one of those members either elected or
appointed to the City Council is required for approval.
(3) Protest. If a valid protest petition opposing an amendment is filed
with the City Clerk by eligible property owners, pursuant to Neb.
RS 19-905, a favorable vote of 3/4 of the members either elected or
appointed to the City Council is required for approval. A valid
protest petition must meet the following criteria:548
(a) Submission of the petition in the office of the City Clerk within
14 days after the conclusion of the public hearing on the
amendment by the Planning Commission.
(b) Notarized signatures by at least 20% or more either of the area
of the lots included in such proposed change, or of those
immediately adjacent on the sides and in the rear thereof
extending 300 feet therefrom, and of those directly opposite
thereto extending 300 feet from the street frontage of such
opposite lots.
E. Required notice and publication. Prior to consideration of amending,
supplementing, changing, modifying, or repealing these regulations by
the governing body, notice of public hearings shall be provided by the
following methods:
548. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-44.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-44.4
1:987
§ 410-44.5. Extension of extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Upon the automatic extension of the two-mile extraterritorial jurisdiction
due to annexation, the City Council, with the recommendation of the
Planning Commission, shall zone properties within the newly established
jurisdiction concurrent with adoption of the annexation ordinance. The
zoning shall consider the Comprehensive Development Plan of the City of
Seward and the present use of the land.
§ 410-44.6. Building permits and certificates of zoning compliance.
(1) Notice by posted sign. A notice shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on or near the property upon which action is pending. Such
notice shall be not less than 18 inches in height and 24 inches in
width with a yellow or white background and black letters not less
than 1 1/2 inches in height. Such posted notice shall be so placed
upon such premises that is easily visible from the street and shall
be so posted at least 10 days before the date of such hearing. It
shall be unlawful for any person to remove, mutilate, destroy or
change such posted notice prior to such hearing.
(2) Publication. At least 15 days before the date of any public hearing
required by this chapter, the City Clerk shall have published in a
daily newspaper having a general circulation in the City of Seward
a notice of the time, place and subject matter of such hearing.
A. Administration and enforcement. The Zoning Administrator shall
administer and enforce these regulations and may direct other persons
to assist him/her. If the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee shall
find that any of the provisions of these regulations are being violated,
he/she shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations,
indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary
to correct it. He/She shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land,
buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of
illegal additions, alterations, or structural changes; discontinuance of
any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by
these regulations to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of
its provisions.
B. Building permits required. No building or other structure shall be
erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a permit
therefor, issued by the administrative official. No building permit shall
be issued by the Building Official except in conformity with the
provisions of these regulations, unless he/she receives a written order
from the Board of Adjustment in the form of an administrative review,
special exception, or variance as provided by these regulations.
C. Application for building permit.
(1) All applications for building permits shall include plans, if
applicable, in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the actual
§ 410-44.4 SEWARD CODE § 410-44.6
1:988
§ 410-44.7. Fees, charges and expenses.
dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes
and locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any; and the
location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration.
(2) The application shall include such other information as lawfully
may be required by the Building Official, including existing or
proposed building or alterations; existing or proposed uses of the
building and land; the number of families, housekeeping units, or
rental units the building is designed to accommodate; conditions
existing on the lot; and such other matters as may be necessary to
determine conformance with and provide for the enforcement of
these regulations. One copy of the plans shall be returned to the
applicant by the Building Official, after he/she shall have marked
such copy either as approved or disapproved and attested to same
by his signature on such copy. One copy of the plans, similarly
marked, shall be retained by the Building Official.
D. Expiration of building permit.
(1) If the work described in any building permit has not begun within
180 days from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire;
it shall be canceled by the Building Official; and written notice
thereof shall be given to the persons affected.
(2) If the work described in any building permit has not been
substantially completed within two years of the date of issuance
thereof, said permit shall expire and be canceled by the Building
Official, and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons
affected, together with notice that further work as described in the
canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new building
permit has been obtained.
(3) The expiration date of a building permit may be established for a
period longer than two years if established at the time that such
permit is issued by the City. The Building Official or his/her
designee may, at his/her discretion, extend the expiration period of
the building permit.
E. Construction and use to be as provided in applications, plans, permits,
and certificates of zoning compliance. Building permits or certificates
of zoning compliance issued on the basis of plans and applications
approved by the Building Official authorize only the use, arrangement,
and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and
no other use, arrangement or construction. Use, arrangement, or
construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a
violation of these regulations and punishable as provided by
§ 410-44.15 hereof.
§ 410-44.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-44.7
1:989
§ 410-44.8. Board of Adjustment establishment; appeals procedure.
A. The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and
expenses and a collection procedure for building permits, appeals, and
other matters pertaining to these regulations.
B. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the Building and
Zoning Department, and may be altered or amended only by the City
Council.
C. Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full,
no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
A. Establishment; appointment of members; rules and regulations;
meetings.
(1) A Board of Adjustment is hereby established to provide relief in
situations of hardship or to hear appeals as provided by this
section. The Board shall consist of five regular members, plus one
additional alternate member who shall attend and vote only when
one member is unable to attend for any reason.
(2) Each member shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
the City Council for a three-year term and is removable for cause by
the appointing authority upon written charges and after public
hearings. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any
member whose term becomes vacant. One member of the Board
shall be appointed from the Planning Commission, and the loss of
membership on the Commission by such member shall also result
in his/her immediate loss of membership on the Board of
Adjustment and the appointment of another Planning
Commissioner to the Board.
(3) The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules and regulations in
accordance with these regulations and the laws of the State of
Nebraska pursuant to Neb. RS 19-901 to 19-914. Meetings shall be
held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the
Board may determine. Such Chairman, or, in his absence, the
acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance
of witnesses. All meetings and records shall be open to the public.
The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote
of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact. The Board shall keep a record of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be
immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public
record. A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
(4) At least one member of the Board of Adjustment shall reside
outside of the corporate boundaries of the City but within its
extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction.549
§ 410-44.7 SEWARD CODE § 410-44.8
1:990
§ 410-44.9. Board of Adjustment powers and duties.
B. Procedure for appeals.
(1) Appeals shall be made to the Board of Adjustment through the
office of the Zoning Administrator in written form as determined by
the Zoning Administrator. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for
the hearing of the appeal and shall decide the appeal within 30
days of the date of the public hearing. An appeal stays all
proceedings in furtherance of the action, unless the Zoning
Administrator certifies to the Board that by reason of the facts
stated in the certificate a stay would, in his/her opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property.
(2) The Board shall provide a minimum of 10 days' notice of a public
hearing on any question before it. Notice of the hearing shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on or near the property on which the
application has been made; by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City of Seward and by written notice to
the appealing party.
(3) Upon the public hearing, any party may appear in person or by
agent or attorney. The concurring vote of four out of five members
of such Board as so composed shall be necessary to reverse any
order, requirement, decision or determination of any administrative
official, or to decide in favor of the appellant on any matter upon
which it is required to pass under any Unified Land Development
Ordinance, or to effect any variation in such regulations.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall have only the following powers and
duties:
(1) Administrative review: to hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Building Official, or his/her designee, in
the enforcement of these regulations or any regulation relating to
the location or soundness of structures, except that the authority to
hear and decide appeals shall not apply to decisions made under
Neb. RS 19-929(3).550
(2) Interpretation of Zoning Map: to hear and decide, in accordance
with the provisions of any zoning regulation, requests for
interpretation of any map.
(3) Variances to relieve hardships relating to property: to authorize,
upon appeal, variances from the strict application of these
regulations where, by reason of exceptional narrowness,
shallowness, or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of
549. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
550. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-44.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-44.9
1:991
enactment of the zoning regulations, or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional
situation or condition of such piece of property, such strict
application would result in peculiar and exceptional practical
difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardships upon the owner
of such property.
(a) Requirements for grant of a variance. No such variance shall
be authorized by the Board unless it finds that:
[1] Strict application of the zoning regulations will produce
undue hardship.
[2] Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties
in the same zoning district and in the same vicinity.
[3] The authorization of such variance will not be of
substantial detriment to adjacent property and the
character of the district will not be changed by the
granting of the variance.
[4] The granting of such variance is based upon reason of
demonstrable and exceptional hardship as distinguished
from variations for purposes of convenience, profit or
caprice.
[5] The condition or situation of the property concerned is not
of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably
practicable a general regulation to be adopted as an
amendment to these zoning regulations.
[6] The granting of the variance will not cause substantial
detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and purpose of any ordinance or
resolution.
(b) Findings by Board. The Board of Adjustment shall make
findings that the requirements of Subsection A(3)(a) have been
met by the applicant for a variance.
(c) Conditions for grant of variance.
[1] In granting any variance, the Board of Adjustment may
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in
conformity with these regulations. Violation of such
conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms
under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a
violation of these regulations and punishable under
§ 410-44.15 of these regulations.
[2] Under no circumstances shall the Board of Adjustment
grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the
terms of these regulations in the district involved, or any
§ 410-44.9 SEWARD CODE § 410-44.9
1:992
§ 410-44.10. Expiration or revocation of Board of Adjustment
action.
§ 410-44.11. Appeals from Board of Adjustment action.
Any person or persons, or any board, taxpayer, officer, department, board
or bureau of the City aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment
may seek review of such decision by the District Court for the county in
the manner provided by the laws of the state and particularly by Neb. RS
19-912, and amendments thereto.
§ 410-44.12. Duties of Zoning Administrator, Board of Adjustment,
City Council, and courts on appeals.
use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of
these regulations in said district.
[3] No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or
buildings in the same district and no permitted or
nonconforming use of lands, structures or buildings in
other districts shall be considered grounds for the
issuance of a variance.
B. Board has powers of Building Official on appeals; reversing decisions of
Building Official.
(1) In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board of
Adjustment may, so long as such action is in conformity with the
terms of these regulations, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or
may modify the order, requirement, decisions, or determination as
ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the
Building Official from whom the appeal is taken.
(2) The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirements, decision, or
determination of the administrative official, or to decide in favor of
the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under
these regulations, or to effect any variation in the application of
these regulations.
A. A variance or other permissive action of the Board of Adjustment shall
become void six months after its effective date if the applicant has not
carried out development or occupancy during that period. After such
expiration, the applicant must reapply for another appropriate Board of
Adjustment action, following the procedures of this article.
B. The Board of Adjustment may revoke a variance or other permissive
action should the applicant violate the conditions under which the
variance or other action was granted.
A. It is the intent of these regulations that all questions of interpretation
and enforcement shall be first presented to the Zoning Administrator,
§ 410-44.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-44.12
1:993
§ 410-44.13. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by the courts to
be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
the chapter as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared
to be unconstitutional or invalid.
§ 410-44.14. Complaints regarding violations.
Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or is allowed to have occurred,
any person may file a written complaint. Such complaints, stating fully the
causes and basis thereof, shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. He/
She shall record properly such complaint immediately, investigate, and take
action thereon as provided by this chapter.
§ 410-44.15. Violations and penalties.
and that such questions shall be presented to the Board of Adjustment
only on appeal from the decision of the Zoning Administrator, and that
recourse from the decisions of Board of Adjustment shall be to the
courts as provided by law.
B. Under these regulations, the City Council shall have only the duties:
(1) Of considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments, or
the repeal of these regulations as provided by law;
(2) Of establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in
§ 410-44.7 of these regulations; and
(3) Of directing a City officer to appeal a decision of the Board of
Adjustment.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of the zoning
regulations of the City of Seward, Nebraska, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not
less than $10 nor more than $500 for each offense, and any actual costs
or expense incurred by the City as a result of said offense shall be taxed
as costs as a part of the judgment of conviction.551
B. The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part
thereof, any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who
commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may
each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties
herein provided.
C. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
551. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 410-44.12 SEWARD CODE § 410-44.16
1:994
§ 410-44.16. Granting of variances (exceptions) and conditions.
[Added 11-1-2005 by Ord. No. 55-05]
In addition to the exceptions contained in this chapter, the Planning
Commission may recommend and the City Council may grant variances
from the provisions of these regulations, but only after determining that:
A. There are unique circumstances or conditions affecting the property
that are not the result of actions by the subdivider.
B. The variance is necessary for the reasonable and acceptable
development of the property in question.
C. The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public or
injurious to adjacent and nearby properties.
§ 410-44.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-44.16
1:995