
Wahoo, NE Code of Ordinances


CITY OF WAHOO, NEBRASKA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



Contains 2010 S-7 Supplement:
Local legislation current through Ord. No. 2033, passed 2-11-10
State legislation current through 2009



 



American Legal Publishing Corporation
432 Walnut Street, 12th Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Email: customerservice@amlegal.com
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



 



Codification Consultant to
The League of Nebraska Municipalities



ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ORDINANCE NO. 1789



AN ORDINANCE TO REVISE ALL THE ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF WAHOO, NEBRASKA AND
TO REPEAL PRIOR ORDINANCES, TO REQUIRE FILING, AND TO PROVIDE AN EFFECTIVE
DATE.



   BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WAHOO,
NEBRASKA



   Section 1.   The general ordinances of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska
are hereby revised, codified, and printed in book form as the "Code of
Ordinances of Wahoo, Nebraska" consisting of the following Titles:



      TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



      TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



      TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



      TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



      TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



      TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



      TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



      TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Section 2.   The Code of Ordinances contains all of the provisions
of a general nature pertaining to the subjects enumerated and embraced in the
code.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by the code
are repealed, except that nothing shall affect any rights acquired under,
actions involving, or fines, penalties, forfeitures, or liabilities incurred
pursuant to such ordinances prior to repeal.



   Section 3.   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all
other ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in the Code of
Ordinances, including ordinances specified in this section, shall remain in
full force and effect unless repealed expressly or by necessary implication.



      1.   Vacating or setting boundaries of streets, alleys, or
other public places.



      2.   Annexing or detaching territory.



      3.   Granting or accepting easements, plats, or dedication of
land to public use.



      4.   Providing for the acquisition or conveyance of real or
personal property.



      5.   Authorizing or directing public improvements to be made.



      6.   Levying taxes or special assessments.



      7.   Appropriating money.



      8.   Granting franchises or special licenses.



      9.   Providing for the issuance of bonds or other instruments
of indebtedness.



   Section 4.   At least one copy of the Code of Ordinances shall be on
file in the office of the City Clerk and available for inspection by members
of the public during the hours the office is kept open for the ordinary
transaction of business. The Clerk shall file a copy of the ordinances with
the County Court.



   Section 5.   This ordinance shall be in full force and shall take
effect from and after its passage, approval, and publication according to law.



   Passed and approved this 24th day of January, 2002.



   CITY OF WAHOO, NEBRASKA



      By:   Phyllis J. Nozicka  /s/



         Mayor



ATTEST:



Melissa M. Harrell  /s/



Clerk



(SEAL)



TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



      Chapter



         10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



         11.   CITY STANDARDS



CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of interpretation



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to other sections



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Effective date of ordinances



   10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.17   Section histories; statutory references



   10.18   Supplementation of code of ordinances



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Wahoo, Nebraska,
shall be designated as the Wahoo Municipal Code and may be so cited.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their
plain, or ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases
having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood
according to their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY.  The city of Wahoo,
Nebraska.



   CITY COUNCIL, COUNCIL, or GOVERNING BODY.  The legislative body of the
city of Wahoo.



   CODE,THIS CODE, THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES, or WAHOO MUNICIPAL CODE. 
This city code as modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new
titles, chapters, or sections.



   COUNTY.  Saunders County, Nebraska.



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



   MONTH.  A calendar month.



   OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN
shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.



   OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT.  An officer,
office, employee, commission, or department of this city unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.



   PERSON.  Includes bodies politic and corporate, societies,
communities, the public generally, individuals, partnerships, limited
liability companies, joint-stock companies, and associations. 



(Neb. RS 49-801(16))



   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.



   STATE.  The state of Nebraska.



   SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of
the heading.  Not all chapters have subchapters.



   WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.



   YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the Mayor and City Council or of the context of the same ordinance:



   (A)   AND or OR.  Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written "and/or," if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute or ordinance requires an
act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act
by an authorized agent or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term.  A general term following specific enumeration
of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and
such word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of such error.



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last.  If the last day is Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   (A)   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain
all of the provisions of a general or permanent nature pertaining to the
subjects herein enumerated and embraced.



   (B)   All prior ordinances of a general and permanent nature
pertaining to the subjects treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from
and after the effective date of this code, provided that in construing the
provisions of this section, the following ordinances shall not be considered
or held to be ordinances of a general or permanent nature:



      (1)   Ordinances vacating streets and alleys.



      (2)   Ordinances authorizing or directing public improvements
to be made.



      (3)   Ordinances levying taxes or special assessments.



      (4)   Ordinances granting any right, privilege, franchise, or
license to persons, firms, or corporations.



      (5)   Ordinances providing for the issuance of bonds or other
instruments of indebtedness.



      (6)   Ordinances establishing grades.



      (7)   Real estate transactions.



      (8)   Any other ordinance which by nature would be considered
special.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.15  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the Mayor and City Council requiring
publication shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof.



Statutory reference:



   Statutes affecting publication, Neb. RS 17-613 and 19-3701



§ 10.16  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it to give effect thereto.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, liability, fine, forfeiture, or
penalty instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance
previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged,
but may be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance
had continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision is itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.



§ 10.17  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending
ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section. 
Example:  (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)



   (B)   (1)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. 
Example:  (Neb. RS 17-100)



      (2)   A statutory cite set forth as a "statutory reference"
following the text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to
that statute for further information.  Example:



   § 39.01  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



      This municipality shall make available to any person for
inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state
law.



   Statutory reference:



      For provisions concerning the inspection of public records, see
Neb. RS 84-712 et seq.



   (C)   If a section of this code was derived from the previous code
of ordinances of the city published in 1972, as subsequently amended, the
1972 code section number shall be indicated in the history by "('72 Code, §
    )."



§ 10.18  SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   Discretion.  When preparing a supplement to this municipal
code, the codifier (that is, the person, agency, or organization authorized
to prepare the supplement) may make formal nonsubstantive changes in
ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement as necessary to
embody them into a unified code.  For example, the codifier may:



      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate
sections and subdivisions;



      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings, and titles for
sections and other subdivisions of the ordinance printed in the supplement
and make changes in such catchlines, headings, and titles;



      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other
subdivisions to be inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate
new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers;



      (4)   Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same
meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this section," and the like, as
may be appropriate, or to "sections     to     " (inserting section
numbers to indicate the sections of the code which embody the substantive
sections of the ordinance incorporated into the code;



      (5)   Insert appropriate section numbers in references to code
sections such as "section     " or "sections     to     " which are not
filled in prior to adoption of an ordinance;



      (6)   Correct the spelling of words, correct obvious
typographical errors, correct erroneous division and hyphenation of words,
capitalize or decapitalize words, and make other similar changes in
accordance with accepted usage or for consistency with other provisions of
the code;



      (7)   Change terminology for consistency with terminology used
in other provisions of the code; and



      (8)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to
incorporate ordinance material into the code while preserving the original
meaning of the ordinance sections.



   (B)   Prohibition.  In no case shall the codifier make any change
in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or
already embodied in the code and not repealed by any ordinance.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement
of any of the provisions of this code of ordinances, set forth at length
herein or incorporated herein by reference shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500
dollars for each offense. A new violation shall be deemed to have been
committed every 24 hours of such failure to comply.



(Ord. 1712, passed 1-27-00; Am. Ord. 1792, passed 2-13-02)



CHAPTER 11:  CITY STANDARDS



Section



   11.01   Official corporate seal



§ 11.01  OFFICIAL CORPORATE SEAL.



   The official corporate seal of the city shall be kept in the office of
the City Clerk, and shall bear the following inscription:  "Seal, City of
Wahoo, Saunders County, Nebraska."  The City Clerk shall affix an impression
of the official seal to all warrants, licenses, permits, ordinances, and all
other official papers issued by order of the Mayor and Council and
countersigned by the City Clerk.



('72 Code, § 1-401)



Statutory reference:



   Authorization, Neb. RS 17-502



   Seal to be either embossed or ink, Neb. RS 64-118



TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



      Chapter



         30.   MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL; ORDINANCES



         31.   APPOINTED OFFICIALS



         32.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



         33.   BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND COMMITTEES



         34.   FIRE AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS



         35.   FINANCE AND REVENUE



         36.   ELECTIONS



         37.   CIVIL DEFENSE



         38.   UTILITY RATES



CHAPTER 30: MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL; ORDINANCES



Section



Mayor



   30.01   Selection and duties



   30.02   Vacancy



City Council



   30.15   Selection and duties



   30.16   President; Acting President



   30.17   Organization



   30.18   Vacancy



   30.19   Restrictions on other employment or elective office



   30.20   Standing committees



Ordinances, Resolutions and Motions



   30.30   Grant of power



   30.31   Introduction to ordinances



   30.32   Style



   30.33   Title



   30.34   Reading and passage of ordinances, resolutions, orders,
bylaws



   30.35   Publication or posting



   30.36   Certificate of publication or posting



   30.37   Effective date; emergency ordinances



   30.38   Amendments and revisions



   30.39   Procedure for resolutions and motions



MAYOR



§ 30.01  SELECTION AND DUTIES.



   The Mayor of the city shall have the general and immediate control over
all property and officials, whether elected or appointed, of the city. The
Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council and may vote when his
or her vote shall be decisive and the Council is equally divided on any
pending matter, legislation or transaction, and the Mayor shall, for the
purpose of the vote, be deemed to be a member of the Council. The Mayor's
signature must appear on the City Clerk's minutes of all meetings, and he or
she must sign all resolutions which have been passed and warrants for the
payment of money when ordered by the City Council. The Mayor shall have the
power to veto or sign any ordinance passed by the City Council. Any ordinance
vetoed by the Mayor may be passed over the veto by a vote of 2/3 of the
members of the City Council. If the Mayor neglects or refuses to sign any
ordinance and returns it with his or her objections in writing at the next
regular Council meeting, the same shall become a law without his or her
signature. The Mayor shall from time to time communicate to the Council such
information and recommendations as, in his or her opinion, may improve the
city. The Mayor may require at reasonable intervals any city official to
exhibit accounts and make reports to the Council on any subject pertaining to
the official's office. The Mayor shall have the power to remit fines or
pardon any offense arising under the ordinances of the city and may remove at
any time an appointed police officer of the city. The Mayor's territorial
authority shall extend over all places within five miles of the corporate
limits of the city for the enforcement of any health ordinance and one-half
mile in all matters vested in the Mayor except taxation. He or she shall also
have such other duties as the City Council may by resolution confer upon the
Mayor or in any other matters which the laws of the state of Nebraska repose
in the Mayor. The Mayor shall be elected at the city election and shall serve
a four-year term of office.  The Mayor shall be a resident and registered
voter of the city. Any candidate for Mayor must have resided within the city
for 40 days prior to filing for the office, and must, in addition, be a
qualified taxpayer.



('72 Code, § 1-101) (Am. Ord. 1045, passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 1246, passed
10-10-85)



Statutory reference:



   Authorizing and similar provisions, see Neb. RS 17-107, 17-110 through
17-117 and 32-533



§ 30.02  VACANCY.



   (A)   Whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor, or in case
of his or her disability or absence, the President of the Council shall
exercise the office of Mayor until the vacancy is filled or the disability is
removed, or in case of temporary absence, until the Mayor returns.



   (B)   When the successful candidate for Mayor shall be prevented
from assuming office, the incumbent Mayor shall not be entitled to hold over
the term, but the office shall automatically become vacant and the President
of the Council shall exercise the office of Mayor until the vacancy is filled.



   (C)   If the President of the Council shall for any cause assume the
office of Mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term, there shall be a
vacancy on the Council which shall be filled as provided in § 30.18.



('72 Code, § 1-106) (Ord. 1047, passed 12-11-75)



CITY COUNCIL



§ 30.15  SELECTION AND DUTIES.



   The City Council shall consist of six members, who shall be elected and
serve for a four-year term.  The City Council shall be the legislative
division of the city government and shall perform such duties and have such
powers as may be authorized by law. The City Council shall maintain the
peace, regulate business, protect the public health and safety, and assess
such taxes and fees as are necessary and appropriate in the exercise of these
functions.



('72 Code, § 1-103)



Statutory reference:



   Additional provisions, see Neb. RS 32-533



§ 30.16  PRESIDENT; ACTING PRESIDENT.



   The City Council shall elect one of its own body each year who shall be
styled the President of the Council and who shall preside at all meetings of
the City Council in the absence of the Mayor. In the absence of the Mayor and
the President of the Council, the City Council shall elect one of its own
body to occupy that place temporarily, who shall be styled Acting President
of the Council.  Both the President of the Council and the Acting President
of the Council, when occupying the position of the Mayor, shall have the same
privileges as the other members of the City Council, and all acts of the
President of the Council, or Acting President of the Council, while so
acting, shall be as binding upon the City Council, and upon the city as if
done by the elected Mayor.



(Neb. RS 17-148) ('72 Code, § 1-102)



§ 30.17  ORGANIZATION.



   City Council members of this city shall take office and commence their
duties on the first regular meeting in December following their election. The
newly elected Council members who have qualified as prescribed by law,
together with the members of the City Council holding over, shall assemble in
a regular meeting at the hour and place hereinafter prescribed and perfect
the reorganization of the City Council as herein provided, and all appointive
offices in which the terms of incumbents are expired shall be filled by
appointment. After the meeting has been called to order, the City Clerk shall
report to the City Council the names of all City Council members-elect who
have qualified for their respective offices, and this report shall be spread
upon the minutes of the meeting preceding the roll call. Each ward of the
city shall be represented by at least two Council members. No person shall be
eligible who is not at the time of election an actual resident of the ward
for which the person is qualified and a registered voter.  If any City
Council member moves from the ward from which the Council member was elected,
his or her office shall thereby become vacant.



('72 Code, § 1-104) (Am. Ord. 1046, passed 12-11-75)



Statutory reference:



   Council member qualifications, see Neb. RS 17-104



Cross-reference:



   Division into wards, see § 36.12



§ 30.18  VACANCY.



   (A)    (1)   Every elective office shall be vacant upon the
happening of any of the events specified in Neb. RS 32-560 except as provided
in Neb. RS 32-561.



(Neb. RS 32-560)



      (2)   After notice and hearing, a vacancy on the City Council
shall exist if a member is absent for more than five consecutive regular
meetings of the Council unless the absences are excused by majority vote of
the remaining members.



(Neb. RS 19-1301)



   (B)   In the case of any vacancy in the office of Mayor, or in case
of his or her disability or absence, the President of the Council shall
exercise the office of Mayor for the unexpired term until such vacancy is
filled or such disability is removed, or in case of temporary absence, until
the Mayor returns.  If the President of the Council assumes the office of
Mayor for the unexpired term, there shall be a vacancy on the Council.



(Neb. RS 32-568(4))



   (C)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (B), (D),
or (E) of this section, vacancies in city elected offices shall be filled by
the Mayor and City Council for the balance of the unexpired term.  Notice of
a vacancy, except a vacancy resulting from the death of the incumbent, shall
be in writing and presented to the Council at a regular or special meeting
and shall appear as a part of the minutes of such meeting.  The Council
shall at once give public notice of the vacancy by causing to be published in
a newspaper of general circulation within the city or by posting in three 
public places in the city the office vacated and the length of the unexpired
term.



      (b)   The Mayor shall, within four weeks after the meeting at
which such notice of vacancy has been presented or upon the death of the
incumbent, call a special meeting of the Council or place the issue of
filling such vacancy on the agenda at the next regular meeting at which time
the Mayor shall submit the name of a qualified registered voter to fill the
vacancy for the balance of the unexpired term.  The Council shall vote upon
such nominee, and if a majority votes in favor of such nominee, the vacancy
shall be declared filled.  If the nominee fails to receive a majority of the
votes, the nomination shall be rejected and the Mayor shall, at the next
regular or special meeting, submit the name of another qualified registered
voter to fill the vacancy. If the subsequent nominee fails to receive a
majority of the votes, the Mayor shall continue at such meeting to submit the
names of qualified registered voters in nomination and the Council shall
continue to vote upon such nominations until the vacancy is filled. The Mayor
shall cast his or her vote for or against the nominee in the case of a tie
vote of the Council. All Council members present shall cast a ballot for or
against the nominee. Any member of the Council who has been appointed to fill
a vacancy on the Council shall have the same rights, including voting, as if
such person were elected.



   (D)   The Mayor and Council may, in lieu of filling a vacancy in a
city elected office as provided in subsection (C) of this section, call a
special city election to fill such vacancy.



   (E)   If vacancies exist in the offices of a majority of the members
of the City Council, the Secretary of State shall conduct a special city
election to fill such vacancies.



(Neb. RS 32-569)



(’72 Code, § 1-105) (Am. Ord. 1047, passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 1261, passed
11-13-86; Am. Ord. 1361, passed 1-24-91; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04; Am.
Ord. 2021, passed 7-23-09)



Statutory reference:



   Additional and similar provisions, see Neb. RS 32-567 through 32-572



§ 30.19  RESTRICTIONS ON OTHER EMPLOYMENT OR ELECTIVE OFFICE.



   (A)   The Mayor and members of the City Council shall hold no other
elective or appointive office or employment with the city.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ELECTIVE OFFICE means any office which has candidates nominated
or elected at the time of a statewide primary election, any office which has
candidates nominated at the time of a statewide primary election and elected
at the time of a statewide general election, any office which has candidates
elected at the time of a statewide general election, any office which has
candidates nominated or elected at a city or village election, and any office
created by an act of the Legislature which has candidates elected at an
election and includes an office which is filled at an election held in
conjunction with the annual meeting of a public body created by an act of the
Legislature.



      HIGH ELECTIVE OFFICE means a member of the Legislature, an
elective office described in article IV, section 1 or 20, or article VII,
section 3 or 10, of the Constitution of Nebraska, or a county, city, or
school district elective office.



(Neb. RS 32-109)



   (C)   No candidate for member of the Legislature or an elective
office described in article IV, section 1 or 20, or article VII, section 3 or
10, of the Constitution of Nebraska shall be eligible to file as a candidate,
to petition on the ballot as a candidate, to accept a nomination by a
political party or by party convention, caucus, or committee to fill a
vacancy, or to be a declared write-in candidate for more than one elective
office to be filled at the same election except for the position of delegate
to a county, state, or national political party convention. No candidate for
any other high elective office shall be eligible to file as a candidate, to
petition on the ballot as a candidate, to accept a nomination by a political
party or by party convention, caucus, or committee to fill a vacancy, or to
be declared a write-in candidate for more than one high elective office to be
filled at the same election.



(Neb. RS 32-603)



   (D)   Except as provided in divisions (E) or (G) of this section, no
person shall be precluded from being elected or appointed to or holding an
elective office for the reason that he or she has been elected or appointed
to or holds another elective office.



   (E)   No person serving as a member of the legislature or in an
elective office described in article IV, section 1 or 20, or article VII,
section 3 or 10, of the Constitution of Nebraska shall simultaneously serve
in any other elective office, except that such a person may simultaneously
serve in another elective office which is filled at an election held in
conjunction with the annual meeting of a public body.



   (F)   Whenever an incumbent serving as a member of the Legislature
or in an elective office described in article IV, section 1 or 20, or article
VII, section 3 or 10, of the Constitution of Nebraska assumes another
elective office, except an elective office filled at an election held in
conjunction with the annual meeting of a public body, the office first held
by the incumbent shall be deemed vacant.



   (G)   No person serving in a high elective office shall
simultaneously serve in any other high elective office.



   (H)   Notwithstanding divisions (E) through (G) of this section, any
person holding more than one high elective office upon September 13, 1997,
shall be entitled to serve the remainder of all terms for which he or she was
elected or appointed.



(Neb. RS 32-604) ('72 Code, § 1-107) (Ord. 1635, passed 7-23-98)



Statutory reference:



   Merger of offices or employment, see Neb. RS 17-108.02



§ 30.20  STANDING COMMITTEES.



   (A)   At the annual organizational meeting of the Mayor and City
Council, the Mayor shall appoint members to such standing committees as the
City Council may by ordinance or resolution create. Except as provided in §
33.06 of this title, membership of each standing committee shall consist of
three Council members. The Mayor shall attempt, through appointment, though
it shall not be mandatory that there be one Council member from each of the
three wards of the city on each Council committee. The Mayor shall be an
ex-officio member of each standing committee. Members of the standing
committees shall serve a term of office of two years, except that at the
organizational meeting of the Mayor and Council in December of 1993, all
appointments shall be for a one year term, and that commencing at the
organizational meeting of the Mayor and Council in December of 1994, all
appointments shall be as set forth herein. The purposes of the various
standing committees shall be to establish policy for the city; to assist the
various Council persons on the committees to develop expertise in a specified
area; to review specific problems or situations; to provide recommendations
to the Mayor and Council, as a whole. It is not the purpose of the committees
to usurp the administrative powers of the Mayor. The various standing
committees shall meet on a periodic basis and shall keep accurate minutes and
records of their meetings. Staff of the city shall be available to lend
assistance to the various committees. The minutes and records of the various
committee meetings shall be presented to the Mayor and Council at a regular
monthly meeting.



('72 Code, § 2-101)



   (B)   The following shall constitute the standing committees of the
Council of the city and their statement of purpose.



      (1)   General Committee.  This committee's responsibility
shall be to serve as a liaison with the City Planning Commission, Board of
Adjustment, Wahoo Housing Authority and Police Department. City staff to
assist this committee shall consist of the Building Inspector and/or the
Chief of Police, or his/her assistant.



      (2)   Personnel and Finance Committee.  This committee's
responsibility shall be to review the nonproprietary city budget, recommend
financing, taxes and fees, review the nonproprietary funds audits, recommend
investment policies, review the Mayor's recommendations regarding employee
wage and benefit packages, and review personnel policies which are city-wide
in scope. City staff to assist this committee shall consist of the City Clerk.



      (3)   Park, Recreation and Cultural Committee.  This
committee's responsibility shall be to serve as a liaison with the Wahoo Area
Recreation Association,  and Library Board. City staff to assist this
committee shall consist of the City Clerk, and Librarian.



      (4)   Streets and Sanitation Committee.  This committee's
responsibility shall be to review capital improvement projects, operating
policies, and procedures regarding streets, cemeteries, solid waste disposal,
and storm sewers. City staff to assist this committee shall consist of the
Street Commissioner.



('72 Code, § 2-102)



      (5)   Economic Development Committee. The duties of the
members of this committee shall be to serve on the Wahoo Economic Development
Committee, a committee of the Board of Directors of the Greater Wahoo
Development Foundation, a Nebraska nonprofit corporation, and comprised of
two representatives of the Council of the city, two representatives appointed
by the Greater Wahoo Development Foundation, one representative appointed by
the Wahoo Chamber of Commerce Board of Directors, and one representative
appointed by the Board of Directors of Wahoo Industries, Inc., a Nebraska
profit corporation. Said individuals shall constitute the governing body of
the Wahoo Economic Development Committee whose purpose shall be to promote
economic development in the city and surrounding area. At the annual
organizational meeting of the City Council, the Mayor, subject to the
approval of the City Council, shall appoint two voting representatives and
one alternate representative of the Mayor and Council of the city to serve on
the Wahoo Economic Development Committee. The alternate representative may
vote only in the absence of one of the other representatives of the Mayor and
Council of the city. Members of this standing committee shall serve a term of
office of two years, except that at the organizational meeting of the Mayor
and Council in December of 1993, all appointments shall be for a one year
term and that commencing at the organizational meeting of the Mayor and
Council in December of 1994, all appointments shall be for a two year term.



('72 Code, § 2-103) (Ord. 1445, passed 12-9-93; Am. Ord. 1815, passed
10-24-02)



ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS



§ 30.30  GRANT OF POWER.



   The City Council may make all ordinances, bylaws, rules, regulations,
and resolutions, not inconsistent with the laws of the state of Nebraska, as
may be expedient for maintaining the peace, good government, and welfare of
the city and its trade, commerce, and manufactories.



(Neb. RS 17-505) ('72 Code, § 1-601) (Am. Ord. 1595, passed 9-25-97)



§ 30.31  INTRODUCTION TO ORDINANCES.



   Ordinances shall be introduced by members of the Council Body in one of
the following ways:



   (A)   With the recognition of the Mayor, a member may, in the
presence and hearing of a majority of the members elected to the Council,
read aloud the substance of the proposed ordinance and file a copy with the
City Clerk for future consideration; or



   (B)   With the recognition of the Mayor, a member may present the
proposed ordinance to the Clerk who, in the presence and hearing of a
majority of the members elected to the Council, shall read aloud the
substance of the ordinance and file it for future consideration.



('72 Code, § 1-602) (Am. Ord. 1596, 9-25-97)



§ 30.32  STYLE.



   The style of all city ordinances shall be:



   "Be it ordained by the Mayor and Council of the City of Wahoo,
Nebraska:…."



(Neb. RS 17-613) ('72 Code, § 1-605)



§ 30.33  TITLE.



   No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not clearly expressed in
the title.



(Neb. RS 17-614) ('72 Code, § 1-606)



Statutory reference:



   Additional requirements, see Neb. RS 17-614



§ 30.34  READING AND PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, ORDERS, BYLAWS.



   (A)   Ordinances of a general or permanent nature shall be read by
title on three different days unless ¾ of the City Council vote to suspend
this requirement, except that such requirement shall not be suspended for any
ordinance for the annexation of territory. In case such requirement is
suspended, the ordinance shall be read by title and then moved for final
passage. A reading of any ordinance in full may be required by ¾ of the City
Council before enactment under either procedure set out in this section. 
All ordinances and resolutions or orders for the appropriation or payment of
money shall require for their passage or adoption the concurrence of a
majority of all members elected to the City Council.



(Neb. RS 17-614)



   (B)   On the passage or adoption of every bylaw or ordinance, and
every resolution or order to enter into a contract by the City Council, the
yeas and nays shall be called and recorded. To pass or adopt any bylaw,
ordinance, or any such resolution or order a concurrence of a majority of the
whole number of members elected to the City Council shall be required. All
appointments of the officers by the City Council shall be made viva voce, and
the concurrence of a like majority shall be required, and the names of those,
and for whom they voted, on the vote resulting in an appointment, shall be
recorded. The requirements of a roll call or viva voce vote shall be
satisfied by a city which utilizes an electronic voting device which allows
the yeas and nays of each member of the City Council to be readily seen by
the public.



(Neb. RS 17-616)



('72 Code, § 1-603) (Am. Ord. 1482, passed 3-9-95; Am. Ord. 1597, passed
9-25-97)



§ 30.35  PUBLICATION OR POSTING.



   All ordinances of a general nature shall, before they take effect, be
published one time, within 15 days after they are passed:



   (A)   In some newspaper published in the city or, if no paper is
published in the city, then by posting a written or printed copy in each of
three public places in the city; or



   (B)   In book or pamphlet form.



(Neb. RS 17-613) ('72 Code, § 1-604) (Am. Ord. 1266, passed 11-13-86; Am.
Ord. 1598, passed 9-25-97)



Statutory reference:



   Emergency ordinance, see Neb. RS 17-613



§ 30.36  CERTIFICATE OF PUBLICATION OR POSTING.



   The passage, approval, and publication or posting of an ordinance shall
be sufficiently proved by a certificate under the seal of the city from the
City Clerk showing that the ordinance was passed and approved, and when and
in what paper the ordinance was published, or when and by whom and where the
ordinance was posted.



(Neb. RS 17-613) ('72 Code, § 1-608)



Statutory reference:



   Passage, rules, and regulations, see Neb. RS 17-615



§ 30.37  EFFECTIVE DATE; EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.



   (A)   Except as provided in § 30.35 and division (B) of this
section, an ordinance for the government of the city which has been adopted
by the City Council without submission to the voters of the city shall not go
into effect until 15 days after the passage of the ordinance.



(Neb. RS 19-3701)



   (B)   In the case of riot, infectious or contagious diseases, or
other impending danger, failure of a public utility, or any other emergency
requiring its immediate operation, an ordinance shall take effect upon the
proclamation of the Mayor and the posting thereof in at least three of the
most public places in the city. Such emergency ordinance shall recite the
emergency, be passed by a ¾ vote of the City Council, and be entered of
record on the City Clerk's minutes.



(Neb. RS 17-613) ('72 Code, § 1-607) (Am. Ord. 1599, passed 9-25-97)



§ 30.38  AMENDMENTS AND REVISIONS.



   No ordinance or section thereof shall be revised or amended unless the
new ordinance contains the entire ordinance or section as revised or amended
and the ordinance or section so amended is repealed, except that an ordinance
revising all the ordinances of the city and modifications to zoning or
building districts may be adopted as otherwise provided by law.



(Neb. RS 17-614) ('72 Code, § 1-609) (Am. Ord. 1600, passed 9-25-97)



§ 30.39  PROCEDURE FOR RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS.



   (A)   Resolutions and motions shall be introduced in one of the
methods prescribed for the introduction of ordinances. After their
introduction, they shall be fully and distinctly read one time in the
presence and hearing of a majority of the members elected to the Council. The
issue raised by said resolutions or motions shall be disposed of in
accordance with the usage of parliamentary law adopted for the guidance of
the Council. A majority vote shall be required to pass any resolution or
motion. The vote on any resolution or motion shall be by roll call vote.



('72 Code, § 1-610)



   (B)   A question to reconsider shall be in order when made by a
member voting with the majority, or who was absent when the vote was taken,
but such motion to reconsider must be made before the expiration of the third
regular meeting after the initial consideration of the question. When any
question is under debate, no motion shall be made, entertained or seconded,
except the previous question, a motion to table, and to adjourn. Each of said
motions shall be decided without debate. Any of the rules of the Governing
Body for meetings may be suspended by a 2/3 vote of the members present. In
all cases in which provisions are not made by these rules, Roberts Rules of
Order is the authority by which the Governing Body shall decide all
procedural disputes that may arise.



CHAPTER 31: APPOINTED OFFICIALS



Section



General Provisions



   31.01   Appointment; removal



   31.02   Merger of offices



   31.03   Vacancies



Officials



   31.15   City Attorney



   31.16   Reserved



   31.17   Reserved



   31.18   City Physician



   31.19   Police Chief



   31.20   City Police



   31.21   Fire Chief



   31.22   City Engineer



   31.23   Special Engineer



   31.24   City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer



   31.25   Street Commissioner



   31.26   Director of Civil Defense



   31.27   Building Inspector



   31.28   Electrical Inspector



   31.29   Plumbing and Mechanical Inspector



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 31.01  APPOINTMENT; REMOVAL.



   (A)   The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, may appoint
such officers as shall be required by ordinance or otherwise required by law.
The Mayor, by and with the consent of the City Council, shall appoint such a
number of regular police officers as may be necessary. The City Council may
establish and provide for the appointment of members of a law enforcement
reserve force as provided by law.



   (B)   All appointed officials may be removed at any time by the
Mayor, except that the Utilities General Manager, for sufficient cause, may
be removed from office by a 2/3 vote of the City Council, and, except police
officers, who may be removed from office pursuant to § 34.32.



('72 Code, § 1-201) (Am. Ord. 1086, passed 2-24-77; Am. Ord. 1593, passed
9-25-97)



Statutory reference:



   Appointments generally, see Neb. RS 17-107



   Water Commissioner, see Neb. RS 17-541



   Law enforcement reserve force, see Neb. RS 81-1438



§ 31.02  MERGER OF OFFICES.



   The City Council may, at its discretion, by ordinance combine and merge
any elective or appointive office or employment or any combination of duties
of any such offices or employments, except Mayor and Council member, with any
other elective or appointive office or employment so that one or more of such
offices or employments or any combination of duties of any such offices or
employments may be held by the same officer or employee at the same time. The
offices or employments so merged and combined shall always be construed to be
separate and the effect of the combination or merger shall be limited to a
consolidation of official duties only. The salary or compensation of the
officer or employee holding the merged or combined offices or employments or
offices and employments shall not be in excess of the maximum amount provided
by law for the salary or compensation of the office, offices, employment, or
employments so merged and combined. For purposes of this section, volunteer
firefighters and ambulance drivers shall not be considered officers.



(Neb. RS 17-108.02) ('72 Code, § 1-202) (Am. Ord. 1262, passed 11-13-86; Am.
Ord. 1362, passed 1-24-91)



§ 31.03  VACANCIES.



   In the event of a vacancy in any office of any appointed official,
except when the same occurred through the expiration of a term of office, the
Mayor shall appoint another person to fill such office for the unexpired
term, with the advice and consent of three-fourths of the members of the
Council.



('72 Code, § 1-203)



OFFICIALS



§ 31.15  CITY ATTORNEY.



   The City Attorney is the city's legal advisor, and as such he or she
shall commence, prosecute, and defend all suits on behalf of the city. When
requested by the Mayor and Council, he or she shall attend meetings of the
Council, and shall advise any city official in all matters of law in which
the interests of the city may be involved. He or she shall draft such
ordinances, bonds, contracts, and other writings as may be required in the
administration of the affairs of the city. He or she shall examine all bonds,
contracts, and documents on which the Mayor and Council will be required to
act, and attach thereto a brief statement in writing to all such instruments
and documents as to whether or not the document is in legal and proper form.
He or she shall prepare complaints, attend, and prosecute violations of the
city ordinances when directed to do so by the Mayor and Council. Without
direction, he or she shall appear and prosecute all cases for violation of
the city ordinances that have been appealed to and are pending in any higher
court. He or she shall also examine, when requested to do so by the Mayor and
Council, the ordinance records and advise and assist the City Clerk as much
as may be necessary to the end that each procedural step will be taken in the
passage of each ordinance to insure that they will be valid and subsisting
local laws in so far as their passage and approval are concerned. The Council
shall have the right to compensate the City Attorney for legal services on
such terms as the Mayor and Council and the City Attorney may agree and to
employ any additional legal assistance as may be necessary out of the funds
of the city.



(Neb. RS 17-610) ('72 Code, § 1-204)



§ 31.16  RESERVED.



§ 31.17  RESERVED.



§ 31.18  CITY PHYSICIAN.



   The City Physician shall be a member of the Board of Health of the city
and perform the duties devolving upon him or her as the medical advisor of
the said board. In all injuries where a liability may be asserted against the
city, the City Physician shall immediately investigate the said injuries, the
extent thereof, and the circumstances. He or she shall then report the
results of his or her investigation with the name of the party injured and
all other persons who may have personal knowledge of the matter. He or she
shall make all physical examinations, and necessary laboratory tests incident
thereto, and issue such health certificates as are required by ordinance. For
the purpose of making examinations of the sanitary conditions of the property
and the state of health of the inhabitants therein, he or she shall have the
right at all reasonable hours to go upon and enter all premises, buildings,
or other structures in the city. He or she shall perform such other duties as
may be required of him or her by the laws of the state of Nebraska and the
ordinances of the city. When ordered to do so by the Mayor and Council he or
she shall disinfect or fumigate the premises or persons in or about the
premises when the premises are quarantined, and to call upon indigent sick
persons, and perform other professional services at the direction of the
Mayor and Council. The City Physician shall receive as compensation for his
or her services such sum as the Mayor and Council may from time to time set.
He or she shall receive no compensation for his or her services as a member
of the City Board of Health.



(Neb. RS 17-121, 17-208) ('72 Code, § 1-209)



§ 31.19  POLICE CHIEF.



   The City Police Chief shall direct the police work of the city and
shall be responsible for the maintenance of law and order. He or she shall
act as Health Inspector and Building Inspector, except in the event the city
appoints another person. He or she shall file the necessary complaints in
cases arising out of violations of city ordinances and shall make all
necessary reports required by the city ordinances or the laws of the state of
Nebraska. The Chief of Police shall have control and management of all
matters relating to the Police Department, its officers, and members, and
shall have the custody and control of all property and books belonging to the
Department. It shall be his or her duty to protect the rights of persons and
property. He or she shall provide a proper police force at fires. He or she
shall take notice of all nuisances, impediments, obstructions, and defects in
the public ways and property. He shall execute the processes issued from the
proper court and shall cause all persons arrested to be brought before the
proper judicial official for trial as speedily as possible. It shall be
unlawful for any person to refuse to assist the Police Chief in the
prevention of any crime or in the arrest of any person when so requested by
the Police Chief.



('72 Code, § 1-210)



Statutory reference:



   Merger of offices, see Neb. RS 17-107



   Chief of Police designated as secretary and quarantine officer of
Health Board, see Neb. RS 17-121



§ 31.20  CITY POLICE.



   The City Police, whether regular, or special shall have the power to
arrest all offenders against the laws of the state of Nebraska or the city,
by day or by night, and keep the said offenders in the county jail, or some
other place to prevent their escape until trial can be held before the proper
official of the state of Nebraska or the city. They shall have full power and
authority to call on any person whenever necessary to assist them in
performing public duties, and failure, neglect, or refusal to render such
assistance shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a
fine.  Every city police officer shall be expected to be conversant and
knowledgeable with the city and state laws, and no law enforcement official
shall have any interest in any establishment having a liquor license. City
police officers shall have the duty to file such complaints and reports as
may be required by the city ordinances and the laws of the state of Nebraska.
Any city police officer who shall willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to make
an arrest or who purposely and willfully fails to make a complaint after an
arrest is made shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
shall be fined.  It shall be unlawful for the City Council to retain any
city police officer in that position after he or she has been duly convicted
of the willful violation of any law of the United States of America, the
state of Nebraska, or any ordinance of the city, except minor traffic
violations. It shall be the duty of every city police officer making a lawful
arrest to search all persons in the presence of some other person, whenever
possible, and shall carefully keep and produce to the proper judicial
official upon the trial everything found upon the person of such prisoners.
Badges shall be furnished to the city police by the city. Any member who
shall lose or destroy the same shall be required to pay the replacement
costs, and in the event that any member shall leave the force, he or she
shall immediately deliver his or her badge to the Police Chief. The City
Council may from time to time provide the city police with such uniforms,
equipment, and transportation as may be essential in the performance of their
official duties.



(Neb. RS 17-118, 17-124, 17-213) ('72 Code, § 1-211) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to establish, see Neb. RS 17-118 and 17-124



§ 31.21  FIRE CHIEF.



   The City Fire Chief shall be elected by the members of the Fire
Department. He or she enforce all laws and ordinances covering the prevention
of fires; the storage and use of explosives and flammable substances; the
installation of fire alarm systems; the maintenance of fire extinguishing
equipment; the regulation of fire escapes; and the inspection of all premises
requiring adequate fire escapes. He or she shall within two days investigate
the cause, origin, and circumstances of fires arising within his or her
jurisdiction. The State Fire Marshal shall have the right to supervise in the
enforcement of such codes.  He or she shall, on or before the first day in
April and October of each year, cause the secretary to file with the City
Clerk and the Clerk of the District Court a certified copy of the rolls of
all members in good standing in their respective companies in order to obtain
the exemptions provided by law. He or she shall have the power during the
time of a fire and for a period of 36 hours thereafter to arrest any
suspected arsonist or any person for hindering the department's efforts,
conducting himself or herself in a noisy and disorderly manner, or any person
who refuses to obey any lawful order by the Fire Chief or Assistant Fire
Chief. The Fire Chief or an assistant in charge of operations at a fire may
command the services of any person present at any fire in extinguishing the
same or in the removal and protection of property. Failure to obey such an
order shall be an offense punishable by a fine. The Fire Chief shall have the
right to enter at all reasonable hours into buildings, and upon all premises
within his or her jurisdiction for the purpose of examining the same for fire
hazards and related dangers.



('72 Code, § 1-212) (Am. Ord. 1049, passed 12-11-75)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to procure equipment, organize companies, and prescribe
rules, see Neb. RS 17-147



   Authority to enforce ordinances by imposing fine, see Neb. RS 17-505



   Membership, rolls, and filings, see Neb. RS 35-102



   Life insurance required, see Neb. RS 35-108



   Investigations and reports required, see Neb. RS 81-506



   Inspections under Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act and Petroleum
Products and Hazardous Substances Storage and Handling Act, see Neb. RS 81-512



Cross-reference:



   Fire Department, see §§ 34.01 et seq.



§ 31.22  CITY ENGINEER.



   The City Engineer shall accurately make all plats, sections, and maps
as may be necessary under the direction of the City Council. Upon request, he
or she shall make estimates of the cost of labor and material which may be
done or furnished by contract with the city and make all surveys, estimates,
and calculations necessary to be made for the establishment of grades,
building of culverts, bridges, curbing, and gutters and the improvement of
streets and erection and repair of buildings, and shall perform such other
duties as the City Council may require.



('72 Code, § 1-213) (Am. Ord. 1815, passed 10-24-02)



Statutory reference:



   Duties related to sewers, see Neb. RS 17-150 and 17-919



   Duties related to annexation, see Neb. RS 17-405



   Duties related to public works, see Neb. RS 17-568.01



   Engineers and Architects Regulation Act, see Neb. RS 81-3401 through
81-3455



§ 31.23  SPECIAL ENGINEER.



   The City Council may employ a Special Engineer to make or assist the
City Engineer in making any particular estimate, survey, or other work. The
Special Engineer shall make a record of the minutes of his or her surveys and
all other work done for the city. He or she shall, when directed by the City
Council, accurately make all plats, sections, profiles, and maps as may be
necessary in the judgment of the City Council. He or she shall, upon request
of the City Council, make estimates of the costs of labor and material which
may be done or furnished by contract with the city and make all surveys,
estimates, and calculations necessary for the establishment of grades,
bridges, building of culverts, curbing and gutters, and the improvement of
streets and erection and repair of buildings, and shall perform such other
duties as the City Council may require. All records of the Special Engineer
shall be public records which shall belong to the city and shall be turned
over to his or her successor.



('72 Code, § 1-214) (Am. Ord. 1199, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord. 1815, passed
10-24-02)



Statutory reference:



   Duties related to sewers, see Neb. RS 17-150 and 17-919



   Duties related to annexation, see Neb. RS 17-405



   Authority to employ special engineer, see Neb. RS 17-568



   Duties related to public works, see Neb. RS 17-568.01



   Engineers and Architects Regulation Act, see Neb. RS 81-3401 through
81-3455



§ 31.24  CITY ADMINISTRATOR/CLERK/TREASURER.



   The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer is to provide for the
centralization of the administrative responsibilities of all of the duties of
the offices of the current City Treasurer and City Clerk of the city, which
are under the direction of the Mayor and Council of the city.  Pursuant to
§ 31.02 of this Code, Merger of Offices, the appointed offices of the City
Treasurer and City Clerk are hereby made a part of the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer's office.  Hereafter, the City Administrator,
City Treasurer and City Clerk shall be known as the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer, and shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:



   (A)   The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall be the custodian
of all money belonging to the city.  He or she shall keep a separate account
of each fund or appropriation and the debts and credits belonging thereto. 
He or she shall give every person paying money into the treasury a receipt
therefor, specifying the date of payment and on what account paid.  He or
she shall also file copies of such receipts with his or her monthly
reports.  The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall, at the end of every
month, and as often as may be required, render an account to the City
Council, under oath, showing the state of the treasury at the date of such
account and the balance of money in the treasury.  He or she shall also
accompany such accounts with a statement of all receipts and disbursements,
together with all warrants redeemed and paid by him or her, which warrants,
with any and all vouchers held by him or her, shall be filed with his or her
account in the City Clerk's office.  If the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer neglects or fails, for the space of ten days
from the end of each month, to render his or her account, the office shall be
declared vacant, and the City Council shall fill the vacancy by appointment
until the next election for municipal officers.



(Neb. RS 17-606)



   (B)   (1)   All warrants upon the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall be paid in the order of their
presentation therefor and as otherwise provided in Neb. RS 77-2201 through
77-2215.



(Neb. RS 77-2201)



      (2)   The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall keep a
warrant register in the form required by Neb. RS 77-2202.



      (3)   The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall make
duplicate receipts for all sums which shall be paid into his or her office,
which receipts shall show the source from which such funds are derived, and
shall, by distinct lines and columns, show the amount received to the credit
of each separate fund, and whether the same was paid in cash, in warrants, or
otherwise.  The Treasurer shall deliver one of the duplicates to the person
making the payment and retain the other in his or her office. 



(Neb. RS 77-2209)



      (4)   The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall daily, as
money is received, foot the several columns of the cash book and of the
register, and carry the amounts forward, and at the close of each year, in
case the amount of money received by the Treasurer is insufficient to pay the
warrants registered, he or she shall close the account for that year in the
register and shall carry forward the excess. 



(Neb. RS 77-2210)



   (C)   (1)   The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall prepare
and publish annually within 60 days following the close of the municipal
fiscal year a statement of the receipts and expenditures by funds of the city
for the preceding fiscal year.



(Neb. RS 19-1101)



      (2)   Publication shall be made in one legal newspaper of
general circulation in the city. If no legal newspaper is published in the
city, then such publication shall be made in one legal newspaper published or
of general circulation within the county in which the City is located.



(Neb. RS 19-1103)



   (D)   The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall keep all money
belonging to the city separate and distinct from his or her own money.  He
or she shall invest and collect all money owned by or owed to the city as
directed by the City Council.  He or she shall maintain depository evidence
that all municipal money is, in the name of the city, in a solvent and going
financial institution of a type authorized by state law for deposit of
municipal funds.  He or she shall cancel all bonds, coupons, warrants, and
other evidences of debt against the city, whenever paid by him or her, by
writing or stamping on the face thereof, "Paid by the City Treasurer," with
the date of payment written or stamped thereon. He or she shall collect all
special taxes, allocate special assessments to the several owners, and obtain
from the County Treasurer a monthly report as to the collection of delinquent
taxes.



   (E)   The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall prepare the
annual operating budget for the city through coordination and cooperation
with the city department heads, in accordance with state requirements.  He
or she shall oversee the finances of the city so as to remain in compliance
with the budget and necessary state requirements.  Reports shall be made to
the City Council as to the financial position of the city and she or she
shall make recommendations as needed in order to maintain the financial
well-being of the city.



   (F)   The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall prepare the
necessary documents and reports for the completion of the independent audit
of city funds.



   (G)   The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall review and
coordinate the city's insurance programs.  He or she shall ensure the
adequacy and cost effectiveness of the coverage provided and serve as a
liaison with the insurance provider.  He or she shall provide suggestions
and recommendations for safety and risk management to the various city
departments as needed.



   (H)   The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall attend the
meetings of the City Council and keep a correct journal of the proceedings of
that body. He or she shall keep a record of all outstanding bonds against the
city and when any bonds are sold, purchased, paid, or canceled, said record
shall show the fact. He or she shall make, at the end of the fiscal year, a
report of the business of the city transacted through his or her office for
the year. That record shall describe particularly the bonds issued and sold
during the year and the terms of the sale, with each and every item and
expense thereof. He or she shall file all official bonds after the same shall
have been properly executed and approved. He or she shall make the proper
certificate of passage which shall be attached to original copies of all bond
ordinances hereafter enacted by the City Council.



   (I)   The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall issue and sign
all licenses, permits, and occupation tax receipts authorized by law and
required by the city ordinances. He or she shall collect all occupation taxes
and license money, except where some other city officer is specifically
charged with that duty. He or she shall keep a register of all licenses
granted in the city and the purpose for which they have been issued.



   (J)   The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall permit no
records, public papers, or other documents of the city kept and preserved in
his or her office to be taken therefrom, except by such officers of the city
as may be entitled to the use of the same, but only upon their leaving a
receipt therefor. He or she shall keep all the records of his or her office,
including a record of all licenses issued by him or her in a blank book with
a proper index. He or she shall include as part of his or her records all
petitions under which the City Council shall order public work to be done at
the expense of the property fronting thereon, together with references to all
resolutions and ordinances relating to the same. He or she shall endorse the
date and hour of filing upon every paper or document so filed in his or her
office. All such filings made by him or her shall be properly docketed.
Included in his or her records shall be all standard codes, amendments
thereto, and other documents incorporated by reference, and arranged in
triplicate in a manner convenient for reference. He or she shall keep an
accurate and complete account of the appropriation of the several funds,
draw, sign, and attest all warrants ordered for the payment of money on the
particular fund from which the same is payable. At the end of each month, he
or she shall then make a report of the amounts appropriated to the various
funds and the amount of the warrants drawn thereon. Nothing herein shall be
construed to prevent any citizen, official, or other person from examining
any public records at all reasonable times.



   (K)   (1)   The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall deliver
all warrants, ordinances, and resolutions under his or her charge to the
Mayor for his or her signature. He or she shall also deliver to officers,
employees, and committees all resolutions and communications which are
directed at said officers, employees, or committees. With the seal of the
city, he or she shall duly attest the Mayor's signature to all ordinances,
deeds, and papers required to be attested to when ordered to do so by the
City Council.



      (2)   Within 30 days after any meeting of the City Council,
the City Administrator/Clerk/ Treasurer shall prepare, and publish the
official proceedings of the City Council in a legal newspaper of general
circulation in the city, and which was duly designated as such by the City
Council. Said publication shall set forth a statement of the proceedings
thereof and shall also include the amount of each claim allowed, the purpose
of the claim, and the name of the claimant, except that the aggregate amount
of all payroll claims may be included as one item. Between July 15 and August
15 of each year, the employee job titles and the current annual, monthly, or
hourly salaries corresponding to such job titles shall be published. Each job
title published shall be descriptive and indicative of the duties and
functions of the position. The charge for such publication shall not exceed
the rates provided by the statutes of the state of Nebraska, Neb. RS 19-1102
and 23-122.



(Neb. RS 19-1102)



      (3)   Said publication shall be charged against the general
fund.



(Neb. RS 19-1103)



      (4)   The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall then keep
in a book with a proper index copies of all notices required to be published
or posted by the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer by order of the City
Council, or under the ordinances of the city. To each of the file copies of
said notices shall be attached the printer's affidavit of publication, if the
said notices are required to be published, or the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer's certificate under seal where the same are
required to be posted only.



   (L)   The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall receive all
objections to creation of paving districts and other street improvements. He
or she shall receive the claims of any person against the city, and in the
event that the said claim is disallowed in part, or in whole, the City
Administrator/Clerk/ Treasurer shall notify such claimant, his or her agent,
or attorney by letter within five days after such disallowance, and the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer shall then prepare transcripts on appeals of
any disallowance of a claim in all proper cases.



   (M)   The City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer may charge a reasonable
fee for certified copies of any record in his or her office as set by
resolution of the City Council. He or she shall destroy city records under
the direction of the state Records Board pursuant to Neb. RS 84-1201 through
84-1227, provided that the City Council shall not have the authority to
destroy the minutes of the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer, the permanent
ordinances, and resolution books, or any other records classified as
permanent by the state Records Board.



('72 Code, §§  1-205, 1-206, 1-207, 1-208)  (Am. Ord.  1862, passed
1-8-04; Am. Ord. 1910, passed 11/10/05)



Statutory reference:



   Additional duties, see Neb. RS 17-605



   Annual report required to be published, see Neb. RS 19-1101 and 19-1103



   Examination of public records free of charge, see Neb. RS 84-712



   Free examination of public records, see Neb. RS 84-712



   Penalty on Clerk for violations of Neb. RS 19-1101 through 19-1103, see
Neb. RS 19-1104



   Publication of proceedings of Council, see Neb. RS 19-1101 et seq.



   Publication rates, see Neb. RS 23-122 and Neb. RS 33-141 through 33-143



   Records Management Act, see Neb. RS 84-1201 through 84-1227



   Statutory duties, see Neb. RS 17-606 through 17-609



§ 31.25  STREET COMMISSIONER.



   The City Street Commissioner shall, subject to the orders and
directives of the Mayor and Council, have general charge, direction, and
control of all work on the streets, sidewalks, culverts, bridges, and
cemeteries of the city, and shall perform such other duties as the Mayor and
Council may require. It shall be his or her responsibility to see that
gutters and drains therein function properly, and that the same are kept in
good repair. He or she shall, at the request of the Mayor and Council, make a
detailed report to the Council on the condition of the streets, sidewalks,
culverts, alleys, bridges, and cemeteries of the city, and shall direct their
attention to such improvements, repairs, extensions, additions, and
additional employees as he or she may believe are needed to maintain a
satisfactory street system and to maintain the cemeteries in the city along
with an estimate of the cost thereof. He or she shall assume such other
duties as the Mayor and Council may direct.



(Neb. RS 17-107, 17-119, 17-214) ('72 Code, § 1-216) (Am. Ord. 1898, passed
5-12-05)



§ 31.26  DIRECTOR OF CIVIL DEFENSE.



   The Director shall be the executive head of the Department of Civil
Defense, and shall have responsibility for the organization, administration,
and operation of the civil defense and disaster control organization subject
to the direction and control of the Mayor. The Director of Civil Defense
shall be responsible for public relations, information and education
regarding all phases of civil defense. The Director shall be responsible for
the development of a civil defense and disaster control plan and upon
adoption shall be responsible for such implementation and revision of the
plan as to maintain it on a current state of readiness at all times. The
Director shall coordinate all activities for civil defense and disaster
control and shall maintain liaison and cooperate with all other interested
and affected agencies, public and private. The Director shall coordinate the
recruitment and training of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the
personnel and facilities of the city for civil defense purposes. The Director
may issue proper insignia and papers to civil defense workers and other
people directly concerned with civil defense. The Director of Civil Defense
is hereby authorized to exercise the powers granted to the Mayor in regard to
civil defense either in the absence or inability to serve of the Mayor or the
President of the Council.



('72 Code, § 1-217)



Cross reference:



   Civil Defense, see Ch. 37



§ 31.27  BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   The City Building Inspector shall conduct surveys and make inspections
in any area of the city to determine whether all buildings and structures are
in compliance with the city ordinances. He or she shall investigate all
complaints whether they are verbal, written, or in the form of a petition
alleging, and charging that a violation of the city ordinances exists, and
that a building or structure is unfit or unsafe for human habitation. The
Building Inspector is authorized upon properly identifying himself or herself
to enter, inspect, survey, and investigate between the hours of 8:00 a.m.,
and 5:00 p.m., or at any time if an emergency exists, or if requested by the
owner, or occupant thereof. He or she shall keep records of all complaints
received, inspection reports, orders, and complaints issued. The records
shall be available for public inspection, and he or she shall prepare an
annual report including statistics based on the records kept. The Building
Inspector or his or her duly authorized agent, acting in good faith and
without malice in the discharge of his or her official duties, shall not
thereby render himself or herself liable personally and is hereby relieved
from all personal liability for any damages that may accrue to persons or
property as the result of any act required or by reason of any act or
omission in the discharge of his or her official duties. Any suit brought
against the Building Inspector or his or her duly authorized agent, because
of any such act or omission performed by him or her shall be defended by the
legal department of the city until final termination of the proceedings. The
Building Inspector shall have no financial interest in the furnishing of
labor, materials, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or
maintenance of a building, except where he or she is the owner of a building,
and he or she shall not act as an agent for any said dealer or as an agent
for the sale, lease, or rental of any real estate. The Building Inspector
shall report to the Mayor and Council as often as they may deem necessary and
shall have such other duties and issue such permits as they may direct. The
Building Inspector may be removed at any time for good and sufficient cause
by the Mayor and Council. He or she shall not be removed from office except
after he or she has been given a full opportunity to be heard concerning the
specific charges of misbehavior or incompetence alleged. During the temporary
absence or disability of the Building Inspector, the Mayor, with the advice
and consent of three-fourths of the members of the City Council, shall
designate an acting Building Inspector for such temporary absence or period
of disability. When no other official is named, the Chief of Police shall be
the acting Building Inspector.



('72 Code, § 1-218)



Cross reference:



   Building Inspector, see §§ 150.080 et seq



§ 31.28  ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.



   (A)   All new electrical installation and services shall be
inspected by the State Electrical Inspector.



   (B)   The City Electrical Utility Department, or its representative,
shall enforce all laws relating to electrical wiring and connections thereto.
When acting in good faith and without malice in the scope of his or her
official duties, the representative shall not himself or herself be held
personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as
the result of any act required by him or her, or by reason of any act or
omission in the discharge of his or her duties. He or she shall, in the
discharge of his or her official duties, and upon proper identification, have
authority to enter into any building, structure, or premise at any reasonable
hour. The Electrical Utility Department, or its representative,  shall
perform such other duties and issue any permits that the Mayor and Council
may direct.



('72 Code, § 1-219)



Statutory reference:



   Related provision, see Neb. RS 17-107



§ 31.29  PLUMBING AND MECHANICAL INSPECTOR.



   The City Plumbing and Mechanical Inspector shall enforce all laws
relating to the installation of plumbing and mechanical systems and
connections thereto. When acting in good faith and without malice in the
scope of his or her official duties, he or she shall not himself or herself
be held personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as the result of any act required by him or her or by reason of any
act, or omission in the discharge of his or her duties. He or she shall, in
the discharge of his or her official duties, and upon proper identification,
have authority to enter into any building, structure or premise at any
reasonable hour. He or she shall perform such other duties and issue any
permits that the Mayor and Council may direct. The Plumbing and Mechanical
Inspector may be removed at any time for good and sufficient cause by the
Mayor and Council. The Plumbing and Mechanical Inspector shall not be removed
except by a two-thirds vote of the Council. The Plumbing and Mechanical
Inspector shall post a bond with the city in such sum as the Mayor and
Council may set by resolution.



('72 Code, § 1-220)



Statutory reference:



   Related provision, see Neb. RS 17-107



CHAPTER 32: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



Meetings



   32.01   Definitions



   32.02   Public meetings



   32.03   Videoconferencing, requirements



   32.031   Telephone conference calls; when allowed



   32.04   Closed sessions



   32.05   Emergency meetings



   32.06   Minutes



   32.07   Votes



   32.08   Notice to news media



   32.09   Public participation



   32.10   Order of business



   32.11   Parliamentary procedure



   32.12   Change in office



   32.13   Regular meetings; quorum



   32.14   Special meetings



Bonds and Oaths



   32.25   Bonds; form



   32.26   Oath of office; city officials



Compensation



   32.40   City officials



   32.41   Conflict of interest involving contracts



   32.42   Job description adopted by reference



   32.43   Pay schedule; exceptions



Employee Retirement Plan



   32.55   Adopted by reference



   32.56   Authorization



   32.57   Only for benefit of employees of city



   32.58   Effective date



Risk Management



   32.70   Intergovernmental risk management



MEETINGS



§ 32.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MEETINGS.  All regular, special, or called meetings, formal or
informal, of a public body for the purposes of briefing, discussion of public
business, formation of tentative policy, or the taking of any action.



(Neb. RS 84-1409(2))  ('72 Code, § 1-501)



   PUBLIC BODY.



      (1)   (a)   The City Council;



         (b)   All independent boards, commissions, bureaus,
committees, councils, subunits, or any other bodies, now or hereafter created
by constitution, statute, ordinance, or otherwise pursuant to law; and



         (c)   Advisory committees of the bodies listed above.



      (2)   This subchapter shall not apply to subcommittees of the
bodies designated in this definition unless a quorum of the public body
attends a subcommittee meeting or unless such subcommittees are holding
hearings, making policy, or taking formal action on behalf of their parent
body.



(Neb. RS 84-1409(1)  ('72 Code, § 1-502)



(Ord. 1050, passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 1200, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord. 1421,
passed 2-25-93)



§ 32.02  PUBLIC MEETINGS.



   (A)   All public meetings as defined by law shall be held in a city
public building which shall be open to attendance by the public.  All
meetings shall be held in the public building in which the City Council
usually holds such meetings unless the publicized notice required by this
section designates some other public building or other specified place.



   (B)   The advance publicized notice of all public convened meetings
shall be simultaneously transmitted to all members of the City Council and to
the public by a method designated by the City Council or by the Mayor if the
City Council has not designated a method.  The notice shall contain the time
and specific place for each meeting and either an enumeration of the agenda
subjects known at the time of the notice or a statement that such an agenda
that is kept continually current shall be readily available for public
inspection at the office of the City Clerk during normal business hours. 
Except for items of an emergency nature, the agenda shall not be altered
later than 24 hours before the scheduled commencement of the meeting or 48
hours before the scheduled commencement of a meeting of the City Council
scheduled outside the corporate limits of the city. The City Council shall
have the right to modify the agenda to include items of an emergency nature
only at such public meetings.



   (C)   The minutes of the City Clerk shall include the record of the
manner and advance time by which the advance publicized notice was given, a
statement of how the availability of an agenda of the then known subjects was
communicated, the time and specific place of the meetings, the names of each
member of the City Council present or absent at each convened meeting, and
the substance of all matters discussed.  The minutes of the City Council
shall be a public record open to inspection by the public upon request at any
reasonable time at the office of the City Clerk.



   (D)   Any official action on any question or motion duly moved and
seconded shall be taken only by roll call vote of the City Council in open
session.  The record of the City Clerk shall show how each member voted or
that the member was absent and did not vote.



('72 Code, § 1-503) (Am. Ord. 1050, passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 1200, passed
9-22-83; Am. Ord. 1280, passed 9-24-87)



Statutory reference:



   Meetings required to be public, see Neb. RS  84-1408



   Definitions, see Neb. RS 84-1409



   Notice, agenda, and the like, see Neb. RS 84-1411



   Minutes, roll call, secret ballot, see Neb. RS 84-1413



§ 32.03  VIDEOCONFERENCING, REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   A meeting of an organization created under the Interlocal
Cooperation Act or the Municipal Cooperative Financing Act or of the City
Council of a risk management pool or advisory committee organized in
accordance with the Intergovernmental Risk Management Act may be held by
means of videoconferencing if:



      (1)   Reasonable advance publicized notice is given;



      (2)   Reasonable arrangements are made to accommodate the
public's right to attend, hear, and speak at the meeting, including seating,
recordation by audio or visual recording devices, and a reasonable
opportunity for input such as public comment or questions to at least the
same extent as would be provided if videoconferencing were not used;



      (3)   At least one copy of all documents being considered is
available to the public at each site of the videoconference;



      (4)   At least one member of the City Council or advisory
committee is present at each site of the videoconference; and



      (5)   No more than one-half of the City Council's or advisory
committee's meetings in a calendar year are held by videoconference.



   (B)   Videoconferencing shall not be used to circumvent any of the
public government purposes established in this subchapter.



(Neb. RS 84-1411)



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      VIDEOCONFERENCING.  Conducting a meeting involving participants
at two or more locations through the use of audio-video equipment which
allows participants at each location to hear and see each meeting participant
at each other location, including public input.  Interaction between meeting
participants shall be possible at all meeting locations.



(Neb. RS 84-1409)  ('72 Code, § 1-515)  (Ord. 1594, passed 9-25-97)



§ 32.031  TELEPHONE CONFERENCE CALLS; WHEN ALLOWED.



   (A)   A meeting of the governing body of an entity formed under the
Interlocal Cooperation Act or the Joint Public Agency Act or of the governing
body of a risk management pool or its advisory committees organized in
accordance with the Intergovernmental Risk Management Act may be held by
telephone conference call if:



      (1)   The territory represented by the member public agencies
of the entity or pool covers more than one county;



      (2)   Reasonable advance publicized notice is given which
identifies each telephone conference location at which a member of the
entity's or pool's governing body will be present;



      (3)   All telephone conference meeting sites identified in the
notice are located within public buildings used by members of the entity or
pool or at a place which will accommodate the anticipated audience;



      (4)   Reasonable arrangements are made to accommodate the
public's right to attend, hear, and speak at the meeting, including seating,
recordation by audio recording devices, and a reasonable opportunity for
input such as public comment or questions to at least the same extent as
would be provided if a telephone conference call was not used;



      (5)   At least one copy of all documents being considered is
available to the public at each site of the telephone conference call;



      (6)   At least one member of the governing body of the entity
or pool is present at each site of the telephone conference call identified
in the public notice;



      (7)   The telephone conference call lasts no more than one
hour; and



      (8)   No more than one-half of the entity's or pool's meetings
in a calendar year are held by telephone conference call.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the participation of
consultants, members of the press, and other nonmembers of the governing body
at sites not identified in the public notice. Telephone conference calls
shall not be used to circumvent any of the public government purposes
established in sections 84-1408 to 84-1414 RS Neb.



(Neb. RS 84-1411(3))  (Ord. 1762, passed 3-22-01)



§ 32.04  CLOSED SESSIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Any public body may hold a closed session by the
affirmative vote of a majority of its voting members if a closed session is
clearly necessary for the protection of the public interest, or for the
prevention of needless injury to the reputation of an individual and if such
individual has not requested a public meeting.  Closed sessions may be held
for but shall not be limited to such reasons as:



         (a)   Strategy sessions with respect to collective
bargaining, real estate purchases, pending litigation, or litigation which is
imminent as evidenced by communication of a claim or threat of litigation to
or by the public body;



         (b)   Discussion regarding deployment of security
personnel or devices;



         (c)   Investigative proceedings regarding allegations of
criminal misconduct; or



         (d)   Evaluation of the job performance of a person when
necessary to prevent needless injury to the reputation of a person and if
such person has not requested a public meeting.



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall permit a closed meeting
for discussion of the appointment or election of a new member to any public
body.



   (B)   The vote to hold a closed session shall be taken in open
session.  The vote of each member on the question of holding a closed
session, the reason for the closed session, and the time when the closed
session commenced and concluded shall be recorded in the minutes.  The
public body holding such a closed session shall restrict its consideration to
matters during the closed portions to only those purposes set forth in the
minutes as the reason for the closed session.  The meeting shall be
reconvened in open session before any formal action may be taken.  For
purposes of this section, formal action shall mean a collective decision or a
collective commitment or promise to make a decision on any question, motion,
proposal, resolution, order, or ordinance or formation of a position or
policy but shall not include negotiating guidance given by members of the
public body to legal counsel or other negotiators in closed sessions
authorized under subdivision (A)(1)(a) of this section.



   (C)   Any member of the public body shall have the right to
challenge the continuation of a closed session if the member determines that
the session has exceeded the reason stated in the original motion to hold a
closed session or if the member contends that the closed session is neither
clearly necessary for the protection of the public interest or the prevention
of needless injury to the reputation of an individual.  Such challenge shall
be overruled only by a majority vote of the members of the public body. 
Such challenge and its disposition shall be recorded in the minutes.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that any
meeting be closed to the public. No person or public body shall fail to
invite a portion of its members to a meeting, and no public body shall
designate itself a subcommittee of the whole body for the purpose of
circumventing the provisions of this subchapter.  No closed session,
informal meeting, chance meeting, social gathering, or electronic
communication shall be used for the purpose of circumventing the provisions
of this subchapter.



   (E)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to chance
meetings or to attendance at or travel to conventions or workshops of members
of a public body at which there is no meeting of the body then intentionally
convened and there is no vote or other action taken regarding any matter over
which the public body has supervision, control, jurisdiction, or advisory
power.



(Neb. RS 84-1410) ('72 Code, § 1-504) (Am. Ord. 1200, passed 9-22-83; Am.
Ord. 1422, passed 2-25-93; Am. Ord. 1481, 3-9-95)



§ 32.05  EMERGENCY MEETINGS.



   When it is necessary to hold an emergency meeting without reasonable
advance public notice, the nature of the emergency shall be stated in the
minutes and any formal action taken in such meeting shall pertain only to the
emergency.  Such emergency meetings may be held by means of electronic or
telecommunication equipment.  The provisions of § 32.08 shall be complied
with in conducting emergency meetings.  Complete minutes of such emergency
meetings specifying the nature of the emergency and any formal action taken
at the meeting shall be made available to the public by no later than the end
of the next regular business day.



(Neb. RS 84-1411(4)) ('72 Code, § 1-505) (Ord. 1050, passed 12-11-75; Am.
Ord. 1200, passed 9-22-83)



§ 32.06  MINUTES.



   Each public body shall keep minutes of all meetings showing the time,
place, members present and absent, and the substance of all matters
discussed.  The minutes shall be public records and open to public
inspection during normal business hours.  Minutes shall be written and
available for inspection within ten working days or prior to the next
convened meeting, whichever occurs earlier.



(Neb. RS 84-1413(1), (4), and (5)) ('72 Code, § 1-506) (Ord. 1050, passed
12-11-75)



Statutory reference:



   Rights of the public, see Neb. RS 84-1412



§ 32.07  VOTES.



   (A)   Any action taken on any question or motion duly moved and
seconded shall be by roll call vote of the public body in open session, and
the record shall state how each member voted, or if the member was absent or
not voting.  The requirements of a roll call or viva voce vote shall be
satisfied by the city utilizing an electronic voting device which allows the
yeas and nays of each member of the City Council to be readily seen by the
public.



(Neb. RS 84-1413(2))



   (B)   The vote to elect leadership within a public body may be taken
by secret ballot, but the total number of votes for each candidate shall be
recorded in the minutes.



(Neb. RS 84-1413(3))



('72 Code, § 1-507) (Ord. 1050, passed 12-11-75)



Statutory reference:



   Voting procedure generally, see Neb. RS 17-616



§ 32.08  NOTICE TO NEWS MEDIA.



   The City Clerk, secretary, or other designee of each public body shall
maintain a list of the news media requesting notification of meetings and
shall make reasonable efforts to provide advance notification to them of the
time and place of each meeting and the subjects to be discussed at that
meeting.



(Neb. RS 84-1411(3)) ('72 Code, § 1-508) (Ord. 1050, passed 12-11-75)



§ 32.09  PUBLIC PARTICIPATION.



   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this subchapter, the public shall
have the right to attend and the right to speak at meetings of public bodies,
and all or any part of a meeting of a public body, except for closed sessions
called pursuant to § 32.04, may be videotaped, televised, photographed,
broadcast, or recorded by any person in attendance by means of a tape
recorder, camera, video equipment, or any other means of pictorial or sonic
reproduction or in writing.



   (B)   It shall not be a violation of this section for any public
body to make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations regarding the
conduct of persons attending, speaking at, videotaping, televising,
photographing, broadcasting, or recording its meetings.  A body may not be
required to allow citizens to speak at each meeting, but it may not forbid
public participation at all meetings.



   (C)   No public body shall require members of the public to identify
themselves as a condition for admission to the meeting nor shall such body
require that the name of any member of the public be placed on the agenda
prior to such meeting in order to speak about items on the agenda.  The body
may require any member of the public desiring to address the body to identify
himself or herself.



   (D)   No public body shall, for the purpose of circumventing the
provisions of this subchapter, hold a meeting in a place known by the body to
be too small to accommodate the anticipated audience.



   (E)   No public body shall be deemed in violation of this section if
it holds its meeting in its traditional meeting place which is located in
this State.



   (F)   No public body shall be deemed in violation of this section if
it holds a meeting outside of this State if, but only if, a member entity of
the public body is located outside of this state and the other requirements
of Neb. RS 84-1412 are met.



   (G)   The public body shall, upon request, make a reasonable effort
to accommodate the public's right to hear the discussion and testimony
presented at the meeting.



   (H)   Public bodies shall make available at the meeting, for
examination and copying by members of the public, at least one copy of all
reproducible written material to be discussed at an open meeting.



(Neb. RS  84-1412) ('72 Code, § 1-509) (Ord. 1050, passed 12-11-75; Am.
Ord. 1200, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord. 1281, passed 9-24-87; Am. Ord. 1862,
passed 1-8-04)



§ 32.10  ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   All meetings of the Mayor and Council shall be open to the public.
Promptly at the hour set by law on the day of each regular meeting, the
members of the City Council, the City Clerk, the Mayor, and such other city
officials that may be required shall take their regular stations in the
meeting place, and the business of the city shall be taken up for
consideration and disposition in the manner prescribed by the official agenda
on file at the office of the City Clerk.



('72 Code, § 1-511)



§ 32.11  PARLIAMENTARY PROCEDURE.



   The Mayor shall preserve order during meetings of the City Council and
shall decide all questions of order, subject to an appeal to the Council.
When any person is called to order, he or she shall be seated until the point
is decided. When the Mayor is putting the question, no person shall leave the
meeting room. Every person present, previous to speaking shall rise from his
or her seat and address himself or herself to the presiding officer and while
speaking shall confine himself or herself to the question. When two or more
persons rise at once, the Mayor shall recognize the one who spoke first. All
resolutions or motions shall be reduced to writing before being acted upon,
if requested by the City Clerk or any member of the Council. Every member of
the City Council who is present when a question is voted upon, shall cast his
or her vote unless excused by a majority of the Council present. No motion
shall be put or debated unless seconded. When seconded, it shall be stated by
the Mayor before being debatable. In all cases where a motion or resolution
is entered on the minutes, the name of the member of the Council making the
motion or resolution shall be entered also. After each vote, the "Yeas" and
"Nays" shall be taken and entered in the minutes upon the request of any
member of the Council. Before the vote is actually taken, any resolution,
motion, or proposed ordinance may be withdrawn from consideration by the
sponsor thereof with the consent of the member of the Council seconding the
said resolution, motion, or ordinance. When, in the consideration of an
ordinance, different times, or amounts are proposed, the question shall be
put on the largest sum, or the longest time. A question to reconsider shall
be in order when made by a member voting with the majority, but such motion
to reconsider must be made before the expiration of the third regular meeting
after the initial consideration of the question. When any question is under
debate, no motion shall be made, entertained, or seconded except the previous
question, a motion to table, and to adjourn. Each of the said motions shall
be decided without debate. Any of the rules of the Council for meetings may
be suspended by a two-thirds vote of the members present. In all cases in
which provisions are not made by these rules, Robert's Rules of Order is the
authority by which the Council shall decide all procedural disputes that may
arise.



('72 Code, § 1-512)



§ 32.12  CHANGE IN OFFICE.



   The change in office shall be made as follows: the Mayor and Council
shall meet on the first regular meeting date in December of each year in
which a city election is held and the outgoing officers and the outgoing
members of the Council shall present their reports, and upon the old Council
having completed its business up to the said time, the outgoing members of
the Council shall surrender their offices to the incoming members, and the
outgoing officers shall thereupon each surrender to his or her successor in
office all property, records, papers and moneys, belonging to the same.



('72 Code, § 1-513) (Am. Ord. 1051, passed 12-11-75)



§ 32.13  REGULAR MEETINGS; QUORUM.



   (A)   The meetings of the City Council shall be held at city hall. 
Regular meetings shall be held on the second and fourth Thursday of each
month at the hour of 7:00 p.m.



   (B)   A majority of all the members elected to the City Council
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business, but a smaller
number may adjourn from day to day and compel the attendance of absent
members.  Whether a quorum is present or not, all absent members shall be
sent for and compelled to attend.



   (C)   Unless a greater vote is required by law, an affirmative vote
of at least one-half of the elected members shall be required for the
transaction of any business.



(Neb. RS 17-105)



   (D)   At the hour appointed for the meeting, the City Clerk shall
proceed to call the roll of members and announce whether a quorum is
present.  If a quorum is present, the Council shall be called to order by
the Mayor, if present, or if absent, by the President of the Council.  In
the absence of both the Mayor and the President of the Council, the City
Council members shall elect a President pro tempore.



('72 Code, § 1-510(part)) (Am. Ord. 1179, passed 10-8-81; Am. Ord. 1791,
passed 2-13-02)



Statutory reference:



   Election, qualifications, term, see Neb. RS 17-104



Cross-reference:



   Bond, see § 32.25



   Oath, see § 32.26



§ 32.14  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   (A)   Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or by three
members of the City Council, the object of which shall be submitted to the
Council in writing.  The call and object, as well as the disposition
thereof, shall be entered upon the journal by the City Clerk.



(Neb. RS 17-106)



   (B)   On filing the call for a special meeting, the City Clerk shall
notify the Council members of the special meeting, stating the time and its
purpose.  Notice of a special meeting need not be given to a Council member
known to be out of the state or physically unable to be present.



   (C)   All ordinances passed at any special meeting shall comply with
procedures set forth in §§ 30.30 et seq.



('72 Code, § 1-510(part)) (Am. Ord. 1179, passed 10-8-81)



BONDS AND OATHS



§ 32.25  BONDS; FORM.



   Official bonds of the city shall be in form joint and several and shall
be made payable to the city in such penalty as the City Council may set by
resolution, provided that the penalty amount on any bond shall not fall below
the legal minimum, when one has been set by the state of Nebraska, for each
particular official.  All official bonds of the city officials shall be
executed by the principal named in such bonds and by at least two sufficient
sureties who shall be freeholders of the county, or by the official as
principal and by a guaranty, surety, fidelity, or bonding company, provided
that no city official, while still in his of her official term of office,
shall be accepted as surety on any other official's bond, contractor's bond,
license bond, or appeal bond under any circumstances.  Only companies that
are legally authorized to transact business in the state of Nebraska shall be
eligible for suretyship on the bond of an official of the city.  All said
bonds shall obligate the principal and sureties for the faithful discharge of
all duties required by law of such principal and shall inure to the benefit
of the city and any persons who may be injured by a breach of the conditions
of such bonds.  No bond shall be deemed to be given or complete until the
approval of the City Council and all sureties are endorsed in writing on the
said instrument by the Mayor and City Clerk pursuant to the said approval of
the City Council.  The premium on any official bond required to be given may
be paid out of the general fund or other proper city fund, upon a resolution
to that effect by the City Council at the beginning of any municipal year. 
All official bonds, meeting the conditions herein, shall be filed with the
City Clerk for his of her official records, and it shall be the duty of the
City Clerk to furnish a certified copy of any bond so filed upon the payment
of a fee, which shall be set by resolution of the City Council.  In the
event that the sureties on the official bond of any officer of the city, in
the opinion of the City Council, become insufficient, the City Council may,
by resolution, fix a reasonable time within which the said officer may give a
new bond or additional sureties as directed.  In the event that the officer
should fail, refuse, or neglect to give a new bond or additional sureties to
the satisfaction and approval of the City Council, then the office shall, by
such failure, refusal, or neglect, become vacant, and it shall be the duty of
the City Council to appoint a competent and qualified person to fill the said
office.  Any official who is re-elected to office shall be required to file
a new bond after each election.



('72 Code, § 1-301)



Statutory reference:



   Bonds generally and similar provisions, see Neb. RS 11-103 through
11-118



   Power to regulate offices, see Neb. RS 17-604



§ 32.26  OATH OF OFFICE; CITY OFFICIALS.



   (A)   All officials of the city, whether elected or appointed,
except when a different oath is specifically provided herein, shall before
entering upon their respective duties take and subscribe the following oath,
which shall be endorsed upon their respective bonds:



"I,                                             , do
solemnly swear that I will support the constitution of the United States and
the constitution of the State of Nebraska, against all enemies foreign and
domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take
this obligation freely and without mental reservation or for the purpose of
evasion; and that I will faithfully and impartially perform the duties of the
office of,                           , according to law and to
the best of my ability. And I do further swear that I do not advocate nor am
I a member of any political party or organization that advocates the
overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state by force or
violence; and that during such time as I am in this position I will not
advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this
state by force or violence.  So help me God."



   (B)   If any such officer is not required to give bond, the oath
shall be filed in the office of the Secretary of State or with the City Clerk.



(Neb. RS 11-101)  ('72 Code, § 1-302)



COMPENSATION



§ 32.40  CITY OFFICIALS.



   (A)   The compensation of any elective official of the city shall
not be increased or diminished during the term for which he or she shall have
been elected except when there has been a merger of offices, provided that
the compensation of the members of the City Council, a board, or commission
may be increased or diminished at the beginning of the full term of any
member, whether or not the terms of one or more members commence and end at
different times.  No elected official may be rehired at a greater salary if
he or she resigns and desires to be rehired during the unexpired term of
office.  He or she may be rehired after the term of office during which he
or she resigned at a greater salary.  All salaries shall be set by ordinance
of the City Council and will be available for public inspection at the office
of the City Clerk.



   (B)   The annual salaries of the Mayor and Council of the city shall
be as follows:



      (1)   Mayor:  $4000



      (2)   Council member:  $2000.



   (C)   The annual compensation shall be paid to the elected officials
once each year at the end of each year in the month of December; if an
elected official does not serve a full 12-month term, the compensation shall
be prorated on a monthly basis.



('72 Code, § 1-901) (Am. Ord. 1672, passed - -; Am. Ord. 1865, passed 1-8-04)



Statutory reference:



   Compensation for merged offices, see Neb. RS 17-108.02



   Compensation of elected offices regulated, see Neb. RS 17-612



§ 32.41  CONFLICT OF INTEREST INVOLVING CONTRACTS.



   (A)   (1)   BUSINESS ASSOCIATION means a business:



         (a)   In which the individual is a partner, limited
liability company member, director, or officer; or



         (b)   In which the individual or a member of the
individual's immediate family is a stockholder of closed corporation stock
worth $1,000 or more at fair market value or which represents more than a 5%
equity interest or is a stockholder of publicly traded stock worth $10,000 or
more at fair market value or which represents more than 10% equity interest.



   An individual who occupies a confidential professional relationship
protected by law shall be exempt from this definition.  This definition
shall not apply to publicly traded stock under a trading account if the filer
reports the name and address of the stockbroker.



(Neb. RS 49-1408)



      (2)   IMMEDIATE FAMILY means a child residing in an
individual's household, a spouse of an individual, or an individual claimed
by that individual or that individual's spouse as a dependent for federal
income tax purposes.



(Neb. RS 49-1425)



      (3)   OFFICER  means:



         (a)   A member of any board or commission of the
municipality which spends and administers its own funds, who is dealing with
a contract made by such board or commission; or



         (b)   Any elected municipal official.  OFFICER does not
mean volunteer firefighters or ambulance drivers with respect to their duties
as firefighters or ambulance drivers.



   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 49-1499.04 or
70-624.04, no officer may have an interest in any contract to which his or
her governing body, or anyone for its benefit, is a party.  The existence of
such an interest in any contract shall render the contract voidable by decree
of a court of competent jurisdiction as to any person who entered into the
contract or took assignment of such contract with actual knowledge of the
prohibited conflict.  An action to have a contract declared void under this
section may be brought by the county attorney, the governing body, or any
resident within the jurisdiction of the governing body and shall be brought
within one year after the contract is signed or assigned.  The decree may
provide for the reimbursement of any person for the reasonable value of all
money, goods, material, labor, or services furnished under the contract, to
the extent that the governing body has benefited thereby.



      (2)   The prohibition in this division (B) shall apply only
when the officer or his or her parent, spouse, or child:



         (a)   Has a business association with the business
involved in the contract; or



         (b)   Will receive a direct pecuniary fee or commission
as a result of the contract.



   (C)   Division (B) of this section does not apply if the contract is
an agenda item approved at a meeting of the governing body and the interested
officer:



      (1)   Makes a declaration on the record to the Governing Body
responsible for approving the contract regarding the nature and extent of his
or her interest prior to official consideration of the contract;



      (2)   Does not vote on the matters of granting the contract,
making payments pursuant to the contract, or accepting performance of work
under the contract, or similar matters relating to the contract, except that
if the number of members of the governing body declaring an interest in the
contract would prevent the body with all members present from securing a
quorum on the issue, then all members may vote on the matters; and



      (3)   Does not act for the governing body which is a party to
the contract as to inspection or performance under the contract in which he
or she has an interest.



   (D)   An officer who:



      (1)   Has no business association with the business involved
in the contract or



      (2)   Will not receive a direct pecuniary fee or commission as
a result of the contract shall not be deemed to have an interest within the
meaning of this section.



   (E)   The receiving of deposits, cashing of checks, and buying and
selling of warrants and bonds of indebtedness of any such governing body by a
financial institution shall not be considered a contract for purposes of this
section.  The ownership of less than 5% of the outstanding shares of a
corporation shall not constitute an interest within the meaning of this
section.



   (F)   If an officer's parent, spouse, or child is an employee of the
officer's governing body, the officer may vote on all issues of the contract
which are generally applicable to 1) all employees or 2) all employees within
a classification and do not single out his or her parent, spouse, or child
for special action.



   (G)   Neb. RS 49-14,102 does not apply to contracts covered by this
section.



(Neb. RS 49-14,103.01)



   (H)   (1)   The person charged with keeping records for the
governing body shall maintain separately from other records a ledger
containing the information listed in subdivisions (a) through (e) of this
division (H)(1) about every contract entered into by the governing body in
which an officer of the body has an interest and for which disclosure is made
pursuant to division (C) of this section.  Such information shall be kept in
the ledger for five years from the date of the officer's last day in office
and shall include the:



         (a)   Names of the contracting parties;



         (b)   Nature of the interest of the officer in question;



         (c)   Date that the contract was approved by the
governing body;



         (d)   Amount of the contract; and



         (e)   Basic terms of the contract.



      (2)   The information supplied relative to the contract shall
be provided no later than ten days after the contract has been signed by both
parties.  The ledger kept pursuant to this division (H) shall be available
for public inspection during the normal working hours of the office in which
it is kept.



(Neb. RS 49-14,103.02)



   (I)   An open account established for the benefit of any governing
body with a business in which an officer has an interest shall be deemed a
contract subject to this section.  The statement required to be filed by
division (H) of this section shall be filed within ten days after such
account is opened.  Thereafter, the person charged with keeping records for
the governing body shall maintain a running account of amounts purchased on
the open account.  Purchases made from petty cash or a petty cash fund shall
not be subject to this section.



(Neb. RS 49-14,103.03)



   (J)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) through (I) of this section, the
governing body may prohibit contracts over a specific dollar amount in which
an officer of the governing body may have an interest. 



(Neb. RS 49-14,103.05)



   (K)   The Governing Body may exempt from divisions (A) through (I)
of this section, contracts involving $100 or less in which an officer of such
body may have an interest.



(Neb. RS 49-14,103.06)



('72 Code, § 1-902) (Am. Ord. 1202, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord. 1267, passed
11-13-86; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04)



Statutory reference:



   Private gain by public officers, see Neb. RS 18-305 through 18-312



   Penalty for violation, see Neb. RS 49-14,103.04



   Utility officers permitted to serve in elected office, see Neb. RS
70-624.04



§ 32.42  JOB DESCRIPTION ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   In order to provide adequate written information for employees and
supervisors of the city, job descriptions and pay schedules as prepared by
the City Personnel Committee are hereby incorporated by reference in addition
to all amendments which may now or in the future be made, as though printed
in full herein. Copies of the herein adopted job descriptions will be
distributed to each pertaining employee with the original kept on file in the
office of the City Clerk.



('72 Code, § 1-903)  (Am. Ord. 1196, passed 9-8-83)



§ 32.43  PAY SCHEDULE; EXCEPTIONS.



   Any employee, due to previous experience, ability, initiative, and
industry may, by action of the Mayor and Council be advanced in Grade Steps.



('72 Code, § 1-904)  (Am. Ord. 1196, passed 9-8-83)



EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT PLAN



§ 32.55  ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   To accumulate for the benefit of the employees of the city, who are,
and will become, participants in the City Employees' Retirement Plan, certain
sums as provision for themselves after retirement from service with the city,
the Mayor and City Council of the city do adopt, as amended, the City
Employees' Retirement Plan in the form of the Basic Plan Document and Full
Flex Money Purchase Pension Plan Non-Standardized (004) Adoption Agreement
dated June 1, 2003 which, by this reference, is hereby incorporated by
reference. Three copies of this City Employees' Retirement Plan shall be on
file at the office of the City Clerk and are available for public inspection
at any reasonable time.



('72 Code, § 1-1001) (Am. Ord. 1695, passed 9-23-99; Am. Ord. 1844, passed
7-24-03)



§ 32.56  AUTHORIZATION.



   The Mayor and other appropriate elected officials and officers of the
city shall be, and they hereby are, authorized to do all the things necessary
to carry out this subchapter, including the execution of the Full Flex Money
Purchase Pension Plan Non-Standardized Adoption Agreement dated June 1, 2003
for the city, and to continue the tax qualification of the City Employees'
Retirement Plan under section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. If
any provision of this Plan is subject to more than one interpretation, such
ambiguity shall be resolved in favor of that interpretation which is
consistent with this Plan being so qualified.



('72 Code, § 1-1002) (Am. Ord. 1695, passed 9-23-99; Am. Ord. 8144, passed
7-24-03)



§ 32.57  ONLY FOR BENEFIT OF EMPLOYEES OF CITY.



   Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions set forth in this
Plan are applicable only to employees in the employ of the city, on or after
June 1, 2003. Former employees whose benefits were paid prior to June 1,
2003, or who had terminated employment prior to that date, and beneficiaries
of the former employees, shall be entitled to the benefits, if any, to which
they were entitled under the Plan as it existed immediately prior to June 1,
2003. However, former employees with unpaid vested benefits as of June 1,
2003 will have their benefits paid in accordance with the Plan as in effect
upon distribution, except as required to maintain the qualified status of the
Plan under Code section 401(a).



('72 Code, § 1-1003) (Am. Ord. 1695, passed 9-23-99; Am. Ord. 8144, passed
7-24-03)



§ 32.58  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   The effective date of the Plan shall be June 1, 2003.



(Ord. 8144, passed 7-24-03)



RISK MANAGEMENT



§ 32.70  INTERGOVERNMENTAL RISK MANAGEMENT.



   The City Council and any one or more public agencies, as defined in
Neb. RS 44-4303, may make and execute an agreement providing for joint and
cooperative action in accordance with Neb. RS 44-4301 through 44-4339 to
form, become members of, and operate a risk management pool for the purpose
of providing to members risk management services and insurance coverages in
the form of group self- insurance or standard insurance, including any
combination of group self-insurance and standard insurance, to protect
members against losses arising from any of the following:



   (A)   General liability;



   (B)   Damage, destruction, or loss of real or personal property,
including but not limited to loss of use or occupancy and loss of income or
extra expense resulting from loss of use or occupancy;



   (C)   Errors and omissions liability; and



   (D)   Workers' compensation liability.



('72 Code, § 1-1301) (Ord. 1282, passed 9-24-87)



Statutory reference:



   Intergovernmental risk management authorized and regulated, see Neb. RS
44-4301 through 44-4339



CHAPTER 33: BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND COMMITTEES



Section



   33.01   Library Board



   33.02   Planning Commission



   33.03   Board of Adjustment



   33.04   Board of Health



   33.05   Community Development Agency



   33.06   Housing Authority



   33.07   Board of Public Works



   33.08   Park and Recreation Commission



§ 33.01  LIBRARY BOARD.



   (A)   (1)   The Library Board shall consist of five appointed
members who shall be residents of the municipality and who shall serve terms
of four years.  The board members shall be appointed by a majority vote of
the members of the City Council.  Neither the Mayor nor any member of the
City Council shall be a member of the Library Board.  The terms of members
serving on the effective date of a change in the number of members shall not
be shortened, and any successors to those members shall be appointed as the
terms of those members expire.  In cases of vacancies by resignation,
removal, or otherwise, the City Council shall fill the vacancy for the
unexpired term.  No member shall receive any pay or compensation for any
services rendered as a member of the Library Board.



(Neb. RS 51-202)



      (2)   The City Council may require the members of the Library
Board to give a bond in a sum set by resolution and conditioned upon the
faithful performance of their duties.



   (B)   (1)   The members of the Library Board shall immediately
after their appointment meet and organize by electing from their number a
President, a Secretary, and such other officers as may be necessary. A
majority of the members of the Library Board shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business.



(Neb. RS 51-204)



      (2)   No member of the Board shall serve in the capacity of
both the President and Secretary of the Board.  It shall be the duty of the
Secretary to keep the full and correct minutes and records of all meetings
and to file the same with the Municipal Clerk where they shall be available
for public inspection at any reasonable time. 



      (3)   The Board shall meet at such times as the Board may
designate.  Special meetings may be held upon the call of the President or a
majority of the members of the Board.



('72 Code, § 2-201)  (Am. Ord. 1054, passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 1176, passed
10-8-81; Am. Ord. 1182, passed 1-14-82; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, regulations, see Neb. RS 51-202



Cross-reference:



   Library, see Ch. 93



§ 33.02  PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Planning Commission shall consist of nine regular members
who shall represent, insofar as is possible, the different professions or
occupations in the city and shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the
approval of a majority vote of the members elected to the City Council. Two
of the regular members may be residents of the area over which the city is
authorized to exercise extraterritorial zoning and subdivision regulation.
When there is a sufficient number of residents in the area over which the
city exercises extraterritorial zoning and subdivision regulation, one
regular member of the Commission shall be a resident from such area. If it is
determined by the City Council that a sufficient number of residents reside
in the area subject to extraterritorial zoning and subdivision regulation,
and no such resident is a regular member of the Commission, the first
available vacancy on the Commission shall be filled by the appointment of
such an individual. For purposes of this section, a sufficient number of
residents shall mean 500 residents. The term of each regular member shall be
three years, except that three regular members of the first Commission shall
serve for terms of one year, three for terms of two years, and three for
terms of three years. All regular members shall hold office until their
successors are appointed. Any member may, after a public hearing before the
City Council, be removed by the Mayor, with the consent of a majority vote of
the members elected to the City Council, for inefficiency, neglect of duty,
or malfeasance in office, or other good and sufficient cause. Vacancies
occurring otherwise than through the expiration of term shall be filled for
the unexpired portion of the term by the Mayor.



   (B)   All regular members of the Commission shall serve without
compensation and shall hold no other city office except when appointed to
serve on the Board of Adjustment as provided in Neb. RS 19-908. All members
of the Commission may be required, in the discretion of the City Council, to
give bond in a sum set by resolution of the Council, and conditioned upon the
faithful performance of their duties. The Commission shall elect its
Chairperson and a Secretary from its members and create and fill such other
of its offices as it may determine. The term of the Chairperson and the
Secretary shall be one year, and they shall be eligible for reelection. No
member of the Commission shall serve in the capacity of both the Chairperson
and Secretary of the Commission. It shall be the duty of the Secretary to
keep the full and correct minutes and records of all meetings and to file
them with the City Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection
during office hours. The Commission shall be funded by the City Council from
time to time out of the general fund. The expenditures of the Commission,
exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for that purpose
by the City Council; and no expenditures nor agreements for expenditures
shall be valid in excess of such amounts. A number of Commissioners equal to
a majority of the number of regular members appointed to the Commission shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business. The Commission shall
hold at least one regular meeting in each calendar quarter, except the City
Council may require the Commission to meet more frequently and the
Chairperson of the Commission may call for a meeting when necessary to deal
with business pending before the Commission. Special meetings may also be
held upon the call of any three members of the Commission. The Commission
shall adopt rules and regulations for the transaction of business and shall
keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations,
which shall be a public record. The Commission shall make and adopt plans for
the physical development of the city, including any areas outside its
boundaries which, in the Commission's judgment, bear relation to the planning
of the city, and shall carry out the other duties and exercise the powers
specified in section Neb. RS 19-929. All actions by the Commission shall be
subject to the review and supervision of the Mayor and City Council. The
Commission shall make its recommendations to the City Council so that they
are received by the City Council within 15 days after the Commission begins
consideration of a matter relating to the comprehensive development plan,
capital improvements, building codes, subdivision development, the annexation
of territory, or zoning. The Commission shall be responsible for making such
reports and performing such other duties as the City Council may, from time
to time, designate.



   (C)   The Mayor, with the approval of a majority vote of the elected
members of the City Council, shall appoint one alternate member to the
Commission. The alternate member shall serve without compensation and shall
hold no other city office. The term of the alternate member shall be three
years, and he or she shall hold office until his or her successor is
appointed and approved. The alternate member may be removed from office in
the same manner as a regular member. If the alternate member position becomes
vacant other than through the expiration of the term, the vacancy shall be
filled for the unexpired portion of the term by the Mayor with the approval
of a majority vote of the elected members of the City Council. The alternate
member may attend any meeting and may serve as a voting and participating
member of the Commission at any time when less than the full number of
regular Commission members is present and capable of voting.



('72 Code, § 2-202)  (Am. Ord. 1485, passed 3-9-95; Am. Ord. 1518, passed
1-25-96; Am. Ord. 1649, passed 7-23-98)



Statutory reference:



   General provisions; Planning Commissions regulated, see Neb. RS 19-924
through 19-929



§ 33.03  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint, with the consent of the City Council,
a Board of Adjustment which shall consist of five regular members plus one
additional member designated as an alternate who shall attend and serve only
when one of the regular members is unable to attend for any reason.  Each
member of the Board shall serve a term of three years, unless reappointed,
and shall be removable only for cause by the City Council upon written
charges and after a public hearing.  Vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant.  One member only of
the Board of Adjustment shall be appointed from the membership of the
Planning Commission, and the loss of membership on the Planning Commission by
such member shall also result in his or her immediate loss of membership on
the Board of Adjustment and the appointment of another Planning Commissioner
to the Board of Adjustment.  After the effective date of this section, the
first vacancy occurring on the Board of Adjustment shall be filled by the
appointment of a person who resides in the extraterritorial zoning
jurisdiction of the city at such time as more than 200 persons reside within
such area.  Thereafter, at all times, at least one member of the Board of
Adjustment shall reside outside the corporate boundaries of the city but
within its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction.



   (B)   The members of the Board shall serve without compensation and
may be required, in the discretion of the City Council, to give a bond in a
sum set by resolution of the City Council, and conditioned upon the faithful
performance of their duties.  The Board shall organize at its first meeting
in January of each year and elect from its membership a Chairperson and
Secretary.  It shall be the duty of the Secretary to keep complete and
accurate minutes of all Board meetings, showing the vote of each member upon
each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and
shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of
which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be
public record.  All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public and
shall be held at such times as the City Council may designate, or at such
other times as the Chairperson may, in his or her discretion, call a
meeting.  Special meetings may be also held upon the call of any three
members of the Board.  A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for
the purpose of doing business.  The Board shall adopt rules in accordance
with the provisions of Neb. RS 19-901 to 19-914.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Board:



      (1)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is
error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by a city
official based on or made in the enforcement of any zoning regulation or any
regulation relating to the location or soundness of structures;



      (2)   To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of
the zoning regulations, requests for interpretation of any map; and



      (3)   Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness,
or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of the enactment of the
zoning regulations, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or
other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such piece of
property, the strict application of any zoning regulation would result in
peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue
hardships upon the owner of such property, to authorize, upon an appeal
relating to the property, a variance from such strict application so as to
relieve such difficulties or hardship, if such relief may be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing
the intent and purpose of any ordinance or resolution.



   (D)   (1)   No variance shall be authorized by the Board unless
it finds that:



         (a)   The strict application of the zoning regulation
would produce undue hardship;



         (b)   Such hardship is not shared generally by other
properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity;



         (c)   The authorization of such variance will not be of
substantial detriment to adjacent property and the character of the district
will not be changed by the granting of the variance; and



         (d)   The granting of such variance is based upon reason
of demonstrable and exceptional hardship as distinguished from variations for
purposes of convenience, profit, or caprice.



      (2)   No variance shall be authorized unless the Board finds
that the condition or situation of the property concerned or the intended use
of the property is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make
reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted
as an amendment to the zoning regulations.



   (E)   In exercising the abovementioned powers, the Board may reverse
or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision
or determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement,
decision, or determination as ought to be made and to that end shall have all
powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.  The concurring vote of
four members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision, or determination of any such city official or to
decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to
pass under any such regulation or to effect any variation in such regulation.



(Neb. RS 19-910)



   (F)   The Board shall be responsible for making such reports and
performing such other duties as the City Council may designate.  No member
of the City Council shall serve as a member of the Board of Adjustment.  No
member of the Board of Adjustment shall serve in the capacity of both
Chairperson and Secretary of the Board.



('72 Code, § 2-203) (Am. Ord. 1519, passed 1-25-96)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, duties, powers, see Neb. RS 19-907 through 19-912



   Authority to request county board to serve as city Board of Adjustment,
see Neb. RS 19-912.01



Cross-reference:



   Zoning Code, see Chapter 151



§ 33.04  BOARD OF HEALTH.



   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint, with the consent of the City Counsel,
a Board of Health which shall consist of four members.  The members of the
Board shall include the Mayor, who shall serve as Chairperson, the President
of the City Council, and two other members.  One member shall be a physician
or health care provider, if one can be found who is willing to serve.  Such
physician or health care provider, if appointed, shall be the Board's medical
advisor.  If the Mayor has appointed the Chief of Police, the Chief of
Police shall serve on the Board as Secretary and quarantine officer.  The
members of the Board shall serve, without compensation, a one year term of
office, unless reappointed and unless removed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the City Council, and shall reorganize at the first meeting in
January of each year.  No member of the Board of Health shall hold more than
one Board of Health position.



   (B)   The Secretary shall keep full and correct minutes and records
of all meetings and file the same with the City Clerk where they shall be
available for public inspection during office hours.  The Board of Health
shall be funded by the City Council from time to time out of the general
fund.  A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of
doing business.  The Board shall meet at such times as the City Council may
designate.  Special meetings may be held upon the call of the Chairperson or
any two members of the Board.



   (C)   The Board shall enact rules and regulations, which shall have
the full force and effect of law, to safeguard the health of the people of
the city.  The Board shall enforce the rules and regulations and provide
fines and punishments for any violations thereof.  It may regulate,
suppress, and prevent the occurrence of nuisances and enforce all laws of the
state of Nebraska and ordinances of the city relating to nuisances and to
matters of sanitation which affect the health and safety of the people.  The
Board shall regularly inspect such premises and businesses as the City
Council may direct.  All members of the Board shall be responsible for
making such reports and performing such other duties as the City Council may,
from time to time, designate.



('72 Code, § 2-204) (Am. Ord. 1606, passed 9-25-97) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 17-121



Cross-reference:



   Health and safety regulations, see Chapter 94



§ 33.05  COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AGENCY.



   (A)   The Mayor and City Council hereby find and determine that it
is necessary and desirable for purposes of providing for the redevelopment
and general welfare of the city that a Community Development Agency be
created pursuant to Neb. RS 18-2101.01.



   (B)   There shall be and there is hereby created in and for the city
an agency to be known as the Community Development Agency of the City of
Wahoo, Nebraska, which shall consist of the Mayor and City Council as
exercising the powers of such Agency in accordance with Neb. RS 18-2101.01. 
As provided in Neb. RS 18-2101.01, such Agency shall exercise all of the
powers and authority provided for in Neb. RS 18-2101 to 18-2144, both
inclusive and 18-2145 to 18-2154, both inclusive, as now existing, as
amended, and as hereafter amended.



   (C)   The Agency, as hereby created shall function under the
direction of the Mayor and Council and shall exercise such of the powers
herein described or referred to as shall be determined appropriate from time
to time by the Mayor and Council as the governing body of such Agency and as
determined by resolution or ordinance duly adopted by said body from time to
time.



('72 Code, § 2-206) (Ord. 1619, passed 11-13-97; Am. Ord. 1891, passed
2-10-05)



§ 33.06  HOUSING AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint, with the approval of the Council,
five persons who shall constitute the Housing Authority, and such persons
shall be called the Commissioners.  One Commissioner shall be appointed each
year.  Each Commissioner shall serve a five-year term of office or until a
successor is duly appointed, provided that all vacancies shall be filled for
the unexpired terms.  The Mayor may, with the approval of the Council,
appoint one of its members to serve as one of the five members of such
Housing Authority for such term as the governing body may determine.  No
person shall serve as a Commissioner unless he or she resides within the area
of operation of that Housing Authority.  A certificate of the appointment or
reappointment of any Commissioner shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk,
and such certificate shall be conclusive evidence of the proper appointment
of such Commissioner.  A Commissioner shall receive no compensation for his
or her services, but he or she shall be entitled to the necessary expenses,
including travel expenses, incurred in discharge of his or her duties.



   (B)   A majority of Commissioners shall constitute a quorum of the
Authority for the purpose of conducting its business, exercising its powers,
and for all other purposes.  Action may be taken by the Authority upon the
vote of the majority of the Commissioners present unless in any case the
bylaws of the Authority shall require a larger number.  The Commissioners
shall elect a Chairperson and Vice- Chairperson from among the Commissioners
and shall have the power to employ an executive director who shall serve as
ex officio Secretary of the Authority. The Authority may also employ legal
counsel, or it may call upon the chief law officer of the municipality, for
such services as it may require.  It may employ technical experts and such
other officers, agents, and employees as it may require and shall determine
their qualifications, duties, compensations, and terms of office.  The
Authority may delegate such other powers and duties to its agents or
employees as it may deem proper.



   (C)   During his or her tenure, and for one year thereafter, no
commissioner, officer, or employee of the Municipal Housing Authority shall
voluntarily acquire any interest, direct or indirect, in any project or in
any property included or planned to be included in any project, or in any
contract or proposed contract relating to any housing project.  If any such
commissioner, officer, or employee involuntarily acquires any such interest,
or voluntarily or involuntarily acquired any such interest prior to
appointment or employment as commissioner, officer, or employee, the
commissioner shall immediately disclose the interest in writing to the
Authority, and such disclosure shall be entered upon the minutes of the
Authority, and he or she shall not participate in any action by the Authority
relating to the property or contract in which he or she has any such
interest, provided that nothing herein shall apply to the acquisition of any
interest in notes or bonds of the Authority issued in connection with any
housing project, or to the execution of agreements by banking institutions
for deposit or handling of funds in connection with a project, or to act as
trustee under any trust indenture, or to utility services, the rates for
which are fixed or controlled by a governmental agency.



   (D)   The Mayor may remove a Commissioner for neglect of duty or
misconduct in office in the manner prescribed hereinafter.  The Mayor shall
send a notice of removal to such Commissioner, which notice shall contain a
statement containing the charges against him or her.  Unless within ten days
from the receipt of such notice, such Commissioner files with the Clerk a
request for a hearing before the governing body, the Commissioner shall be
deemed as removed from office.  If a request for a hearing is filed with the
Clerk, the governing body of the municipality shall hold a hearing at which
the Commissioner shall have the right to appear in person or by counsel and
the governing body shall determine whether the removal shall be disapproved
or upheld.  If the removal is disapproved, the Commissioner shall continue
to hold his or her position.



   (E)   The Housing Authority shall keep an accurate account of all
its activities and of all its receipts and disbursements and shall make a
report to the governing body on all such information.



§ 33.07  BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS.



   (A)   The findings set forth in Ordinance 1815 are hereby made a
part of this section as fully as if set out at length herein.



   (B)   The Mayor and City Council hereby establish a Board of Public
Works for the city for the following public works of the city: electricity,
natural gas, sewers and water, hereinafter called Utility and/or Utilities,
said Board of Public Works to be known and designated as the Wahoo Board of
Public Works.



   (C)   The purpose of the Board of Public Works is to provide
governance for the aforenoted Utilities as provided herein.



   (D)   The structure and governance of the Board of Public Works
shall be as follows:



      (1)   The Board of Public Works shall consist of five members;



      (2)   The Mayor shall appoint, subject to the approval of the
Council, or a majority thereof, the five members of the Board of Public Works
who shall be citizens and bona fide residents of the city.  Said member or
members may be removed by the Mayor and a majority of the City Council at
anytime;



      (3)   Each member of the Board of Public Works shall serve
until his/her successor is appointed and qualified, provided, that the
members of the original Board of Public Works shall be appointed in such a
manner that the terms shall be for one, two, three, or four years, in the
manner designated by the Mayor, as the case may be, commencing the first
meeting in June of 2003 of said Board, after which the term of each member
shall be four years, and the terms of not more than two members shall expire
at any one time;



      (4)   Vacancies in the membership of the Board of Public Works
shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor, subject to the approval
of the Council, or a majority thereof;



      (5)   Each member of the Board of Public Works shall, before
entering upon the discharge of his or her duties, take an oath to discharge
faithfully the duties of his or her office. Further, each of the members of
said Board before entering upon the duties of their office shall be required
to give bond to the city with corporate security.  Such bond shall be in the
sum of $5,000 and shall be conditioned for the faithful performance of the
duties of the members of the Board of Public Works and the security on such
bond shall be approved by the Mayor and Council and shall be filed with the
City Treasurer, provided, the premium on said bond shall be paid out of the
funds of the Board of Public Works;



      (6)   No member of the Board of Public Works shall receive any
salary or compensation for his or her services as a member of such Board, but
the actual and necessary expenses incurred by said member in the performance
of his or her duties shall be allowed and paid as a part of the cost and
operation of the Utilities of the city;



      (7)   The Board of Public Works is hereby empowered to adopt
such rules and regulations as may be necessary for its government and the
transaction of business and to provide for amendments thereto. Further, the
Board shall establish regular times for its meetings and keep a record of
their proceedings and publish within the Wahoo Newspaper the minutes of each
meeting of the Board of Public Works within 30 days after said meeting;



      (8)   The members of the Board of Public Works shall organize
as soon as practical after their appointment, by electing a chair, vice
chair, and a secretary at the first meeting of June of each year, who shall
serve until the first meeting in June next following their appointment, and
thereafter, said Board of Public Works shall elect a chair, vice chair, and a
secretary at the first meeting of June of each year. In the absence of
regular officers, temporary officers to serve in their places may be chosen
by the members present at any meeting. Further, the members may select such
other officers, clerks, deputies, laborers and other help and assistants as
may be necessary by such Board to be necessary or expedient.



   (E)   The Mayor and City Council shall retain all statutory powers
regarding the governance of the Utilities of the city not heretofore or
hereinafter transferred and/or assigned to the Board of Public Works.



   (F)   The Board of Public Works is hereby empowered as follows:



      (1)   To hire a general manager of the Board of Public Works
who shall be known as the Utilities General Manager and to empower said
Utilities General Manager with all managerial rights in the operation of the
Utilities not heretofore reserved to the Board of Public Works or not
thereafter assigned by it to the Utilities General Manager;



      (2)   To provide that the current Utilities General Manager of
the city  shall, after the effective date of this section, be employed
thereafter by the Board of Public Works at such reasonable compensation as
may be agreed upon at the time of such employment and shall thereafter be
under the jurisdiction of said Board, any of the provisions of Neb RS 17-401
to 17-426, 17-501 to 17-560, and 19-1401 to 19-1404  and applicable city
ordinances to the contrary not withstanding. Said Utilities General Manager,
under the jurisdiction and control of the Board of Public Works, may be
removed by a majority vote of said Board, after an opportunity to be heard
before the Mayor and City Council, if so requested, for malfeasance,
misfeasance, or neglect in office;



      (3)   To provide that all contracts made by the Board of
Public Works, regarding the Utilities, shall be authorized by a majority of
the Board of Public Works by appropriate action, and the record of all
actions by said Board shall be spread in full upon the minute record of the
Board proceedings;



      (4)   To cooperate and participate in the pension plan on file
in the office of the City Clerk and intended for the benefit of the employees
of the city and for the purpose of such pension plan, the Board of Public
Works may make contributions under such plan, authorize deductions from
salaries of employees, and take such other steps as may be necessary and are
consistent with said plan;



      (5)   To participate in a group insurance plan for the benefit
of its employees covering sickness, dental, accident, and life insurance on
file in the office of the City Clerk and intended for the benefit of the
employees of the city and for the purpose of such group insurance plan, the
Board of Public Works may make contributions under such plan, authorize
deduction from salaries of employees, and take such other steps as may be
necessary and are consistent with said plan;



      (6)   To provide that the procedures and enforcement of all
city ordinances relative to the aforenoted Utilities of the city and Chapters
50, 51, 52, 53, and 54 of Title IV, Public Works of this code, except those
ordinances and chapters and portions thereof, relative to utility rate
setting, are hereby assigned and transferred to the Board of Public Works;



      (7)   To provide that the Board of Public Works shall keep
separate books of account for each Utility under its control showing current
entries of the receipts and expenditures of the Board and duplicate vouchers
of all of its expenditures for each of said Utilities, which records shall,
at all times, be open to the examination of the Mayor and City Council or a
committee thereof. The Board of Public Works shall make a monthly report of
their receipts and expenditures for each separate Utility to the Mayor and
City Council.  The audit and report, at the close of the fiscal year, of the
financial transactions and affairs of the said Utilities, operating through
the Board of Public Works, shall be entirely separate from the general audit
of the city's accounts at the close of its fiscal year and may be carried out
by a different accountant than the one making such general audit for the city;



      (8)   To operate, manage and maintain the city's Utilities and
any and all property owned by the city  and used in connection with the
operation and maintenance of such Utilities, including the erection and
construction of additions, extensions, and improvements in and to such
systems; in furtherance thereof, the Board of Public Works may utilize its
own engineering staff and may hire consulting engineers for the design and
installation of extensions and improvements of the Utilities under the
jurisdiction of the  Board of Public Works, provided, however, said  Board
of Public Works shall follow the requirements of Neb. RS 17-568.01 pertaining
to advertisements for bids for the enlargement or improvement of any of the
Utilities;



      (9)   To purchase all materials and supplies for the operation
and maintenance of such Utilities;



      (10)    To study and recommend to the Mayor and City Council
revisions, changes, and amendments to all rates of the Utilities of the city;



      (11)    To collect all rates, charges, revenues and profits
accruing on account of the ownership and operation of such Utilities;



      (12)    To provide that the collection of rates for the
Utilities or other services furnished and rendered by said Utilities, shall
be under the control and supervision of the Board of Public Works.  All
revenues of said Utilities shall be segregated from all other fun and
revenues of the city and shall be paid and deposited into separate funds, as
designated by the Board of Public Works, said funds to be administered solely
by said Board of Public Works for the purpose of paying operating expenses of
said Utilities, the maintenance and repair of each of said Utilities, and for
paying the interest on and principal of all revenue bonds or combined revenue
bonds of said Utilities, provided, that any surplus funds arising out of the
operation of any of the Utilities by the Board of Public Works may, if not
invested pursuant to the provisions of any other law upon the subject, be
invested by said  Board of Public Works as provided by the laws of the State
of Nebraska, as amended or superseded.  The Board of Public Works shall be
bound by the terms of any ordinance, duly passed and adopted by the Mayor and
City Council in respect to all utility funds in the issuance of bonds and all
other matters;



      (13)    To keep the accounts of cash received and disbursed on
account of the operation and maintenance of such Utilities and all amounts
receivable and payable on account thereof;



      (14)    To pay all salaries, labor, insurance premiums,
materials and supplies, and such other expenses incident to the operation and
conduct of such Utilities;



      (15)    To perform such other acts as the Board may deem
expedient in the operation, maintenance and conduct of such Utilities and the
business and services incident thereto and not in conflict herewith.



   (G)   The Board of Public Works shall be subject to the following:



      (1)   The authority of the Mayor and City Council to approve
the budget of the Board of Public Works as provided in the Municipal
Propriety Function Act;



      (2)   To spend any amount, as set forth in the budget which
has been approved by the Mayor and City Council for the operation and
management of the Utilities. It shall further have authority to spend any
amount not to exceed $60,0000 for the improvement, construction, or extension
of any of the Utilities hereof. In case of emergency, defined as a failure of
one or more of said Utilities, a three-fourths vote of the Board of Public
Works may authorize the Utilities General Manager to exceed the amounts as
specified herein;



      (3)   To provide that the management, operation and
maintenance of the Utilities and of the property used in connection therewith
shall, at all times, be in conformity with the provisions of all bond
ordinances applicable thereto and the refunding revenue bonds of the city
issued pursuant thereto, prior hereto, and in conformity with the provisions
of any ordinance pertaining to the refunding of such outstanding bonds, or
the issuance of new or additional bonds secured by the revenues of said
Utilities. If at any time the provisions of this section shall appear to
conflict in any manner with the provisions of such bond ordinances or the
bonds issues pursuant thereto or with the provisions of any ordinance
pertaining to the refunding of said bonds or issuance of new or additional
revenue bonds secured by the revenues of said Utilities, then the provisions
of such bond ordinances and of the bonds issues pursuant thereto and the
provisions of any ordinance pertaining to the refunding of outstanding bonds
or issuance of new or additional bonds secured by the revenues of said
Utilities shall prevail over the provisions of this section and the
provisions of this section shall yield thereto to the extent necessary to
reconcile any such conflicting provisions;



      (4)   To provide that no member of the Board of Public Works
shall ever be financially interested in a contract entered into by the Board
on behalf of the Board of Public Works;



      (5)   To provide that the Board of Public Works shall not be
entitled to or have any authority over any money raised by taxation for
street lighting purposes. Funds so raised shall be under the control of the
Mayor and City Council. The Board of Public Works may, by mutual contract or
agreement with the Mayor and City Council furnish electric power, and provide
for the installation, operation, and maintenance for street lighting at such
rates and/or fees as may be agreed upon.



   (H)   The Mayor and City Council, by appropriate resolution and/or
ordinance, shall assign the following to the Board of Public Works:



      (1)   The employees designated in Ordinance 1815 are assigned
to the Board of Public Works, as of December 1, 2002;



      (2)   All assets and liabilities pertaining to the Utilities
of the city;



      (3)   All rights-of-way of the city for the aforenoted
Utilities, subject to existing franchise/usage fees presently imposed by the
city for the usage of said rights-of-way or which may be hereafter imposed by
the city;



      (4)   All existing easements of the city for said aforenoted
Utilities;



      (5)   Space in the Wahoo City Hall, at a rental amount or a
shared services agreement to be agreed upon between the Board of Public Works
and the Mayor and City Council.



(Ord. 1815, passed 10-24-02)



§ 33.08  PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Park and Recreation Commission shall consist of five
appointed members who shall be residents of the city and who shall serve
terms of five years, except for the initial members whose respective terms
shall be established by the Mayor as of the date of their appointment.  The
Commission members shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval by a
majority vote of the members of the City Council.  Neither the Mayor nor any
member of the City Council shall be a member of the Commission.  The terms
of members serving on the effective date of a change in the number of members
shall not be shortened, and any successors to those members shall be
appointed as the terms of those members expire.  In cases of vacancies by
resignation, removal or otherwise, the Mayor, with the consent of the City
Council, shall fill the vacancy for the unexpired term.  No member shall
receive any pay or compensation for any services rendered as a member of the
Commission.



(Neb. RS 17-951)



   (B)   (1)   The members of the Commission shall immediately after
their appointment meet and organize by electing from their number a
president, a secretary, and such other officers as may be necessary.  A
majority of the members of the Park and Recreation Commission shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.



      (2)   No member of the Commission shall serve in the capacity
of both the president and secretary of the Commission. It shall be the duty
of the secretary to keep the full and correct minutes and records of all
meetings and to file the same with the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer
where they shall be available for public inspection at any reasonable time.



      (3)   The Commission shall meet at such times as the
Commission may designate.  Special meetings may be held upon the call of the
president or a majority of the members of the Board.



   (C)   The Commission shall have the power to make and adopt such
bylaws, rules and regulations for its own guidance and for the government of
the Park and Recreation Commission as it may deem expedient, not inconsistent
herewith.



(Neb. RS 17-949)



   (D)   (1)   All funds allocated by the city to the Commission,
and all funds received by the Commission from whatever sources, shall be used
by the Commission for the laying out, improving and beautifying the city's
parks, swimming pool and recreational facilities and for the payment of
salaries and wages of persons employed in the performance of such labor and
shall constitute the Park and Recreation Fund of the city.



(Neb. RS 17-951)



      (2)   The Park and Recreation Fund shall be subject to audit
by city and warrants against such fund shall be drawn by the president of the
Commission and warrants so drawn shall be paid by the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer out of such fund.



(Neb. RS 17-952)



   (E)   The Commission shall have the power to utilize all parks and
recreational facilities of the city for the use for which they were created
and to appoint a suitable Recreation Director, to fix his/her compensation,
and to remove such Recreation Director at their pleasure.  The Recreation
Director shall have the ability to hire and fire assistants and employees to
assist the Recreation Director in performance of the duties of the Park and
Recreation Commission, said assistants and employees to be employees of the
city and subject to the City to Wahoo Employee Policies and Procedure Manual,
as it now exists, or may exist in the future.  It shall have the power to
establish rules and regulations for the government of such parks and
recreational facilities as may be deemed necessary for their preservation and
to maintain their usefulness and efficiency.  It shall have the power to fix
and impose, by general rules, penalties and forfeitures for trespasses upon
or injury to the parks and recreational facilities or for violation of any
bylaw, rule or regulation and to fix and impose reasonable fees for the use
of the parks and recreational facilities of city and provide rules and
regulations for the closing of said parks and recreational facilities, in
whole or in part, to the general public, and charge admission thereto during
such closing.  Any rule and regulation for which the Commission declares a
monetary penalty for the violation thereof shall be subject to approval by
the City Council and enforceable by the city Police Department or any other
law enforcement agency having jurisdiction in the city.  Said penalty shall
first be resolved through the Bureau of Violations of the city, as found in
§ 70.20 of this code, before proceeding through the court system of the
State of Nebraska. The Commission shall have and exercise such power as may
be necessary to carry out the spirit and intent of these powers in
establishing and maintaining said parks and recreational facilities.



(Neb. RS 17-951)



   (F)   The Commission shall, on or before the second Monday in
February in each year, make a report to the City Council of the conditions of
the parks and recreational facilities in its trust on the last day of the
prior fiscal year.  The report shall show all money received and credited or
expended; the assets held and other statistics, information and suggestions
as the Commission may deem of general interest or as the City Council may
require.  The report shall be verified by affidavit of the proper officers
of the Commission.



   (G)   Penalties imposed or accruing by any bylaw or regulation of
the Commission and any court costs and attorney's fees may be recovered in a
civil action before any court having jurisdiction.



   (H)   Each member of the Park and Recreation Commission shall,
before entering upon the discharge of his or her duties, take an oath to
discharge faithfully the duties of his or her office.  Further, each of the
members of the Park and Recreation Commission may, before entering upon the
duties of their office, be required to give bond to the city, with corporate
security.  Such bond shall be in the sum of $5,000 and shall be conditioned
for the faithful performance of the duties of the members of the Park and
Recreation Commission and the security on such bond shall be approved by the
Mayor and Council and shall be filed with the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer, provided, the premium on said bonds shall be
paid out of the funds of the city.



(Ord. 1904, passed 7-14-05; Am. Ord. 1905, passed 8-11-05; Am. Ord. 1942,
passed 9-28-06)



CHAPTER 34: FIRE AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS



Section



Fire Department



   34.01   Operation and funding



   34.02   Membership



   34.03   Records



   34.04   Fires



   34.05   Distant fires



   34.06   Fighting distant fires



   34.07   Preservation of property



   34.08   Inspections



   34.09   Notice of violation



   34.10   Mandatory assistance



   34.11   Power of arrest



   34.12   Fire investigation



   34.13   Unlawful handling of equipment



   34.14   Hose tested



   34.15   Drills



Police Department



   34.30   Reserve officer bond



   34.31   Arrest and enforcement jurisdiction



   34.32   Police officers; discipline or removal from duty; notice and
hearing; determination



Abandoned Personal Property



   34.40   Abandoned personal property



   34.41   Storage fees



   34.42   Lien for storage fees and disposition



FIRE DEPARTMENT



§ 34.01  OPERATION AND FUNDING.



   (A)   The city operates the City Fire Department and Licensed
Ambulance Service through the City Fire Chief and Firefighters.  The City
Council, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the management,
maintenance, and improving the Fire Department may each year levy a tax not
exceeding the maximum limits prescribed by state law on the taxable value of
all taxable property within the city.  The revenue from the said tax shall
be known as the Fire Department Fund.  The Fund shall be at all times in the
possession of the City Treasurer.



   (B)   For the purpose of further defraying the costs of maintaining
the Fire Department and to provide additional fire protection, the city may
enter into an agreement with the Rural Fire District for mutual aid and
protection, provided that any such agreement shall be placed on file at the
office of the City Clerk for inspection at any reasonable time.  The Fund
shall be at all times in the possession of the City Treasurer.



('72 Code, § 3-101)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to create; operation, see Neb. RS 17-147



   Taxing authority, see Neb. RS 17-718



   Fire station creation and maintenance, see Neb. RS 17-953



§ 34.02  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The Fire Department shall consist of so many members as may be
decided by the City Council. The members may organize themselves in any way
they may decide, subject to the review of the City Council. The Fire Chief
shall appoint no more than 25 members for each fire department company
subject to the review and approval of the City Council. All vacancies shall
be filled in this manner.



   (B)   All members of the Fire Department shall be subject to such
rules and regulations, and shall perform such duties, as may be prescribed or
required of them by the Fire Chief or the City Council. The members of the
Fire Department shall, during the time of a fire or great public danger, have
and exercise the powers and duties of police officers and shall have full
power and authority to arrest all persons guilty of any violation of the
municipal code or the laws of the State of Nebraska.



   (C)   Members of the Fire Department may hold meetings and engage in
social activities with the approval of the City Council. The secretary shall,
upon request, keep a record of all meetings and shall make a report to the
City Council of all meetings and activities of the Fire Department.



   (D)   Members of the Fire Department shall be considered to be
employees of the city for the purpose of providing them with workers'
compensation and other benefits. The City Council may compensate or reimburse
any member of the Fire Department for expenses incurred in carrying out his
or her duties in an amount set by resolution.



   (E)   The City Council shall purchase and maintain in force a policy
of group term life insurance to age 65 covering the lives of all of the
city's active volunteer fire and rescue personnel, except that when any such
person serves more than one municipality or rural or suburban fire protection
district, the policy shall be purchased only by the first municipality or
district which he or she serves.  The policy shall provide a minimum death
benefit of $10,000 for death from any cause and shall, at the option of the
insured, be convertible to a permanent form of life insurance at age 65. 
The coverage of such policy shall terminate as to any individual who ceases
to be an active volunteer member of the fire department of the city. 



(Neb. RS 35-108)



   (F)   For purposes of Neb. RS  33-139.01, volunteer firefighters
and rescue squad members testifying as witnesses in that capacity alone shall
not be deemed employees of the city. 



(Neb. RS 33-139.01)



('72 Code, § 3-102) (Am. Ord. 1055, passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 1862, passed
1-8-04)



Statutory reference:



   Witness fees prohibited, see Neb. RS 33-139.01



   General regulations, see Neb. RS 35-101 through 35-103



   Life insurance required, see Neb. RS 35-108



§ 34.03  RECORDS.



   The Fire Chief shall keep or cause to be kept a record of all meetings
of the Fire Department, the attendance record of all members, a record of all
fires, and shall make a full report of such records to the City Clerk during
the month of January for the previous calendar year. The record of any fire
shall include the cause, origin, circumstances, property involved, and
whether criminal conduct may have been involved. In the event of sizable
property damage, he shall include the information of whether such losses were
covered by insurance, and if so, in what amount, All records shall be
available to the public at any reasonable time.



('72 Code, § 3-103)



§ 34.04  FIRES.



   It shall be the duty of the Fire Department to use all proper means for
the extinguishment of fires, to protect property within the city, and to
secure the observance of all ordinances, laws, and other rules and
regulations with respect to fires and fire prevention.



('72 Code, § 3-108)



§ 34.05  DISTANT FIRES.



   Upon the permission of the Mayor or Fire Chief such fire equipment of
the city as may be designated by the City Council as rural equipment may be
used beyond the corporate limits to extinguish reported fires.



('72 Code, § 3-109)



§ 34.06  FIGHTING DISTANT FIRES.



   The firefighters of the city shall be considered as acting in the
performance and within the scope of their duties in fighting fire or saving
property or life outside the corporate limits of the city when directed to do
so by the Mayor or Chief of the Fire Department, or some person authorized to
act for such Chief and, in so doing, may take such fire equipment of the city
as may be designated by the City Council.



('72 Code, § 3-110)



§ 34.07  PRESERVATION OF PROPERTY.



   Any official of the City Fire Department shall have the power during
the time of a fire to cause the removal of any private or public property
whenever it shall become necessary to do so for the preservation of such
property from fire, to prevent the spreading of fire, or to protect adjoining
property.  The said officials may direct the city firefighters to remove any
building, structure, or fence for the purpose of checking the progress of any
fire, and the official in charge of the fire fighting effort shall have the
power to blow up or cause to be blown up with powder or otherwise any
building or erection during the progress of a fire for the purpose of
extinguishing or checking the same.



('72 Code, § 3-111)



§ 34.08  INSPECTIONS.



   It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, when
directed to do so by the City Council, to inspect or cause to be inspected by
Fire Department officers, members, or some other official as often as may be
necessary, but not less than two times a year in outlying districts and four
times a year within the fire limits, all buildings, premises, and public
thoroughfares, except the interiors of private dwellings, for the purpose of
ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to create a
fire hazard.  The inspection shall be of the storage, sale, and use of
flammable liquids, combustibles, and explosives; electric wiring and heating;
and the means and adequacy of exits, in case of fire in schools, churches,
hotels, halls, theaters, factories, hospitals, and all other buildings in
which numbers of persons congregate from time to time for any purpose whether
publicly or privately owned; the design, construction, location,
installation, and operation of equipment for storing, handling, and utilizing
of liquefied petroleum gases, specifying the odorization of said gases and
the degree thereof; and chemicals, prozylin plastics, nitrocellulose films,
or any other hazardous material that may now or hereafter exist.



('72 Code, § 3-106)



Statutory reference:



   Inspections under Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act and Petroleum
Products and Hazardous Substances Storage and Handling Act, see Neb. RS 81-512



§ 34.09  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   Upon the finding that the city code has been violated, the Fire Chief
shall notify, or cause to be notified, the owner, occupant, or manager of the
premise where a violation has occurred. Notice may be made personally or by
delivering a copy to the premise and affixing it to the door of the main
entrance of the said premise.  Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an
order upon the owner, such order may be served personally, or by mailing a
copy to the owner's last known post office address if the  owner is absent
from the jurisdiction. Any such order shall be immediately complied with by
the owner, occupant, or manager of the premise or building. The owner,
occupant, or manager may, within five days after such order by the Chief of
the Fire Department or his agent, appeal the order with the Council
requesting a review and it shall be the duty of the Council to hear the same
within not less than five days nor more than ten days from the time when the
request was filed in writing with the City Clerk. The Mayor and Council shall
then affirm, modify, or rescind the said order as safety and justice may
require and the decision shall then be final, subject only to any remedy
which the aggrieved person may have at law or equity. The said order shall be
modified or rescinded only where it is evident that reasonable safety exists
and that conditions necessitate a variance due to the probable hardship in
complying literally with the order of the Fire Chief. A copy of any decision
so made shall be sent to both the Fire Chief and the owner, occupant, or
manager making the appeal.



('72 Code, § 3-107)



§ 34.10  MANDATORY ASSISTANCE.



   Any official of the City Fire Department may command the assistance and
services of any person present at a fire to help in extinguishing the fire or
in the removal and protection of property.  In the event that a spectator
refuses, neglects, or fails to assist the Fire Department after a lawful
order to do so, he or she shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.



('72 Code, § 3-112)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 34.11  POWER OF ARREST.



   The City Fire Chief or the assistant Fire Chief shall have the power,
during the time of a fire and for a period of 36 hours after its
extinguishment, to arrest any suspected arsonist, or other person hindering
or resisting the fire fighting effort, or any person who conducts himself or
herself in a noisy or disorderly manner.  The officials shall be severally
vested with the usual powers and authority of city police officers to command
all persons to assist them in the performance of their duties.



('72 Code, § 3-113)



§ 34.12  FIRE INVESTIGATION.



   It shall be the duty of the Fire Department to investigate or cause to
be investigated the cause, origin, and circumstances of every fire occurring
in the city in which property has been destroyed or damaged in excess of
$50.  All fires of unknown origin shall be reported, and such officers shall
especially make an investigation and report as to whether such fire was the
result of carelessness, accident, or design.  Such investigation shall be
begun immediately following extinguishment of such fire or as soon as it is
determined to be safe to do the same, and the State Fire Marshal shall have
the right to supervise and direct the investigation whenever he or she deems
it expedient or necessary.  The officer making the investigation of fires
occurring within the city shall immediately notify the State Fire Marshal and
shall within one week of the occurrence of the fire furnish him or her with a
written statement of all the facts relating to the cause and origin of the
fire, and such further information as he or she may call for.



('72 Code, § 3-114)



§ 34.13  UNLAWFUL HANDLING OF EQUIPMENT.



   All apparatus and appliances for the extinguishment of fire shall be
under the direct and immediate control of the Chief of the Fire Department
and of the several fire companies to which such appliances have been
delivered.  No person shall, under any pretense whatsoever, remove any of
such appliances from the place where it is kept by its respective company,
except the members of such company, without the order of one of the properly
authorized officers of such company, the Chief of the department, or someone
authorized to act in his or her stead.  It shall be the duty of the fire
companies to keep all apparatus and hose in a serviceable and clean condition
and in such a state as to be of immediate use in case of fire.



('72 Code, § 3-115)



§ 34.14  HOSE TESTED.



   All fire hoses shall be pressure tested at least one time each year.



('72 Code, § 3-104)



§ 34.15  DRILLS.



   The City Fire Department shall hold departmental fire drills at least
twelve times per year at such times as the members of the Fire Department
shall decide.



('72 Code, § 3-105)



POLICE DEPARTMENT



§ 34.30  RESERVE OFFICER BOND.



   No appointment of a law enforcement reserve officer shall be valid
until a bond in the amount of $2,000, payable to the city, has been filed
with the City Clerk by the individual appointed, or a blanket surety bond
arranged and paid for by the City Council and bonding all such officers of
the City Council has been filed.  Such bonds shall be subject to the
provisions of Neb. RS Chapter 11, Article 1.



(Neb. RS 17-118, 81-1444) ('72 Code, § 3-1101) (Ord. 1268, passed 11-13-86)



§ 34.31  ARREST AND ENFORCEMENT JURISDICTION.



   (A)   Every municipal law enforcement officer has the power and
authority to enforce the laws of this state and the municipality or otherwise
perform the functions of that office anywhere within his or her primary
jurisdiction. Primary jurisdiction means the geographic area within
territorial limits of the municipality.



   (B)   Any municipal law enforcement officer who is within this
state, but beyond his or her primary jurisdiction, has the power and
authority to enforce the laws of this state or any legal ordinance of any
city or incorporated village or otherwise perform the functions of his or her
office, including the authority to arrest and detain suspects, as if
enforcing the laws or performing the functions within his or her primary
jurisdiction in the following cases:



      (1)   Any municipal law enforcement officer, if in a fresh
attempt to apprehend a person suspected of committing a felony, may follow
such person into any other jurisdiction in this state and there arrest and
detain such person and return such person to the officer's primary
jurisdiction;



      (2)   Any municipal law enforcement officer, if in a fresh
attempt to apprehend a person suspected of committing a misdemeanor or a
traffic infraction, may follow such person anywhere in an area within 25
miles of the boundaries of the officer's primary jurisdiction and there
arrest and detain such person and return such person to the officer's primary
jurisdiction;



      (3)   Any municipal law enforcement officer has such
enforcement and arrest and detention authority when responding to a call in
which a local, state, or federal law enforcement officer is in need of
assistance.  A law enforcement officer in need of assistance shall mean:



         (a)   A law enforcement officer whose life is in danger;
or



         (b)   A law enforcement officer who needs assistance in
making an arrest and the suspect:



            1.   Will not be apprehended unless immediately
arrested;



            2.   May cause injury to himself or herself or
others or damage to property unless immediately arrested; or



            3.   May destroy or conceal evidence of the
commission of a crime; and



      (4)   If the municipality, under the provisions of the
Interlocal Cooperation Act or the Joint Public Agency Act, enters into a
contract with any other municipality or county for law enforcement services
or joint law enforcement services, law enforcement personnel may have such
enforcement authority within the jurisdiction of each of the participating
political subdivisions if provided for in the agreement. Unless otherwise
provided in the agreement, the municipality shall provide liability insurance
coverage for its own law enforcement personnel as provided in Neb. RS
13-1802. 



   (C)   When probable cause exists to believe that a person is
operating or in the actual physical control of any motor vehicle, motorboat,
or aircraft while under the influence of alcoholic liquor or of any drug or
otherwise in violation of Neb. RS 28-1465, 28-1466, 28-1472, 37-1254.01,
37-1254.02, 60-4,163, 60-4,164, 60-6,196, 60-6,197, 60-6,211.01, or
60-6,211.02, a municipal law enforcement officer has the power and authority
to do any of the following or any combination thereof:



      (1)   Transport such person to a facility outside of the law
enforcement officer's primary jurisdiction for appropriate chemical testing
of the person;



      (2)   Administer outside of the law enforcement officer's
primary jurisdiction any post-arrest test advisement to the person; or



      (3)   With respect to such person, perform other procedures or
functions outside of the law enforcement officer's primary jurisdiction which
are directly and solely related to enforcing the laws that concern a person
operating or being in the actual physical control of any motor vehicle,
motorboat, or aircraft while under the influence of alcoholic liquor or of
any other drug or otherwise in violation of Neb. RS 28-1465, 28-1466,
28-1472, 37-1254.01, 37-1254.02, 60-4,163, 60-4,164, 60-6,196, 60-6,197,
60-6,211.01, or 60-6,211.02.



(Neb. RS 29-215)



   (D)   If municipal law enforcement personnel are rendering aid in
their law enforcement capacity outside the limits of the municipality in the
event of disaster, emergency, or civil defense emergency or in connection
with any program of practice or training for such disaster, emergency, or
civil defense emergency when such program is conducted or participated in by
the Nebraska Emergency Management Agency or with any other related training
program, the law enforcement personnel have the power and authority to
enforce the laws of this state or any legal ordinances or resolutions of the
local government where they are rendering aid or otherwise perform the
functions of their office, including the authority to arrest and detain
suspects, as if enforcing the laws or performing the functions within their
primary jurisdiction.  The municipality shall self-insure or contract for
insurance against any liability for personal injuries or property damage that
may be incurred by it or by its personnel as the result of any movement made
pursuant to this division.



(Neb. RS 81-829.65)



('72 Code, § 3-1102) (Ord. 1486, passed 3-9-95; Am. Ord. 1651, passed
7-23-98; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04)



§ 34.32  POLICE OFFICERS; DISCIPLINE OR REMOVAL FROM DUTY; NOTICE AND
HEARING; DETERMINATION.



   (A)   No police officer, including the Chief of Police, shall be
disciplined, suspended, demoted, removed, or discharged except upon written
notice stating the reasons for such disciplinary action, suspension,
demotion, removal, or discharge.  Such notice shall also contain a statement
informing the police officer of his or her right to a hearing before the City
Council.



   (B)   Any police officer so disciplined, suspended, demoted,
removed, or discharged may, within ten days after being notified of such
disciplinary action, suspension, demotion, removal, or discharge, file with
the City Clerk a written demand for a hearing before the City Council.  The
City Council shall set the matter for hearing not less than ten nor more than
20 days after the filing of the written demand for a hearing.  The City
Council shall give the police officer written notice of the hearing not less
than seven nor more than 14 days prior to the hearing.



   (C)   At the hearing, the police officer shall have the right to:



      (1)   Respond in person to the charges and to present
witnesses and documentary evidence;



      (2)   Confront and cross-examine available adverse witnesses;
and



      (3)   To be represented by counsel.



   (D)   Not later than 30 days following the adjournment of the
meeting at which the hearing was held, the City Council shall vote to uphold,
reverse, or modify the disciplinary action, suspension, demotion, removal, or
discharge.  The failure of the City Council to act within 30 days or the
failure of a majority of the elected Council members to vote to reverse or
modify the disciplinary action, suspension, demotion, removal, or discharge
shall be construed as a vote to uphold the disciplinary action, suspension,
demotion, removal, or discharge.  The decision of the City Council shall be
based upon its determination that, under the facts and evidence presented at
the hearing, the challenged disciplinary action, suspension, demotion,
removal, or discharge was necessary for the proper management and the
effective operation of the Police Department in the performance of its duties
under the state statutes.



   (E)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the
preemptory suspension or immediate removal from duty of an officer, pending
the hearing authorized by this section, in cases of gross misconduct, neglect
of duty, or disobedience of orders.



(Neb. RS 17-107) ('72 Code, § 3-1103) (Ord. 1572, passed 4-24-97)



ABANDONED PERSONAL PROPERTY



§ 34.40  ABANDONED PERSONAL PROPERTY.



   It shall be the duty of the Police Department of the city to take into
its possession, for storage, all personal property abandoned on public
property as set forth and defined in § 94.20 of this code.



(Ord. 1952, passed 12-14-06)



§ 34.41  STORAGE FEES.



   The Mayor and City Council are hereby authorized to adopt, by
resolution, a storage fee schedule to be utilized by the Police Department
for the assessment of storage fees of personal property, in its possession,
found abandoned on public property pursuant to § 94.20 of this code.



(Ord. 1952, passed 12-14-06)



§ 34.42  LIEN FOR STORAGE FEES AND DISPOSITION.



   Pursuant to Neb. RS 52-601.01 et seq. the Police Department of the city
is authorized to dispose of said personal property pursuant to said statutes,
as they now exist and as they may from time to time hereafter be amended.



(Ord. 1952, passed 12-14-06)



CHAPTER 35: FINANCE AND REVENUE



Section



General Provisions



   35.01   Contracts and purchases; bidding and other requirements



   35.02   Annual audit; financial statements



   35.03   Claims



   35.04   Expenditures



   35.05   Warrants



   35.06   Collection of special assessments; procedure



   35.07   Special assessment fund



   35.08   Sinking funds



   35.09   Deposit of funds



   35.10   Certificates of deposit; time deposits; conditions



   35.11   Bond issues



   35.12   Motor vehicle tax



   35.13   Investment of funds



   35.14   Credit cards; authority to accept



   35.15   Sales and use tax



   35.16   Park Fund



Electrical, Water and Sewer Systems



   35.30   Fiscal year



   35.31   Budget statement



   35.32   Budget hearing



   35.33   Expenditures



Annual Budget



   35.50   Fiscal year



   35.51   Expenditures prior to adoption of budget



   35.52   Proposed budget statement; contents; availability; correction



   35.53   Proposed budget statement; hearing; adoption; certification
of tax amount



   35.54   Adopted budget statement; filing; certification of amount of
tax



   35.55   Public funds defined



   35.56   Budget procedure



   35.57   Appropriation bill



Tax Levies



   35.70   All purpose levy; allocation; abandonment; extraordinary
levies



   35.71   Property tax; certification of amount



   35.72   Property tax levy; maximum; authority to exceed



   35.73   Property tax levy and request; authority to set



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 35.01  CONTRACTS AND PURCHASES; BIDDING AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS; LOWEST
RESPONSIBLE BIDDER.



   (A)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 18-412.01 for a contract with a
public power district to operate, renew, replace, or add to the electric
distribution, transmission, or generation system of the city, no contract for
enlargement or general improvements, such as water extensions, sewers, public
heating system, bridges, work on streets, or any other work or improvement
when the cost of such enlargement or improvement is assessed to the property,
costing over $30,000, shall be made unless it is first approved by the City
Council.



   (B)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 18-412.01, before the City
Council makes any contract in excess of $30,000 for enlargement or general
improvements, such as water extensions, sewers, public heating system,
bridges, work on streets, or any other work or improvement when the cost of
such enlargement or improvement is assessed to the property, an estimate of
the cost shall be made by the City Engineer and submitted to the City
Council.  In advertising for bids as provided in divisions (C) and (E) of
this section, the City Council may publish the amount of the estimate.



   (C)   Advertisements for bids shall be required for any contract
costing over $30,000 entered into:



      (1)   For enlargement or general improvements, such as water
extensions, sewers, public heating system, bridges, work on streets, or any
other work or improvement when the cost of such enlargement or improvement is
assessed to the property; or



      (2)   For the purchase of equipment used in the construction
of such enlargement or general improvements.



   (D)   A city electric utility may enter into a contract for the
enlargement or improvement of the electric system or for the purchase of
equipment used for such enlargement or improvement without advertising for
bids if the price is:



      (1)   $30,000 or less;



      (2)   $60,000 or less and the city electric utility has gross
annual revenue from retail sales in excess of $1,000,000;



      (3)   $90,000 or less and the city electric utility has gross
annual revenue from retail sales in excess of $5,000,000;



      (4)   $120,000 or less and the city electric utility has gross
annual revenue from retail sales in excess of $10,000,000.



   (E)   The advertisement provided for in division (C) of this section
shall be published at least seven days prior to the bid closing in a legal
newspaper published in or of general circulation in the city and, if there is
no legal newspaper published in or of general circulation in the city, then
in some newspaper of general circulation published in the county in which the
city is located, and if there is no legal newspaper of general circulation
published in the county in which the city is located, then in a newspaper,
designated by the County Board, having a general circulation within the
county where bids are required, and if no newspaper is published in the city
or county, or if no newspaper has general circulation in the county, then by
posting a written or printed copy thereof in each of three public places in
the city at least seven days prior to the bid closing.  In case of a public
emergency resulting from infectious or contagious diseases, destructive
windstorms, floods, snow, war, or an exigency or pressing necessity or
unforeseen need calling for immediate action or remedy to prevent a serious
loss of or serious injury or damage to life, health, or property, estimates
of costs and advertising for bids may be waived in the emergency ordinance
authorized by Neb. RS 17-613 when adopted by a ¾ vote of the City Council
and entered of record.



   (F)   If, after advertising for bids as provided in this section,
the City Council receives fewer than two bids on a contract or if the bids
received by the City Council contain a price which exceeds the estimated
cost, the City Council may negotiate a contract in an attempt to complete the
proposed enlargement or general improvements at a cost commensurate with the
estimate given.



   (G)   If the materials are of such a nature that, in the opinion of
the manufacturer and with the concurrence of the City Council, no cost can be
estimated until the materials have been manufactured or assembled to the
specific qualifications of the purchasing city, the City Council may
authorize the manufacture and assemblage of such materials and may thereafter
approve the estimated cost expenditure when it is provided by the
manufacturer.



(Neb. RS 17-568.01)



   (H)   Any city bidding procedure may be waived by the City Council:



      (1)   When materials or equipment are purchased at the same
price and from the same seller as materials or equipment which have formerly
been obtained pursuant to the state bidding procedure in Neb. RS 81-145 to
81-162; or



      (2)   When the contract is negotiated directly with a
sheltered workshop pursuant to Neb. RS 48-1503.



(Neb. RS 17-568.02)



   (I)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law or a home rule
charter, a city which has established, by an interlocal agreement with any
county, a joint purchasing division or agency may purchase personal property
without competitive bidding if the price for the property has been
established by the federal General Services Administration or the materiel
division of the Department of Administrative Services.  For purposes of this
division (I):



      (1)   PERSONAL PROPERTY includes but is not limited to
supplies, materials, and equipment used by or furnished to any officer,
office, department, institution, board, or other agency; and



      (2)   PURCHASING or PURCHASE means the obtaining of personal
property by sale, lease, or other contractual means.



(Neb. RS 18-1756)



   (J)   (1)   All purchases, leases, or contracts which by law are
required to be based on competitive bids shall be made to the lowest
responsible bidder, taking into consideration the best interests of the City
of Wahoo, Nebraska.  In determining the lowest responsible bidder, in
addition to price, the following elements shall be given consideration:



         (a)   The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to
perform the contract required;



         (b)   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment,
experience, and efficiency of the bidder;



         (c)   Whether the bidder can perform the contract within
the time specified;



         (d)   The quality of performance of previous contracts;



         (e)   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder
with laws relating to the contract; and



         (f)   Such other information as may be secured having a
bearing on the decision to award the contract.



      (2)   When awarding a contract for personal property, in
addition to the above, the following elements shall be given consideration:



         (a)   The quality or performance of the personal
property proposed to be supplied;



         (b)   Its conformity with specifications;



         (c)   The purposes for which required;



         (d)   The time(s) of delivery;



         (e)   The life-cost of the personal property in relation
to the purchase price and specific use of the item;



         (f)   The performance of the personal property, taking
into consideration any commonly accepted tests and standards of product
usability and user requirements;



         (g)   Energy efficiency ratio as stated by the bidder
for alternative choices of appliances or equipment; and



         (h)   The information furnished by each bidder
concerning life-cycle costs between alternatives for all classes of
equipment, evidence of expected life, repair and maintenance costs, and
energy consumption on a per-year basis.



      (3)   If the item of personal property is a motor vehicle,
then the following, along with all of the aforenoted elements, shall be given
consideration: the results of the United States Environmental Protection
Agency tests on fleet performance of motor vehicles. Each bidder shall
furnish information relating to such results.



('72 Code, § 1-809) (Am. Ord. 1201, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord. 1647, passed
7-23-98; Am. Ord. 1749, passed 12-28-00)



Statutory reference:



   Requirements for public lettings, see Neb. RS 73-101 et seq.



§ 35.02  ANNUAL AUDIT; FINANCIAL STATEMENTS.



   (A)   The City Council shall cause an audit of the city accounts to
be made by a qualified accountant as expeditiously as possible following the
close of the fiscal year.  Such audit shall be made on a cash or accrual
method at the discretion of the City Council.  The audit shall be completed
and the annual audit report made not later than six months after the close of
the fiscal year.  The accountant making the audit shall submit not less than
three copies of the audit report to the City Council.  All public utilities
or other enterprises which substantially generate their own revenue shall be
audited separately, and the results of such audits shall appear separately in
the annual audit report, and such audits shall be on an accrual basis and
shall contain statements and materials which conform to generally accepted
accounting principles.  The audit report shall set forth the financial
position and results of financial operations for each fund or group of
accounts of the city as well as an opinion by the accountant with respect to
the financial statements.  Two copies of the annual audit report shall be
filed with the City Clerk, and shall become a part of the public records of
the City Clerk's office, and will at all times thereafter be open for public
inspection.  One copy shall be filed with the auditor of public accounts.



   (B)   The City Council shall provide and file with the City Clerk
not later than August 1 of each year financial statements showing its actual
and budgeted figures for the most recently completed fiscal year.  (Neb. RS
13-606)



('72 Code, § 1-810)



Statutory reference:



   State municipal auditing regulations; similar provisions, see Neb. RS
19-2901 through 19-2909



§ 35.03  CLAIMS.



   (A)   All liquidated and unliquidated claims and accounts payable
against the city shall:



      (1)   Be presented in writing;



      (2)   State the name and address of the claimant and the
amount of the claim; and



      (3)   Fully and accurately identify the items or services for
which payment is claimed, or the time, place, nature and circumstances giving
rise to the claim.



   (B)   As a condition precedent to maintaining an action for a claim,
other than a tort claim as defined in Neb. RS 13-903, the claimant shall file
such claim within 90 days of the accrual of the claim in the office of the
City Clerk.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall notify the claimant or his or her agent
or attorney by letter mailed to the claimant's address within five days if
the claim is disallowed by the City Council.



   (D)   No costs shall be recovered against the city in any action
brought against it for any claim, or for any claim allowed in part which has
not been presented to the City Council to be audited, unless the recovery is
for a greater sum than the amount allowed with the interest due.



(Neb. RS 17-714)



   (E)   Upon the allowance of claims by the City Council, the order
for their payment shall specify the particular fund or appropriation out of
which they are payable as specified in the adopted budget statement; and no
order or warrant shall be drawn in excess of 85% of the current levy for the
purpose for which it is drawn, unless there shall be sufficient money in the
treasury at the credit of the proper fund for its payment; provided, that in
the event there exists at the time such warrant is drawn obligated funds from
the federal government or the state, or both from the federal government and
the state, for the general purpose or purposes of such warrant, then such
warrant may be drawn in excess of 85% of the current levy for the purpose for
which it is drawn to the additional extent of 100% of such obligated federal
or state funds. No claim shall be audited or allowed unless an order or
warrant for the payment  thereof may be legally drawn.



(Neb. RS 17-715)



§ 35.04  EXPENDITURES.



   (A)   No city official shall have the power to appropriate, issue,
or draw any order or warrant on the city treasury for money, unless the same
has been appropriated or ordered by ordinance.



(Neb. RS 17-708)



   (B)   No expenditure for any improvement to be paid for out of the
general fund of the city shall exceed in any one year the amount provided for
that improvement in the adopted budget statement.



('72 Code, § 1-808)



§ 35.05  WARRANTS.



   All warrants drawn upon the city treasury must be signed by the Mayor
and countersigned by the City Clerk, stating the particular fund to which the
warrant is chargeable, the person to whom payable, and for what particular
object.  No money shall be otherwise paid than upon warrants so drawn. 
Each warrant shall specify the amount included in the adopted budget
statement for the fund upon which it is drawn and the amount already expended
of such fund.



(Neb. RS 17-711) ('72 Code, § 1-812)



§ 35.06  COLLECTION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS; PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The city shall have the authority to collect the special
assessments which it levies and perform all other necessary functions related
thereto including foreclosure.



   (B)   Notice that special assessments are due shall be mailed or
otherwise delivered to the last known address of the person against whom such
special assessments are assessed or to the lending institution or other party
responsible for paying such special assessments.  Failure to receive such
notice shall not relieve the taxpayer from any liability to pay such special
assessments and any interest or penalties accrued thereon.



   (C)   The city shall:



      (1)   File notice of the assessments and the amount of
assessment being levied for each lot or tract of land to the Register of
Deeds; and



      (2)   File a release of assessment upon final payment of each
assessment with the Register of Deeds.



(Neb. RS 18-1216) ('72 Code, § 1-825) (Ord. 1604, passed 9-25-97)



§ 35.07  SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUND.



   All money received on special tax assessments shall be held by the City
Treasurer as a special fund to be applied to the payment of the improvement
for which the assessment was made, and such money shall be used for no other
purpose whatever, unless to reimburse the city for money expended for any
such improvement.



(Neb. RS 17-710) ('72 Code, § 1-814)



§ 35.08  SINKING FUNDS.



   (A)   The City Council, subject to the limitations set forth herein,
shall have the power to levy a tax not to exceed that prescribed by state law
upon the taxable value of all taxable property within the city for a term not
to exceed that prescribed by state law in addition to the amount of tax which
may be annually levied for the purposes of the adopted budget statement of
the city, for the purpose of establishing a sinking fund for the
construction, purchase, improvement, extension, original equipment, or
repair, not including maintenance, of the approved uses as authorized by
state law.



(Neb. RS 19-1302)



   (B)   To initiate the sinking fund, the City Council shall declare
its purpose by resolution to submit to the qualified electors of the city the
proposition to provide the improvement at the next general city election. 
The resolution shall set forth a clear description of the improvement, the
estimated cost, the amount of the annual levy, over a definite period of
years (not exceeding ten years) required to pay such cost, and the specific
name or designation for the sinking fund sought to be established to carry
out the planned improvement, together with a statement of the proposition for
placement upon the ballot at such election.  Notice of the proposition shall
be published in its entirety three times on successive weeks before the day
of the election in a legal newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
The sinking fund may be established after the election if a majority or more
of the legal votes were in favor of the establishment of the fund.  The City
Council may then proceed to establish the fund in conformity with the
provisions of the proposition and applicable state law.  The funds received
by the City Treasurer shall, as they accumulate, be immediately invested with
the written approval of the City Council in the manner provided by state
law.  No sinking fund so established shall be used for any purpose or
purposes contrary to the purpose as it appeared on the ballot unless the City
Council is authorized to do so by 60% of the qualified electors of the city
voting at a general election favoring such a change in the use of the sinking
fund.



('72 Code, § 1-815)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 19-1301 through 19-1304



   Investment of funds, see Neb. RS 77-2337 and 77-2339



§ 35.09  DEPOSIT OF FUNDS.



   (A)   The City Treasurer shall deposit, and at all times keep on
deposit, for safekeeping, in banks, capital stock financial institutions, or
qualifying mutual financial institutions of approved and responsible
standing, all money collected, received, or held by him or her as City
Treasurer. Such deposits shall be subject to all regulations imposed by law
or adopted by the City Council for the receiving and holding thereof. The
fact that a stockholder, director, or other officer of such bank, capital
stock financial institution, or qualifying mutual financial institution is
also serving as Mayor, as a member of the City Council, as a member of the
Board of Public Works, or as any other officer of the city shall not
disqualify such bank, capital stock financial institution, or qualifying
mutual financial institution from acting as a depository for such municipal
funds.



   (B)   The City Council shall require from all banks, capital stock
financial institutions, or qualifying mutual financial institutions:



      (1)   A bond in such penal sum as may be the maximum amount on
deposit at any time less the amount insured or guaranteed by the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation or, in lieu thereof,



      (2)   Security given as provided in the Public Funds Deposit
Security Act to secure the payment of all such deposits and accretions.



The City Council shall approve such bond or giving of security.  The City
Treasurer shall not be liable for any loss of any money sustained by reason
of the failure of any such depository so designated and approved.



(Neb. RS 17-607)



   (C)   The insurance afforded to depositors in banks, capital stock
financial institutions, or qualifying mutual financial institutions through
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation shall be deemed and construed to be
a surety bond to the extent that the deposits are insured or guaranteed by
such corporation, and for deposits so insured or guaranteed, no other surety
bond or other security shall be required.



(Neb. RS 77-2362)



   (D)   Neb. RS 77-2366 shall apply to deposits in capital stock
financial institutions. Neb. RS 77-2365.01 shall apply to deposits in
qualifying mutual financial institutions.



(Neb. RS 17-607, 77-2362)



('72 Code, § 1-817) (Am. Ord. 1645, passed 7-23-98; Am. Ord. 1862, passed
1-8-04)



§ 35.10  CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT; TIME DEPOSITS; CONDITIONS.



   The City Treasurer may, upon resolution of the Mayor and City Council
authorizing the same, purchase certificates of deposit from and make time
deposits in any bank, capital stock financial institution, or qualifying
mutual financial institution in the State of Nebraska to the extent that such
certificates of deposit or time deposits are insured or guaranteed by the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.  Deposits may be made in excess of
the amounts so secured by the corporation, and the amount of the excess
deposit shall be secured by a bond or by security given in the same manner as
is provided for cities of the first class in Neb. RS 16-714 to 16-716.  Neb.
RS  77-2366  shall apply to deposits in capital stock financial
institutions.  Neb. RS 77-2365.01 shall apply to deposits in qualifying
mutual financial institutions.



(Neb. RS 17-720)  (Ord. 1646, passed 7-23-98; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04)



Statutory Reference:



   Applicability of Neb. RS 16-714 to 16-716, see Neb. RS 17-720



   Public Funds Deposit Security Act, see Neb. RS 77-2386 through 77-23,106



§ 35.11  BOND ISSUES.



   The City Council may, after meeting all the requirements of state law,
issue bonds, fund bonds, and retire bonds for such purposes as may be
permitted by state law.  The City Council shall have the authority to levy
special assessments for the payment of interest and principal on such bonds
and may spread the payments up to the maximum number of years permitted by
state law.



('72 Code, § 1-819)



Statutory reference:



   Bonds in general, see Neb. RS 18-1801 through 18-1805



   Boundary bridge bonds, see Neb. RS 39-835 through 39-842.01



   Cemetery bonds, see Neb. RS 17-939



   Cold storage plant bonds, see Neb. RS 17-958



   Compromise of indebtedness, see Neb. RS 10-301 through 10-305



   Dikes, see Neb. RS 17-529.01



   Flood control project bonds, see Neb. RS 17-529.08



   Funding and refunding bonds, see Neb. RS 10-606 through 10-614



   General provisions, see Neb. RS 10-101 through 10-143



   Internal improvement bonds, see Neb. RS 10-401 through 10-411



   Joint power plant bonds, see Neb. RS 17-911



   Library bonds, see Neb. RS 17-968



   Medical and multiunit facility bonds, see Neb. RS 23-3513



   Municipal cemetery; issuance of bonds, see Neb. RS 12-1001 through
12-1004 and RS 17-939



   Power plant bonds, see Neb. RS 17-908



   Public safety bonds, see Neb. RS 18-1201 through 18-1202



   Uniform registration and cancellation of bonds, see Neb. RS 10-201
through 10-209



   Utilities bonds, see Neb. RS 17-905



   Waterworks bonds, see Neb. RS 17-534



§ 35.12  MOTOR VEHICLE TAX.



   The City Council of the city may levy a tax on all motor vehicles owned
or used in the city. Until the implementation date designated by the Director
of Motor Vehicles under Neb. RS 23-186 the tax shall be paid to the County
Treasurer of the county in which the city is located when the registration
fees as provided in the Motor Vehicle Registration Act are paid.  Such taxes
shall be credited by the County Treasurer to the road fund of the city.  On
and after the implementation date designated under Neb. RS 23-186, the tax
shall be paid to the County Treasurer for credit to such road fund. Such
funds shall be used by the city for constructing, resurfacing, maintaining,
or improving streets, roads alleys, public ways, or parts thereof or for the
amortization of bonded indebtedness when created for such purposes.



(Neb. RS 18-1214) ('72 Code, § 1-820) (Ord. 1323, passed 12-28-89)



§ 35.13  INVESTMENT OF FUNDS.



   Whenever a city has accumulated a surplus of any fund in excess of its
current needs or has accumulated a sinking fund for the payment of its bonds
and the money in such sinking fund exceeds the amount necessary to pay the
principal and interest of any such bonds which become due during the current
year, the City Council may invest any such surplus in certificates of
deposit, in time deposits, and in any securities in which the state
investment officer is authorized by law and as provided in the authorized
investment guidelines of the Nebraska Investment Council in effect on the
date the investment is made.



(Neb. RS 77-2341(1)) ('72 Code, § 1-818) (Am. Ord. 1322, passed 12-28-89)



Statutory reference:



   Investment in bonds, see Neb. RS 17-608 and 17-609



§ 35.14  CREDIT CARDS; AUTHORITY TO ACCEPT.



   (A)   The City Council may authorize city officials to accept credit
cards, charge cards, or debit cards as a method of cash payment of any tax,
levy, excise, duty, custom, toll, interest, penalty, fine, license, fee, or
assessment of whatever kind or nature, whether general or special, as
provided by Neb. RS 77-1702.



   (B)   The total amount of such taxes, levies, excises, duties,
customs, tolls, interest, penalties, fines, licenses, fees, or assessments of
whatever kind or nature, whether general or special, paid for by credit card
shall be collected by the city official.



   (C)   The City Council may choose to accept credit cards, charge
cards, or debit cards as a means of cash payment to any facility it operates
in a proprietary capacity and may adjust the price for services to reflect
the handling and payment costs.



   (D)   The city official shall obtain, for each transaction,
authorization for use of any credit card, charge card, or debit card used
pursuant to this section from the financial institution, vending service
company, credit card or charge card company, or third-party merchant bank
providing such service.



   (E)   The City Council may choose to accept the types of credit
cards, charge cards, or debit cards accepted by and the services provided to
the state pursuant to the contract entered into by the state with one or more
credit card, charge card, or debit card companies or third-party merchant
banks for services on behalf of the state and those political subdivisions
that choose to participate in the state contract. The City Council may choose
not to participate in the state contract and may choose types of credit
cards, charge cards, and debit cards and may negotiate and contract
independently or collectively as a governmental entity with one or more
financial institutions, vending service companies, credit card, charge card,
or debit card companies, or third-party merchant banks for the provision of
such services.



   (F)   When authorizing acceptance of credit card or charge card
payments, the City Council shall be authorized but not required to impose a
surcharge or convenience fee upon the person making a payment by credit card
or charge card so as to wholly or partially offset the amount of any discount
or administrative fees charged to the city.  The surcharge or convenience
fee shall be applied only when allowed by the operating rules and regulations
of the credit card or charge card involved or when authorized in writing by
the credit card or charge card company involved. When a person elects to make
a payment to the city by credit card or charge card and such a surcharge or
convenience fee is imposed, the payment of such surcharge or convenience fee
shall be deemed voluntary by such person and shall be in no case refundable.



(Neb. RS 13-609)  (Ord. 1648, passed 7-23-98; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04)



§ 35.15  SALES AND USE TAX.



   (A)   There is hereby imposed a sales and use tax of 1% upon the
same transactions within the city, which the state of Nebraska is authorized
to impose a sales and use tax pursuant to the Local Option Revenue Act of the
State of Nebraska, as amended from time to time. Said tax shall take effect
for all transactions occurring after December 31, 1998. The revenue received
from said tax will be allocated by the Mayor and Council of the city, to the
general fund of the city for police and fire protection, street maintenance
and improvements, city buildings maintenance and improvements, and parks and
recreation.



   (B)   There is hereby imposed an additional sales and use tax of
0.50% upon the same transactions which the State of Nebraska is authorized to
impose a tax, which additional sales and use tax shall commence April 1,
2005, for the purpose of paying:



      (1)   The principal of and the interest on Aquatic Center
bonds in the principal amount of not to exceed $2,000,000, to be issued by
the city, and



      (2)   The annual operational costs of the city's aquatic
facilities after application of such aquatic facilities revenues.



   Said tax to remain in effect only so long as any of the indebtedness
evidenced by said bonds (including any refunding bonds issued to refund such
indebtedness) shall remain outstanding and unpaid.



(Ord. 1670, passed 11-23-98; Am. Ord. 1878, passed 11-23-04)



§ 35.16  PARK FUND.



   The city owns the city parks and other recreational areas.  The Mayor
and Council, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the care, management,
and maintenance of the city parks and recreational facilities may each year
levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state law, on the
actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within the
corporate limits that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the said tax
shall be known as the Park Fund and shall remain in the custody of the City
Treasurer. The Park and Recreation Commission shall have the authority to
adopt rules and regulations for the efficient management of the city parks
and other recreational areas of the city. The Park and Recreation Commission
shall not enter into a contract of any nature which involves an expenditure
of funds, except for ordinary operating expenses, unless the contract has
been approved by resolution of the majority of the members of the Council
prior to the contractual agreement.



(Neb. RS 17-948 through 17-952) ('72 Code, § 3-401)  (Am. Ord. 1937, passed
7-27-06)



ELECTRICAL, WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS



§ 35.30  FISCAL YEAR.



   There shall be and is established a separate fiscal year for the
proprietary functions of the city; that said fiscal year shall commence on
January 1 and end with the last day of December, commencing with January 1,
1994.



('72 Code, § 1-821) (Ord. 1434, passed 8-26-93)



Cross reference:



   Fiscal year, see § 35.50



§ 35.31  BUDGET STATEMENT.



   With respect to the proprietary functions of the city, the following
procedures shall apply:



   (A)   At least 30 days prior to the start of the fiscal year of each
proprietary function, a proposed proprietary budget statement shall be
prepared in writing and filled with the City Clerk containing the following
information:



      (1)   For the immediate two prior fiscal years, the revenue
from all sources, the unencumbered cash balance at the beginning and end of
the year, the amount received by taxation, and the amount of actual
expenditure;



      (2)   For the current fiscal year, actual and estimated
revenue from all sources separately stated as to each such source, the actual
unencumbered cash balance available at the beginning of the year, the amount
received from taxation, and the amount of actual and estimated expenditure,
whichever is applicable;



      (3)   For the immediately ensuing fiscal year, an estimate of
revenue from all sources separately stated as to each such source, the actual
or estimated unencumbered cash balance, whichever is applicable, to be
available at the beginning of the year, the amounts proposed to be expended
during the fiscal year, and the amount of cash reserve based on actual
experience of prior years; and



      (4)   A uniform summary of the proposed budget statement which
shall include a total of all funds maintained for the proprietary function.



   (B)   The statement shall contain the estimated cash reserve for
each fiscal year and shall note whether or not such reserve is encumbered.
The cash reserve projections shall be based upon the actual experience of
prior years.



   (C)   Within three years after the effective date of this act, each
proprietary budget statement shall be filed on forms prescribed and furnished
by the Auditor of Public Accounts following consultation with representatives
of such governing bodies as operate proprietary functions subject to the
provisions of the Municipal Proprietary Function Act.



('72 Code, § 1-822) (Ord. 1434, passed 8-26-93)



§ 35.32  BUDGET HEARING.



   (A)   After a proposed proprietary budget statement is filed with
the City Clerk, the Mayor and Council  shall conduct a public hearing on
such statement. Notice of the time and place of the hearing, a summary of the
proposed proprietary budget statement, and notice that the full proposed
proprietary budget statement is available for public review with the City
Clerk during normal business hours shall be published one time at least five
days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the
Council's jurisdiction or by mailing to each resident within the Council's
jurisdiction.



   (B)   After such hearing, the proposed proprietary budget statement
shall be adopted or amended and adopted as amended, and a written record
shall be kept of such hearing. If the adopted proprietary budget statement
reflects a change from the proposed proprietary budget statement presented at
the hearing, a copy of the adopted proprietary budget statement shall be
filed with the City Clerk within 20 days after its adoption and published in
a newspaper of general circulation within the Council's jurisdiction or by
mailing to each resident with the Council's jurisdiction.



('72 Code, § 1-823) (Ord. 1434, passed 8-26-93)



§ 35.33  EXPENDITURES.



   (A)   If the actual expenditures for a proprietary function exceed
the estimated expenditures in the proprietary budget statement during its
fiscal year, the Council shall adopt a proprietary function reconciliation
statement within 90 days after the end of such fiscal year which reflects any
difference between the adopted proprietary budget statement for the previous
fiscal year and the actual expenditures and revenue for such fiscal year.
After adoption of a proprietary function reconciliation statement, it shall
be filed with the City Clerk and published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the Council's jurisdiction or by mailing to each resident
within the Council's jurisdiction. If the difference between the adopted
proprietary budget for the previous fiscal year and the actual expenditures
and revenue for such fiscal year is greater than 10%, the proprietary
function reconciliation statement shall only be adopted following a public
hearing.



   (B)   If the budget of a proprietary function is included in the
city budget statement created pursuant to the Nebraska Budget Act, the
Municipal Proprietary Function Act need not be followed for that proprietary
function. Any income from a proprietary function which is transferred to the
general fund of the city shall be shown as a source of revenue in the city
budget statement created pursuant to the Nebraska Budget Act.



('72 Code, § 1-824) (Ord. 1434, passed 8-26-93)



ANNUAL BUDGET



§ 35.50  FISCAL YEAR.



   The fiscal year of the city, except for the proprietary functions of
the city, commences on October 1 and extends through the following September
30.



('72 Code, § 1-801) (Am. Ord. 1515, passed 1-25-96)



Cross reference:



   Fiscal year for proprietary functions of the city, see § 35.30



§ 35.51  EXPENDITURES PRIOR TO ADOPTION OF BUDGET.



   (A)   On and after the first day of its fiscal year in 1993 and of
each succeeding year and until the adoption of the budget by the City Council
in September, the City Council may expend any balance of cash on hand for the
current expenses of the city.  Except as provided in division (B) of this
section, such expenditures shall not exceed an amount equivalent to the total
amount expended under the last budget in the equivalent period of the prior
budget year.  Such expenditures shall be charged against the appropriations
for each individual fund or purpose as provided in the budget when adopted.



(Neb. RS 13-509.01)



   (B)   The restriction on expenditures in division (A) of this
section may be exceeded upon the express finding of the City Council that
expenditures beyond the amount authorized are necessary to enable the city to
meet its statutory duties and responsibilities.  The finding and approval of
the expenditures in excess of the statutory authorization shall be adopted by
the City Council in open public session.  Expenditures authorized by this
section shall be charged against appropriations for each individual fund or
purpose as provided in the budget when adopted, and nothing in this section
shall be construed to authorize expenditures by the city in excess of that
authorized by any other statutory provision.



('72 Code, § 1-804.01) (Ord. 1484, passed 3-9-95)



§ 35.52  PROPOSED BUDGET STATEMENT; CONTENTS; AVAILABILITY; CORRECTION.



   (A)   The Governing Body shall annually prepare a proposed budget
statement on forms prescribed and furnished by the Auditor of Public
Accounts.  The proposed budget statement shall be made available to the
public prior to publication of the notice of the hearing on the proposed
budget statement.  A proposed budget statement shall contain the following
information, except as provided by state law:



      (1)   For the immediately preceding fiscal year, the revenue
from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other than revenue received
from personal and real property taxation, allocated to the funds and
separately stated as to each such source:  The unencumbered cash balance at
the beginning and end of the year; the amount received by taxation of
personal and real property; and the amount of actual expenditures;



      (2)   For the current fiscal year, actual and estimated
revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, allocated to the
funds and separately stated as to each such source: The actual unencumbered
cash balance available at the beginning of the year; the amount received from
personal and real property taxation; and the amount of actual and estimated
expenditures, whichever is applicable.  Such statement shall contain the
cash reserve for each fiscal year and shall note whether or not such reserve
is encumbered.  Such cash reserve projections shall be based upon the actual
experience of prior years.  The cash reserve shall not exceed 50% of the
total budget adopted exclusive of capital outlay items;



      (3)   For the immediately ensuing fiscal year, an estimate of
revenue from all sources, including motor vehicle taxes, other than revenue
to be received from taxation of personal and real property, separately stated
as to each such source: The actual or estimated unencumbered cash balances,
whichever is applicable, to be available at the beginning of the year; the
amounts proposed to be expended during the year; and the amount of cash
reserve, based on actual experience of prior years, which cash reserve shall
not exceed 50% of the total budget adopted exclusive of capital outlay items;



      (4)   A statement setting out separately the amount sought to
be raised from the levy of a tax on the taxable value of real property:



         (a)   For the purpose of paying the principal or
interest on bonds issued by the Governing Body and



         (b)   For all other purposes;



      (5)   A uniform summary of the proposed budget statement,
including each proprietary function fund included in a separate proprietary
budget statement prepared pursuant to the Municipal Proprietary Function Act,
and a grand total of all funds maintained by the Governing Body; and



      (6)   A list of the proprietary functions which are not
included in the budget statement.  Such proprietary functions shall have a
separate budget statement which is approved by the Governing Body as provided
in the Municipal Proprietary Function Act.



   (B)   The actual or estimated unencumbered cash balance required to
be included in the budget statement by this section shall include deposits
and investments of the municipality as well as any funds held by the County
Treasurer for the municipality and shall be accurately stated on the proposed
budget statement.



   (C)   The municipality shall correct any material errors in the
budget statement detected by the Auditor of Public Accounts or by other
sources.



(Neb. RS 13-504)



   (D)   The estimated expenditures plus the required cash reserve for
the ensuing fiscal year less all estimated and actual unencumbered balances
at the beginning of the year and less the estimated income from all sources,
including motor vehicle taxes, other than taxation of personal and real
property shall equal the amount to be received from taxes, and such amount
shall be shown on the proposed budget statement pursuant to this section. 
The amount to be raised from taxation of personal and real property, as
determined above, plus the estimated revenue from other sources, including
motor vehicle taxes, and the unencumbered balances shall equal the estimated
expenditures, plus the necessary required cash reserve, for the ensuing year.



(Neb. RS 13-505)



('72 Code, § 1-802) (Am. Ord. 1459, passed 7-28-94; Am. Ord. 1602, passed
9-25-97; Am. Ord. 1637, passed 7-23-98; Am. Ord. 1762, passed 3-22-01; Am.
Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04)



§ 35.53  PROPOSED BUDGET STATEMENT; HEARING; ADOPTION; CERTIFICATION OF TAX
AMOUNT.



   (A)   The Governing Body shall each year conduct a public hearing on
its proposed budget statement.  Notice of the place and time of the hearing,
together with a summary of the proposed budget statement, shall be published
at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing in a newspaper of
general circulation within the municipality.



   (B)   After the hearing, the proposed budget statement shall be
adopted, or amended and adopted as amended, and a written record shall be
kept of such hearing. The amount to be received from personal and real
property taxation shall be certified to the levying board after the proposed
budget statement is adopted or is amended and adopted as amended.  The
certification of the amount to be received from personal and real property
taxation shall specify separately:



      (1)   The amount to be applied to the payment of principal or
interest on bonds issued by the Governing Body and



      (2)   The amount to be received for all other purposes.



   (C)   If the adopted budget statement reflects a change from that
shown in the published proposed budget statement, a summary of such changes
shall be published within 20 days after its adoption in the manner provided
in this section, but without provision for hearing, setting forth the items
changed and the reasons for such changes.



(Neb. RS 13-506)



   (D)   When a levy increase has been authorized by vote of the
electors, the adopted budget statement shall indicate the amount of the levy
increase.



(Neb. RS 13-507)



('72 Code, § 1-803) (Am. Ord. 1638, passed 7-23-98; Am. Ord. 1862, passed
1-8-04)



§ 35.54  ADOPTED BUDGET STATEMENT; FILING; CERTIFICATION OF AMOUNT OF TAX.



   (A)   (1)   After publication and hearing on the proposed budget
statement and within the time prescribed by law, the City Council shall file
with and certify to the levying board or boards on or before September 20 of
each year and file with the Auditor of Public Accounts a copy of the adopted
budget statement which complies with Neb. RS 13-518 to 13-522, together with
the amount of the tax required to fund the adopted budget, setting out
separately:



         (a)   The amount to be levied for the payment of
principal or interest on bonds issued by the City Council; and



         (b)   The amount to be levied for all other purposes.



      (2)   Proof of publication shall be attached to the statements.



   (B)   The City Council, in certifying the amount required, may make
allowance for delinquent taxes not exceeding 5% of the amount required plus
the actual percentage of delinquent taxes for the preceding tax year and for
the amount of estimated tax loss from any pending or anticipated litigation
which involves taxation and in which tax collections have been or can be
withheld or escrowed by court order.  For purposes of this section,
anticipated litigation shall be limited to the anticipation of an action
being filed by a taxpayer who or which filed a similar action for the
preceding year which is still pending.  Except for such allowances, the City
Council shall not certify an amount of tax more than 1% greater or lesser
than the amount determined under § 35.52.



   (C)   The City Council shall use the certified taxable values as
provided by the County Assessor pursuant to Neb. RS 13-509 for the current
year in setting or certifying the levy. The City Council may designate one of
its members to perform any duty or responsibility required of the Council by
this section.



(Neb. RS 13-508)  (’72 Code, § 1-804) (Am. Ord. 1516, passed 1-25-96; Am.
Ord. 1603, passed 9-25-97; Am. Ord. 1639, passed 7-23-98)



§ 35.55  PUBLIC FUNDS DEFINED.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PUBLIC FUNDS.  All money, including non-tax money, used in the
operation and functions of governing bodies.  For purposes of a county,
city, or village which has a lottery established under the Nebraska County
and City Lottery Act, only those net proceeds which are actually received by
the county, city, or village from a licensed lottery operator shall be
considered PUBLIC FUNDS, and PUBLIC FUNDS shall not include amounts awarded
as prizes.



(Neb. RS 13-503(7))  ('72 Code, § 1-801.01)  (Ord. 1483, passed 3-9-95)



§ 35.56  BUDGET PROCEDURE.



   The Manual of Instructions for City/Village: Budgets, prepared by the
Auditor of Public Accounts, State Capitol, Lincoln, Nebraska  68509 is
incorporated herein by reference for the purpose of proper budget preparation.



('72 Code, § 1-805)



§ 35.57  APPROPRIATION BILL.



   The City Council shall adopt a budget statement pursuant to the
Nebraska Budget Act, to be termed "The Annual Appropriation Bill," in which
are appropriated such sums of money as may be deemed necessary to defray all
necessary expenses and liabilities of the city.



(Neb. RS 17-706) ('72 Code, § 1-806) (Am. Ord. 1461, passed 7-28-94; Am.
Ord. 1517, passed 1-25-96)



TAX LEVIES



§ 35.70  ALL-PURPOSE LEVY; ALLOCATION; ABANDONMENT; EXTRAORDINARY LEVIES.



   (A)   The City Council has decided to certify to the County Clerk
for collection one all-purpose levy required to be raised by taxation for all
city purposes instead of certifying a schedule of levies for specific
purposes added together.  Subject to the limits in Neb. RS 77-3442, the
all-purpose levy shall not exceed the annual levy specified in Neb. RS
19-1309 to be levied upon the taxable valuation of all taxable property in
the city.



   (B)   (1)   The amount of the all-purpose levy shall be certified
as a single amount for general fund purposes.



      (2)   The City Council shall allocate the amount raised by the
all-purpose levy to the several departments of the city in its annual budget
and appropriation ordinance, or in other legal manner, as the City Council
deems wisest and best.



   (C)   The city shall be bound by its election to follow the
all-purpose levy method during the ensuing fiscal year but may abandon such
method in succeeding fiscal years.



   (D)   Otherwise authorized extraordinary levies to service and pay
bonded indebtedness of the city may be made by the city in addition to the
all-purpose levy.



(Ord. 1643, passed 7-23-98)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state laws, see Neb. RS 19-1309 through 19-1312



§ 35.71  PROPERTY TAX; CERTIFICATION OF AMOUNT.



   The City Council shall, at the time and in the manner provided by law,
cause to be certified to the County Clerk the amount of tax to be levied upon
the taxable value of all the taxable property of the city which the city
requires for the purposes of the adopted budget statement for the ensuing
year, including all special assessments and taxes assessed as otherwise
provided.  Subject to Neb. RS 77-3442, the maximum amount of tax which may
be so certified, assessed, and collected shall not require a tax levy in
excess of the amounts specified in Neb. RS 17-702.



(Neb. RS 17-702) ('72 Code, § 1-807) (Am. Ord. 1640, passed 7-23-98)



§ 35.72  PROPERTY TAX LEVY; MAXIMUM; AUTHORITY TO EXCEED.



   (A)   Property tax levies for the support of the city for fiscal
years beginning on or after July 1, 1998, shall be limited to the amounts set
forth in this division (A), except as provided in division (C). The City may
levy a maximum levy of $0.45 per $100 of taxable valuation of property
subject to the levy plus an additional $0.05 per $100 of taxable valuation to
provide financing for the City's share of revenue required under an agreement
or agreements executed pursuant to the Interlocal Cooperation Act or the
Joint Public Agency Act.  The maximum levy shall include amounts levied to
pay for sums to support a library pursuant to section 51-201 RS Neb., museum
pursuant to section 51-501 RS Neb., visiting community nurse, home health
nurse, or home health agency pursuant to section 71-1637 RS Neb., or statue,
memorial, or monument pursuant to section 80-202 RS Neb.  Property tax
levies for judgments, except judgments or orders from the Commission of
Industrial Relations, obtained against the City which require or obligate the
City to pay such judgment, to the extent such judgment is not paid by
liability insurance coverage of the city, for preexisting lease-purchase
contracts approved prior to July 1, 1998, for bonded indebtedness approved
according to law and secured by a levy on property, and for payments by a
public airport to retire interest-free loans from the Department of
Aeronautics in lieu of bonded indebtedness at a lower cost to the public
airport are not included in the levy limits established by this division
(A).  The limitations on tax levies provided in this division (A) are to
include all other general or special levies provided by law. 
Notwithstanding other provisions of law, the only exceptions to the limits in
this division (A) are those provided by or authorized by this section.  Tax
levies in excess of the limitations in this section shall be considered
unauthorized levies under section 77-1606 RS Neb. unless approved under
division (C). 



(Neb. RS 77-3442)



   (B)   (1)   All city airport authorities established under the
Cities Airport Authorities Act, community redevelopment authorities
established under the Community Development Law, and offstreet parking
districts established under the Offstreet Parking District Act may be
allocated property taxes as authorized by law which are authorized by the
city and are counted in the municipal levy limit provided by division (A),
except that such limitation shall not apply to property tax levies for
preexisting lease- purchase contracts approved prior to July 1, 1998, for
bonded indebtedness approved according to law and secured by a levy on
property, and for payments by a public airport to retire interest-free loans
from the Department of Aeronautics in lieu of bonded indebtedness at a lower
cost to the public airport.  For offstreet parking districts established
under the Offstreet Parking District Act, the tax shall be counted in the
allocation by the City proportionately, by dividing the total taxable
valuation of the taxable property within the district by the total taxable
valuation of the taxable property within the City multiplied by the levy of
the district.  The City Council shall review and approve or disapprove the
levy request of the political subdivisions subject to this division (B). 
The City Council may approve all or a portion of the levy request and may
approve a levy request that would allow a levy greater than that permitted by
law.  The levy allocated by the city may be exceeded as provided in division
(C).



      (2)   On or before August 1, all political subdivisions
subject to municipal levy authority under this division (B) shall submit a
preliminary request for levy allocation to the City Council. The preliminary
request of the political subdivision shall be in the form of a resolution
adopted by a majority vote of members present of the political subdivision's
governing body.  The failure of a political subdivision to make a
preliminary request shall preclude such political subdivision from using
procedures set forth in Neb. RS 77-3444  to exceed the final levy allocation
as determined in this division (B).



      (3)   (a)   The City Council shall:



            1.   Adopt a resolution by a majority vote of
members present which determines a final allocation of levy authority to its
political subdivisions; and



            2.   Forward a copy of such resolution to the
chairperson of the governing body of each of its political subdivisions.



         (b)   No final levy allocation shall be changed after
September 1 except by agreement between both the City Council and the
governing body of the political subdivision whose final levy allocation is at
issue.



(Neb. RS 77-3443)



   (C)   (1)   The city may exceed the limits provided in division
(A) by an amount not to exceed a maximum levy approved by a majority of
registered voters voting on the issue in a primary, general, or special
election at which the issue is placed before the registered voters.  A vote
to exceed the limits must be approved prior to October 10 of the fiscal year
which is to be the first to exceed the limits.



      (2)   The City Council may call for the submission of the
issue to the voters:



         (a)   By passing a resolution calling for exceeding the
limits by a vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the City
Council and delivering a copy of the resolution to the County Clerk or
Election Commissioner of every county which contains all or part of the city;
or



         (b)   Upon receipt of a petition by the County Clerk or
Election Commissioner of every county containing all or part of the city
requesting an election signed by at least 5% of the registered voters
residing in the city.



      (3)   The resolution or petition shall include the amount of
levy which would be imposed in excess of the limits provided in division (A)
and the duration of the excess levy authority.  The excess levy authority
shall not have a duration greater than five years.  Any resolution or
petition calling for a special election shall be filed with the County Clerk
or Election Commissioner no later than 30 days prior to the date of the
election, and the time of publication and providing a copy of the notice of
election required in Neb. RS 32-802 shall be no later than 20 days prior to
the election.



      (4)   The County Clerk or Election Commissioner shall place
the issue on the ballot at an election as called for in the resolution or
petition which is at least 30 days after receipt of the resolution or
petition.  The election shall be held pursuant to the Election Act.  For
petitions filed with the County Clerk or Election Commissioner on or after
May 1, 1998, the petition shall be in the form as provided in Neb. RS 32-628
through 32-631.



      (5)   Any excess levy authority approved under this division
(C) shall terminate pursuant to its terms, on a vote of the City Council to
terminate the authority to levy more than the limits, at the end of the
fourth fiscal year following the first year in which the levy exceeded the
limit, or as provided in division (C)(8), whichever is earliest.



      (6)   The City Council may pass no more than one resolution
calling for an election pursuant to this division (C) during any one calendar
year.  Only one election may be held in any one  calendar year pursuant to
a petition initiated under this division (C).  The ballot question may
include any terms and conditions set forth in the resolution or petition and
shall include the language specified in Neb. RS 77-3444.



      (7)   If a majority of the votes cast upon the ballot question
are in favor of such tax, the County Board shall authorize a tax in excess of
the limits in division (A), but such tax shall not exceed the amount stated
in the ballot question.  If a majority of those voting on the ballot
question are opposed to such tax, the City Council shall not impose such tax.



      (8)   (a)   The city may rescind or modify a previously
approved excess levy authority prior to its expiration by a majority of
registered voters voting on the issue in a primary, general, or special
election at which the issue is placed before the registered voters.  A vote
to rescind or modify must be approved prior to October 10 of the fiscal year
for which it is to be effective.



         (b)   The City Council may call for the submission of
the issue to the voters:



            1.   By passing a resolution calling for the
rescission or modification by a vote of at least two-thirds of the members of
the City Council and delivering a copy of the resolution to the County Clerk
or Election Commissioner of every county which contains all or part of the
city; or



            2.   Upon request of a petition by the County
Clerk or Election Commissioner of every county containing all or part of the
city requesting an election signed by at least 5% of the registered voters
residing in the city.



         (c)   The resolution or petition shall include the
amount and the duration of the previously approved excess levy authority and
a statement that either such excess levy authority will be rescinded or such
excess levy authority will be modified.  If the excess levy authority will
be modified, the amount and duration of such modification shall be stated. 
The modification shall not have a duration greater than five years.  The
County Clerk or Election Commissioner shall place the issue on the ballot at
an election as called for in the resolution or petition which is at least 30
days after receipt of the resolution or petition, and the time of publication
and providing a copy of the notice of election required in Neb. RS 32-802
shall be no later than 20 days prior to the election.  The election shall be
held pursuant to the Election Act.



(Neb. RS 77-3444)



(Ord. 1641, passed 7-23-98; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 77-3442 through 77-3444



§ 35.73  PROPERTY TAX LEVY AND REQUEST; AUTHORITY TO SET.



   (A)   After publication and hearing on the proposed budget statement
and within the time prescribed by law, the City Council shall file with the
levying board on or before October 14 of each year and file with the Auditor
of Public Accounts a certified copy of any resolution passed setting a tax
levy which shall not exceed the maximum levy prescribed by state law and a
statement reconciling the levy set by the City Council with the adopted
budget statement filed as otherwise required by law.  The levy shall be set
to fund property tax requirements in the adopted budget to four to eight
places to the right of the decimal point.  The City Council shall use the
final adjusted values as provided by the County Assessor pursuant to Neb. RS
13-509 for the current year in setting or certifying the levy.  The City
Council may designate one of its members to perform any duty or
responsibility required of such body by this division (A).



   (B)   (1)   The property tax request for the prior year shall be
the property tax request for the current year for purposes of the levy set by
the County Board of Equalization in Neb. RS 77-1601 unless the City Council
passes by a majority vote a resolution or ordinance setting the tax request
at a different amount.  Such resolution or ordinance shall only be passed
after a special public hearing called for such purpose is held and after
notice is published in a newspaper of general circulation in the area of the
city at least five days prior to the hearing.



      (2)   The hearing notice shall contain the following
information:



         (a)   The dollar amount of the prior year's tax request
and the property tax rate that was necessary to fund that tax request;



         (b)   The property tax rate that would be necessary to
fund last year's tax request if applied to the current year's valuation; and



         (c)   The proposed dollar amount of the tax request for
the current year and the property tax rate that will be necessary to fund
that tax request.



      (3)   Any resolution setting a tax request under this division
(B) shall be certified and forwarded to the County Clerk prior to October 14
of the year for which the tax request is to apply. Any tax levy which is not
in compliance with this subsection and Neb. RS 77-1601 shall be construed as
an unauthorized levy under Neb. RS 77-1606.



('72 Code, § 1-826) (Ord. 1605, passed 9-25-97; Am. Ord. 1642, passed
7-23-98)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 13-508 and 77-1601.02



CHAPTER 36: ELECTIONS



Section



General Election Provisions



   36.01   Generally



   36.02   Primary election



   36.03   Tie votes



   36.04   General election; preparation of ballot



   36.05   Election to terms



   36.06   Filing fee



   36.07   Special elections



   36.08   (Reserved)



   36.09   Petition, write-in, and other candidates for general
election ballot; procedures



   36.10   (Reserved)



   36.11   Registered voters; qualifications



   36.12   Wards



   36.13   Recall procedure



   36.14   Officers; terms; qualifications



Initiative and Referendum



   36.30   Definitions



   36.31   Petitions; ballots



   36.32   Petition form



   36.321   Declaratory judgment



   36.33   Signature sheets



   36.34   Petition affidavit



   36.35   Petition notification; verification



   36.36   Frequency of occurrence



   36.37   Direct vote



   36.38   Elections



   36.39   Ballots



   36.40   Initiative



   36.41   Referendum limitations



   36.42   Referendum passage



   36.43   Applicability



GENERAL ELECTION PROVISIONS



§ 36.01  GENERALLY.



   All city issues and offices shall be combined on the statewide primary
and general election ballots whenever possible.  The issuance of separate
ballots shall be avoided in a statewide election if city offices or issues
can reasonably be combined with the non-partisan ballot and state law does
not require otherwise.  When the city holds an election in conjunction with
the statewide primary or general election, the election shall be held as
provided in the Election Act.  Any other election by the city shall be held
as provided in the Election Act unless otherwise provided by Neb. RS Ch. 32.



(Neb. RS 32-556) ('72 Code, § 1-701) (Am. Ord. 1052, passed 12-11-75)



Statutory reference:



   Statewide primary election, see Neb. RS 32-401



   Statewide general election, see Neb. RS 32-404



   Conformance to Election Act, see Neb. RS 32-404(1)



   Notice, publication, and printing of ballots, see Neb. RS 32-801
through 32-822



   Election costs, see Neb. RS 32-1201 through 32-1208



§ 36.02  PRIMARY ELECTION.



   (A)   Number of candidates filing.  If the names of candidates
properly filed for nomination at the primary election for officers of the
city do not exceed two candidates for each position to be filled, any such
candidates shall be declared nominated and their names shall not appear on
any primary election ballots.



(Neb. RS 32-811) ('72 Code, § 1-703)



   (B)   Write-in candidates.  When the name of a candidate who did
not file or become a petition candidate for nomination is written in and
voted for as a candidate for a Council member, such person shall not be
entitled to a certificate of nomination at the statewide primary election nor
have his or her name placed on the general election ballot unless he or she
shall have received not less than 20% of the total votes cast for the
candidate receiving the greatest number of votes in the precinct or ward of
the candidate receiving the greatest number of votes of the at-large
candidates, whichever the case may be, at the preceding election in which
candidates were elected to serve the ward, or of the at-large candidates if
the election was held at large.



('72 Code, § 1-704)



(Ord. 1052, 12-11-75)



§ 36.03  TIE VOTES.



   In the case of a tie vote of any of the candidates in either the
primary or general election, the Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall
notify such candidates by certified mail to appear at his or her office on a
given day and hour to determine the same before the canvassing board, and the
certificate of nomination or election shall be delivered accordingly.



(Neb. RS 32-1122) ('72 Code, § 1-705) (Ord. 1052, passed 12-11-75)



§ 36.04  GENERAL ELECTION; PREPARATION OF BALLOT.



   (A)   When more than one person becomes a candidate by filing,
petition, or write-in procedures for the same position in the primary, the
County Clerk, in preparing the official ballot for the general election shall
place thereon the names of the persons who received the greatest number of
votes in the primary, but in no event shall the names on the general election
ballot be more than twice the number of vacancies to be filled at the general
election.



   (B)   The County Clerk shall place the names of the candidates on
the general election ballot in the direct order according to the number of
votes received at the primary election. If no primary election was held, the
name of the candidates shall be placed upon the general election ballot in
the order of their filing.



('72 Code, § 1-706) (Ord. 1052, passed 12-11-75)



§ 36.05  ELECTION TO TERMS.



   The candidates shall be placed on the general election ballot and the
candidates receiving the greatest number of votes shall be elected to terms
of the longest duration, and those receiving the next greatest number of
votes shall be elected to the remaining term or terms. The County Clerk shall
place the names of the candidates on the general election ballot in the
direct order according to the number of votes received at the primary
election. The term of office of all such members shall commence on the first
regular meeting of the Council in December following their election. Any
vacancy on the Council resulting from causes other than expiration of the
term shall be filled by vote of the remaining members as provided in § 30.18.



('72 Code, § 1-707) (Ord. 1052, passed 12-11-75)



§ 36.06  FILING FEE.



   (A)   Except as provided in divisions (C) or (D) of this section, a
filing fee shall be paid to the City Treasurer by or on behalf of each
candidate prior to filing for office.  The filing fee shall be a sum equal
to 1% of the annual salary such candidate will receive if he or she is
elected and qualifies for the office for which he or she files as a
candidate.  The fee shall be placed in the general fund of the city.  No
candidate filing forms shall be filed until the proper receipt showing
payment of such filing fee is presented to the filing officer.



   (B)   All declared write-in candidates shall pay the filing fees
that are required for the office at the time that they present the write-in
affidavit to the filing officer.  Any undeclared write-in candidate who is
nominated or elected by write-in votes shall pay the filing fee required for
the office within ten days after the canvass of votes by the county
canvassing board and shall file the receipt with the person issuing the
certificate of nomination or the certificate of election prior to the
certificate being issued.



   (C)   No filing fee shall be required on any candidate filing for an
office in which a per diem is paid rather than a salary or for which there is
a salary of less than $500 per year.



   (D)   No filing fee shall be required of any candidate completing an
affidavit requesting to file for elective office in forma pauperis.  A
pauper shall mean a person whose income and other resources for maintenance
are found under assistance standards to be insufficient for meeting the cost
of his or her requirements and whose reserve of cash or other available
resources does not exceed the maximum available resources that an eligible
individual may own.  Available resources shall include every type of
property or interest in property that an individual owns and may convert into
cash except:



      (1)   Real property used as a home;



      (2)   Household goods of a moderate value used in the home; and



      (3)   Assets to a maximum value of $3,000 used by a recipient
in a planned effort directed towards self-support.



   (E)   If any candidate dies prior to an election, the spouse of the
candidate may file a claim for refund of the filing fee with the City Council
prior to the date of the election.  Upon approval of the claim by the City
Council, the filing fee shall be refunded.



('72 Code, § 1-708) (Am. Ord. 1052, passed 12-11-75)



Statutory reference:



   Filing fee, see Neb. RS 32-608



§ 36.07  SPECIAL ELECTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 77-3444, any issue to
be submitted to the registered voters at a special election by the city shall
be certified by the City Clerk to the Election Commissioner or County Clerk
at least 50 days prior to the election.  A special election may be held by
mail as provided in Neb. RS 32-952 through 32-959.  Any other special
election shall be subject to division (B) of this section.



      (2)   In lieu of submitting the issue at a special election,
the city may submit the issue at a statewide primary or general election or
at any scheduled county election, except that no such issue shall be
submitted at a statewide election or scheduled county election unless the
issue to be submitted has been certified by the City Clerk to the Election
Commissioner or County Clerk by March 1 for the primary election and by
September 1 for the general election.



      (3)   After the Election Commissioner or County Clerk has
received the certification of the issue to be submitted, he or she shall be
responsible for all matters relating to the submission of the issue to the
registered voters, except that the City Clerk shall be responsible for the
publication or posting of any required special notice of the submission of
such issue other than the notice required to be given of the statewide
election issues.  The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall prepare
the ballots and issue ballots for early voting and shall also conduct the
submission of the issue, including the receiving and counting of ballots on
the issue.  The election returns shall be made to the Election Commissioner
or County Clerk.  The ballots shall be counted and canvassed at the same
time and in the same manner as the other ballots.  Upon completion of the
canvass of the vote by the County Canvassing Board, the Election Commissioner
or County Clerk shall certify the election results to the City Council.  The
canvass by the County Canvassing Board shall have the same force and effect
as if made by the City Council.



(Neb. RS 32-559)



   (B)   Any special election under the Election Act shall be held on
the first Tuesday following the second Monday of the selected month unless
otherwise specifically provided.  No special election shall be held under
the Election Act in April, May, June, October, November, or December of an
even- numbered year unless it is held in conjunction with the statewide
primary or general election.



(Ref. 32-405 RS Neb.)



('72 Code, § 1-709) (Am. Ord. 1263, passed 11-13-86; Am. Ord. 1601, passed
9-25-97; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04)



§ 36.08  (RESERVED).



§ 36.09  PETITION, WRITE-IN, AND OTHER CANDIDATES FOR GENERAL ELECTION
BALLOT; PROCEDURES.



   (A)   (1)   Any registered voter who was not a candidate in the
primary election may have his or her name placed on the general election
ballot for a partisan office by filing petitions as prescribed in this
section and Neb. RS 32-621 or by nomination by political party convention or
committee. 



      (2)   Any candidate who was defeated in the primary election
and any registered voter who was not a candidate in the primary election may
have his or her name placed on the general election ballot if a vacancy
exists on the ballot under subsection (2) of Neb. RS 32-625 and the candidate
files for the office by petition as prescribed in this section or files as a
write-in candidate as prescribed in section Neb. RS 32-615.



(Neb. RS 32-616)



   (B)   Petitions for nomination shall conform to the requirements of
Neb. RS 32-628.  Petitions shall state the office to be filled and the name
and address of the candidate.  Petitions for partisan office shall also
indicate the party affiliation of the candidate.  Petitions shall be signed
by registered voters residing in the ward in which the officer is to be
elected, if candidates are chosen by ward, or residing in the Municipality,
if candidates are not chosen by ward, and shall be filed with the filing
officer in the same manner as provided for candidate filing forms in Neb. RS
32-607.  Petition signers and circulators shall conform to the requirements
of Neb. RS 32-629 and 32-630.  No petition for nomination shall be filed
unless there is attached thereto a receipt showing payment of the filing fee
required pursuant to Neb. RS 32-608.  The petitions shall be filed by
September 1 in the year of the general election.



(Neb. RS 32-617)



   (C)   (1)   The number of signatures of registered voters needed
to place the name of a candidate upon the nonpartisan ballot for the general
election shall be at least 10% of the total number of registered voters
voting for Governor or President of the United States at the immediately
preceding general election in the ward in which the officer is to be elected
or in the municipality, as appropriate.



      (2)   The number of signatures of registered voters needed to
place the name of a candidate upon the partisan ballot for the general
election shall be at least 20% of the total vote for Governor or President of
the United States at the immediately preceding general election within the
municipality, not to exceed 2,000.



(Neb. RS 32-618)



('72 Code, § 1-711) (Am. Ord. 1263, passed 11-13-86: Am. Ord. 1862, passed
1-8-04)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 32-616 through 32-618



§ 36.10  (RESERVED).



§ 36.11  REGISTERED VOTERS; QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, REGISTERED VOTER shall mean an
elector who has a current voter registration record on file with the Election
Commissioner or County Clerk.



(Neb. RS 32-115)



   (B)   All registered voters residing within the corporate limits of
the city on or before election day shall be entitled to vote at all city
elections.



(Neb. RS 17-602) ('72 Code, § 1-713)



Statutory reference:



   Definition of elector, see Neb. RS 32-110



§ 36.12  WARDS.



   The territory now embraced in the city, without any further ordinance
or resolution shall be, and hereby is, divided into three Wards as follows:



   FIRST WARD



All that part of the City of Wahoo, Saunders County, Nebraska, lying west of
Maple Street and north of Ninth Street, shall be and is hereby constituted
"First Ward," which said Ward shall have a polling place or places to be
selected as provided by law.



   SECOND WARD



All that part of the City of Wahoo, Saunders County, Nebraska, lying south of
Ninth Street and west of Maple Street, and all that part of the City of Wahoo
lying south of Fifth Street and east of Maple Street shall be and is hereby
constituted "Second Ward," which said Ward shall have a polling pace or
places to be selected as provided by law.



   THIRD WARD



All that part of the City of Wahoo, Saunders County, Nebraska, lying north of
Fifth Street and east of the Maple Street, shall be and is hereby constituted
"Third Ward," which said Ward shall have a polling place or places to be
selected as provided by law.



('72 Code, § 1-714) (Am. Ord. 1163, 12-11-80)



Statutory reference:



   Ward requirements, see Neb. RS 17-102



§ 36.13  RECALL PROCEDURE.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, filing clerk means the Election
Commissioner or County Clerk.



(Neb. RS 32-1301)



   (B)   (1)   The Mayor, a member of the City Council, and any
other elected official of the city may be removed from office by recall
pursuant to Neb. RS 32-1301 to 32-1309.



      (2)   The recall procedure and special election provisions of
such sections shall apply to members of the City Council who are elected by
ward.  Only registered voters of such member's ward may sign a recall
petition or vote at the recall election.  The recall election shall be held
within the member's ward.  When a member of the City Council is nominated by
ward in the primary election and elected at large in the general election,
the recall provisions shall apply to the registered voters at the general
election.



(Neb. RS 32-1302)



   (C)   (1)   A petition demanding that the question of removing
the Mayor, a member of the City Council, or any other elected official of the
city be submitted to the registered voters shall be signed by registered
voters equal in number to at least 35% of the total vote cast for that office
in the last general election, except that for an office for which more than
one candidate is chosen, the petition shall be signed by registered voters
equal in number to at least 35% of the number of votes cast for the person
receiving the most votes for such office in the last general election. The
signatures shall be affixed to petition papers and shall be considered part
of the petition.



      (2)   Petition circulators shall conform to the requirements
of Neb. RS 32-629 and 32-630.



      (3)   The petition papers shall be procured from the filing
clerk.  Prior to the issuance of such petition papers, an affidavit shall be
signed and filed with the filing clerk by at least one registered voter. Such
voter or voters shall be deemed to be the principal circulator or circulators
of the recall petition.  The affidavit shall state the name and office of
the official sought to be removed, shall include in typewritten form in
concise language of 60 words or less the reason or reasons for which recall
is sought, and shall request that the filing clerk issue initial petition
papers to the principal circulator for circulation.  The filing clerk shall
deliver a copy of the affidavit by certified mail to the official sought to
be removed.  If the official chooses, he or she may submit a defense
statement in typewritten form in concise language of 60 words or less for
inclusion on the petition.  Any such defense statement shall be submitted to
the filing clerk within 20 days after the official receives the copy of the
affidavit.  The filing clerk shall notify the principal circulator or
circulators that the necessary signatures must be gathered within 30 days
from the date of issuing the petitions.



      (4)   The filing clerk, upon issuing the initial petition
papers or any subsequent petition papers, shall enter in a record, to be kept
in his or her office, the name of the principal circulator or circulators to
whom the papers were issued, the date of issuance, and the number of papers
issued.  The filing clerk shall certify on the papers the name of the
principal circulator or circulators to whom the papers were issued and the
date they were issued.  No petition paper shall be accepted as part of the
petition unless it bears such certificate. The principal circulator or
circulators who check out petitions from the filing clerk may distribute such
petitions to persons who may act as circulators of such petitions.



      (5)   Petition signers shall conform to the requirements of
Neb. RS 32-629 and 32-630.  Each signer of a recall petition shall be a
registered voter and qualified by his or her place of residence to vote for
the office in question.



(Neb. RS 32-1303)



   (D)   Each petition paper shall conform to the requirements of Neb.
RS 32-1304.



   (E)   (1)   The principal circulator or circulators shall file,
as one instrument, all petition papers comprising a recall petition for
signature verification with the filing clerk within 30 days after the filing
clerk issues the initial petition papers to the principal circulator or
circulators.



      (2)   Within 15 days after the filing of the petition, the
filing clerk shall ascertain whether or not the petition is signed by the
requisite number of registered voters. No new signatures may be added after
the initial filing of the petition papers.  No signatures may be removed
unless the filing clerk receives an affidavit signed by the person requesting
his or her signature be removed before the petitions are filed with the
filing clerk for signature verification.  If the petition is found to be
sufficient, the filing clerk shall attach to the petition a certificate
showing the result of such examination.  If the requisite number of
signatures has not been gathered, the filing clerk shall file the petition in
his or her office without prejudice to the filing of a new petition for the
same purpose.



(Neb. RS 32-1305)



   (F)   (1)   If the recall petition is found to be sufficient, the
filing clerk shall notify the official whose removal is sought and the City
Council that sufficient signatures have been gathered. Notification of the
official sought to be removed may be by any method specified in Neb. RS
25-505.01 or, if notification cannot be made with reasonable diligence by any
of the methods specified in Neb. RS 25-505.01, by leaving such notice at the
official's usual place of residence and mailing a copy by first-class mail to
the official's last-known address.



      (2)   The City Council shall order an election to be held not
less than 30 nor more than 45 days after the notification of the official
whose removal is sought under division (F)(1) of this section, except that if
any other election is to be held in the city within 90 days after such
notification, the City Council shall provide for the holding of the recall
election on the same day. All resignations shall be tendered as provided in
Neb. RS 32-562. If the official whose removal is sought resigns before the
recall election is held, the City Council may cancel the recall election if
the City Council notifies the election commissioner or county clerk of the
cancellation at least 16 days prior to the election, otherwise the recall
election shall be held as scheduled.



      (3)   If the City Council fails or refuses to order a recall
election within the time required, the election may be ordered by the
district court having jurisdiction over a county in which the elected
official serves. If a filing clerk is subject to a recall election, the
Secretary of State shall conduct the recall election.



(Neb. RS 32-1306)



   (G)   The form of the official ballot at a recall election shall
conform to the requirements of Neb. RS 32-1307.



   (H)   (1)   If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election
are against the removal of the official named on the ballot or the election
results in a tie, the official shall continue in office for the remainder of
his or her term but may be subject to further recall attempts as provided in
division (I) of this section.



      (2)   If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election are
for the removal of the official named on the ballot, he or she shall,
regardless of any technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed
from office unless a recount is ordered.  If the official is deemed removed,
the removal shall result in a vacancy in the office which shall be filled as
otherwise provided in this section and state law.



      (3)   If the election results show a margin of votes equal to
1% or less between the removal or retention of the official in question, the
Secretary of State, Election Commissioner, or County Clerk shall order a
recount of the votes cast unless the official named on the ballot files a
written statement with the Election Commissioner or County Clerk that he or
she does not want a recount.



      (4)   If there are vacancies in the offices of a majority or
more of the members of the City Council at one time due to the recall of such
members, a special election to fill such vacancies shall be conducted as
expeditiously as possible by the Secretary of State, Election Commissioner,
or County Clerk.



      (5)   No official who is removed at a recall election or who
resigns after the initiation of the recall process shall be appointed to fill
the vacancy resulting from his or her removal or the removal of any other
member of the same governing body during the remainder of his or her term of
office.



(Neb. RS 32-1308)



   (I)   No recall petition shall be filed against an elected official
within 12 months after a recall election has failed to remove him or her from
office or within six months after the beginning of his or her term of office
or within six months prior to the incumbent filing deadline for the office.



(Neb. RS 32-1309)



('72 Code, § 1-715) (Ord. 1263, passed 11-13-86; Am. Ord. 1862, passed
1-8-04)



§ 36.14  OFFICERS; TERMS; QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Commencing with the primary election in 1976 and every two
years thereafter, all elected officers of the city shall be nominated at the
statewide primary election and elected at the statewide general election. 
All elected officers of the city shall serve for terms of four years or until
their successors are elected and qualified.



(Neb. RS 32-533)



   (B)   The Mayor and Council members shall be residents and
registered voters of the city.



   (C)   The members of the City Council shall be elected from the city
by wards, as defined in § 36.12 of this code, unless the registered voters
of the city vote to elect its Council members at large.  Each ward of the
city shall have two Council members elected in the manner provided in the
Election Act.  The term of office shall begin on the first regular meeting
of the City Council in December following the statewide general election. 
No person shall be eligible to the office of Council member who is not at the
time of the election an actual resident of the ward for which he or she is
elected and a registered voter.



('72 Code, § 1-716) (Ord. 1263, passed 11-13-86)



Statutory reference:



   City Council, members, terms, qualifications, see Neb. RS 17-103 and
17-104



   Mayor, qualifications, see Neb. RS 17-107



   Merger of elective and appointive offices, see Neb. RS 17-108.02



   Change from or to ward or at-large election, see Neb. RS 32-554



INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM



§ 36.30  DEFINITIONS.



   The powers of initiative and referendum are reserved to the qualified
electors of the city by state law.  This subchapter shall govern the use of
initiative to enact, and the use of referendum to amend or repeal measures
affecting the governance of the city.  For the purpose of this subchapter,
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



   CIRCULATOR.  Any person who solicits signatures for an initiative or
referendum petition.



   CLERK.  The City Clerk or the city official in charge of elections.



   MEASURE.  An ordinance, charter provision, or resolution which is
within the legislative authority of the Council to pass, and which is not
excluded from the operation of referendum by the exceptions in § 36.41.



   MUNICIPALITY.  The City of Wahoo.



   PETITION.  A document authorized for circulation pursuant to § 36.31
or any copy of such document.



   PLACE OF RESIDENCE.  The street and number of the residence.  If
there is no street and number for the residence, PLACE OF RESIDENCE shall
mean the mailing address.



   PROSPECTIVE PETITION.  A sample document containing the information
necessary for a completed petition, including a sample signature sheet, which
has not yet been authorized for circulation.



   QUALIFIED ELECTORS.  All persons registered to vote, at the time the
prospective petition is filed, in the jurisdiction governed or to be governed
by any measure sought to be enacted by initiative or altered or repealed by
referendum.



   RESIDENCE.  That place at which a person has established his or her
home, where he or she is habitually present, and to which, when he or she
departs, he or she intends to return.



   SIGNATURE SHEET.  A sheet of paper which is part of a petition and
which is signed by persons wishing to support the petition effort.



(Neb. RS 18-2503 through 18-2511)  ('72 Code, § 1-1201)  (Ord. 1213,
passed 9-22-83)



Statutory reference:



   Power reserved to qualified electors, see Neb. RS 18-2501



§ 36.31  PETITIONS; BALLOTS.



   (A)   Before circulating an initiative or referendum petition, the
petitioner shall file with the Clerk a prospective petition.  The Clerk
shall date the prospective petition immediately upon its receipt.  The Clerk
shall verify that the prospective petition is in proper form and shall
provide a ballot title for the initiative or referendum proposal, as
described below.  If the prospective petition is in proper form, the Clerk
shall authorize the circulation of the petition, and such authorization shall
be given within three working days from the date the prospective petition was
filed.  If the form of the prospective petition is incorrect, the Clerk
shall, within three working days from the date the prospective petition was
filed, inform the petitioner of necessary changes and request that those
changes be made.  When the requested changes have been made and the revised
prospective petition has been submitted to the Clerk in proper form, the
Clerk shall authorize the circulation of the petition, and such authorization
shall be given within two working days from the receipt of the properly
revised petition.  Verification by the Clerk that the prospective petition
is in proper form does not constitute an admission by the Clerk, City
Council, or city that the measure is subject to referendum or limited
referendum or that the measure may be enacted by initiative.



(Neb. RS 18-2512)



   (B)   The ballot title of any measure to be initiated or referred
shall consist of:



      (1)   A briefly-worded caption by which the measure is
commonly known or which accurately summarizes the measure;



      (2)   A briefly-worded question which plainly states the
purpose of the measure and which is phrased so that an affirmative response
to the question corresponds to an affirmative vote on the measure; and



      (3)   A concise and impartial statement, of not more than 75
words, of the chief purpose of the measure.



(Neb. RS 18-2513)



   (C)   The ballots used when voting on an initiative or referendum
proposal shall contain the entire ballot title.  Proposals for initiative
and referendum shall be submitted on separate ballots and the ballots shall
be printed in lower case, ten-point type, except that the caption shall be in
bold face type.  All initiative and referendum measures shall be submitted
in a nonpartisan manner without indicating or suggesting on the ballot that
they have or have not been approved or endorsed by any political party or
organization.



(Neb. RS 18-2513) ('72 Code, § 1-1202) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord.
1264, passed 11-13-86)



§ 36.32  PETITION FORM.



   (A)   The forms designed by the Secretary of State to be used for
initiative and referendum petitions shall be made available to the public by
the City Clerk, and they shall serve as a guide for individuals preparing
prospective petitions.  Substantial compliance with initiative and
referendum forms is required before authorization to circulate such petition
shall be granted by the City Clerk.  Chief petitioners or circulators
preparing prospective petitions shall be responsible for making copies of the
petition for circulation after authorization for circulation has been granted.



(Neb. RS 18-2514)



   (B)   Each petition presented for signature must be identical to the
petition authorized for circulation by the City Clerk.  Every petition shall
contain the name and place of residence of not more than three persons as
chief petitioners or sponsors of the measure.  The chief petitioners or
sponsors shall be qualified electors of the municipality potentially affected
by the initiative or referendum proposal.  Every petition shall contain the
caption and the statement specified to be part of the ballot title.  When a
special election is being requested, such fact shall be stated on every
petition.



(Neb. RS 18-2515)



('72 Code, § 1-1203) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord. 1264, passed
11-13-86; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04)



Statutory reference:



   Service of summons on political subdivisions, see Neb. RS 25-510.02



§ 36.321  DECLARATORY JUDGMENT.



   (A)   The city or any chief petitioner may seek a declaratory
judgment regarding any questions arising under this subchapter, as it may be
from time to time amended, including, but not limited to, determining whether
a measure is subject to referendum or limited referendum or whether a measure
may be enacted by initiative. If a chief petitioner seeks a declaratory
judgment, the city shall be served by personal, residence, or certified mail
service upon the chief executive officer or City Clerk.  If the city seeks a
declaratory judgment, only the chief petitioner or chief petitioners shall be
required to be served.



   (B)   Any action brought for declaratory judgment for purposes of
determining whether a measure is subject to limited referendum or referendum,
or whether a measure may be enacted by initiative, may be filed in the
district court at any time after the filing of a referendum or initiative
petition with the City Clerk for signature verification until 40 days from
the date the City Council received notification from the verifying official
that the necessary signatures have been obtained.  If the city does not
bring an action for declaratory judgment to determine whether the measure is
subject to limited referendum or referendum, or whether the measure may be
enacted by initiative, until after it has received such notification, it
shall be required to proceed with the initiative or referendum election in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. If the city does file such
an action prior to receiving such notification, it shall not be required to
proceed to hold such election until a final decision has been rendered in the
action.



   (C)   Any action for a declaratory judgment shall be governed
generally by Neb. RS 25-21,149 through 25-21,164, except that only the city
and each chief petitioner shall be required to be made parties. The city,
City Clerk, City Council, or any of the city's officers shall be entitled to
rely on any order rendered by the court in any such proceeding. Any action
brought for declaratory judgment pursuant to this section shall be given
priority in scheduling hearings and in disposition as determined by the
court.  When an action is brought to determine whether the measure is
subject to limited referendum or referendum, or whether a measure may be
enacted by initiative, a decision shall be rendered by the court no later
than five days prior to the election.



   (D)   The provisions of this section relating to declaratory
judgments shall not be construed as limiting, but construed as supplemental
and additional to other rights and remedies conferred by law. 



(Neb. RS 18-2538) (Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04)



§ 36.33  SIGNATURE SHEETS.



   (A)   Every signature sheet shall:



      (1)   Contain the caption required in § 36.31(B)(1)(a);



      (2)   Be part of a complete and authorized petition when
presented to potential signatories;



      (3)   Provide space for signatories to write their names,
places of residence, and the date of signing;



(Neb. RS 18-2516)



      (4)   Contain a statement that anyone falsifying information
on a signature sheet shall be subject to penalties provided by law.



   (B)   No more than 25 signatures on each signature sheet shall be
counted.  In order to be valid, a signature shall be that of an individual
registered to vote, at the time of signing, in the jurisdiction governed or
to be governed by the measure addressed in the petition.  A signature shall
include the signatory's full name, his or her place of residence, and the
date of signing.  No signatory shall use ditto marks as a means of affixing
his or her place of residence or date on any petition.  A woman shall not
use her husband's forename or given name when she signs a petition, and she
shall sign her own forename or given name along with her surname.



('72 Code, § 1-1204) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord. 1264, passed
11-13-86)



§ 36.34  PETITION AFFIDAVIT.



   Included in the contents of every petition shall be an affidavit, to be
signed by the circulator in the presence of a notary, which states that the
circulator is a qualified elector, that each person who signed the petition
did so in the presence of the circulator on the date indicated, and that the
circulator believes that each signatory was registered to vote in the
affected jurisdiction at the time he or she signed the petition, and that the
circulator believes that each signatory has stated his or her name and place
of residence correctly.



('72 Code, § 1-1205) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord. 1264, passed
11-13-86)



Statutory reference:



   Petition requirements, see Neb. RS 18-2517



§ 36.35  PETITION NOTIFICATION; VERIFICATION.



   (A)   Signed petitions shall be filed with the Clerk for signature
verification.  Upon the filing of a petition, and passage of a resolution by
the City Council, the city and the County Clerk or Election Commissioner of
the county in which such city is located may by mutual agreement provide that
the County Clerk or Election Commissioner shall ascertain whether the
petition is signed by the requisite number of voters.  The city shall
reimburse the County for any costs incurred by the County Clerk or Election
Commissioner.  When the verifying official has determined that 100% of the
necessary signatures required by this subchapter have been obtained, he or
she shall notify the City Council of that fact and shall immediately forward
to the City Council a copy of the petition.



   (B)   In order for an initiative or referendum proposal to be
submitted to the City Council and the voters, the necessary signatures shall
be on file with the Clerk within six months from the date the prospective
petition was authorized for circulation.  If the necessary signatures are
not obtained by such date, the petition shall be void.



(Neb. RS 18-2518) ('72 Code, § 1-1206) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-83)



§ 36.36  FREQUENCY OF OCCURRENCE.



   The same measure, either in form or in essential substance, may not be
submitted to the people by initiative petition, either affirmatively or
negatively, more often than once every two years.  No attempt to repeal or
alter an existing measure or portion of such measure by referendum petition
may be made within two years from the last attempt to do the same.  Such
prohibition shall apply only when the subsequent attempt to repeal or alter
is designed to accomplish the same, or essentially the same purpose as the
previous attempt.



(Neb. RS 18-2519) ('72 Code, § 1-1207) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-83)



§ 36.37  DIRECT VOTE.



   The executive officer and City Council of the city may at any time, by
resolution, provide for the submission to a direct vote of the electors of
any measure pending before it, passed by it, including an override of any
veto, if necessary, or enacted by the electors under this subchapter and may
provide in such resolution that such measure shall be submitted at a special
election or the next regularly scheduled primary or general election. 
Immediately upon the passage of any such resolution for submission, the Clerk
shall cause such measure to be submitted to a direct vote of the electors, at
the time specified in such resolution and in the manner provided in this
subchapter for submission of measures upon proposals and petitions filed by
voters.  Such matter shall become law if approved by a majority of the votes
cast.



(Neb. RS 18-2520) ('72 Code, § 1-1208) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord.
1264, passed 11-13-86)



§ 36.38  ELECTIONS.



   (A)   The Clerk shall call elections under this subchapter, either
at a special election or regularly scheduled primary or general election. 
He or she shall cause notice of every such election to be printed in one or
more newspapers of general circulation in such city at least once not less
than 30 days prior to such election and also posted in the office of the
Clerk and in at least three conspicuous places in such city at least 30 days
prior to such election.  The notice shall be substantially as follows:



"Notice is hereby given that on Tuesday, the __________ day of
__________________, 20 _____, at _____________________________(identify
polling place or precinct) of the municipality of
___________________________, Nebraska, an election will be held at which
there will be submitted to the electors of the municipality for their
approval or rejection, the following measures, propositions, or issues:



   (naming measures, propositions, or issues)



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                              ,



which election will be open at 8:00 a.m. and will continue open until 8:00
p.m., of the same day.



Dated this _______ day of _____________________, 20_____.



_______________________________________



Clerk of the City of ___________________, Nebraska."



   (B)   The Clerk shall make available for photocopying a copy in
pamphlet form of measures initiated or referred.  Such notice provided in
this section shall designate where such a copy in pamphlet form may be
obtained.



(Neb. RS 18-2521) ('72 Code, § 1-1209) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord.
1264, passed 11-13-86)



§ 36.39  BALLOTS.



   All ballots for use in special elections under this subchapter shall be
prepared by the Clerk and furnished by the City Council, unless the City
Council contracts with the county for such service, and shall be in form the
same as provided by law for election of the executive officer and City
Council. When ordinances under such sections are submitted to the electors at
a regularly scheduled primary or general election, they shall be placed upon
the official ballots as provided in this subchapter.



(Neb. RS 18-2522) ('72 Code, § 1-1210) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord.
1264, passed 11-13-86)



§ 36.40  INITIATIVE.



   (A)   (1)   The power of initiative allows citizens the right to
enact measures affecting the governance of the city.  An initiative proposal
shall not have as its primary or sole purpose the repeal or modification of
existing law except if such repeal or modification is ancillary to and
necessary for the adoption and effective operation of the initiative measure.



      (2)   An initiative shall not be effective if the direct or
indirect effect of the passage of such initiative measure shall be to repeal
or alter an existing law, or portion thereof, which is not subject to
referendum or subject only to limited referendum pursuant to § 36.41.



(Neb. RS 18-2523)



   (B)   Whenever an initiative petition bearing signatures equal in
number to at least 15% of the qualified electors of the city has been filed
with the Clerk and verified, it shall be the duty of the City Council to
consider passage of the measure contained in the petition, including an
override of any veto, if necessary.  If the City Council fails to pass the
measure without amendment, including an override of any veto, if necessary,
within 30 days from the date it received notification, the Clerk shall cause
the measure to be submitted to a vote of the people at the next regularly
scheduled primary or general election held within the city.  If the City
Council desires to submit the measure to a vote of the people at a special
election prior to the next regularly scheduled primary or general election
held within the city, the City Council shall by resolution direct the Clerk
to cause the measure to be submitted at a special election.  Such resolution
shall not be subject to referendum or limited referendum.



(Neb. RS 18-2524)



   (C)   Whenever an initiative petition bearing signatures equal in
number to at least 20% of the qualified electors which requests that a
special election be called to submit the initiative measure to a vote of the
people has been filed with the Clerk and verified pursuant to § 36.35, it
shall be the duty of the City Council to consider passage of the measure
contained in the petition, including an override of any veto, if necessary. 
If the City Council fails to pass the measure, without amendment, including
an override of any veto, if necessary, within 30 days from the date it
received notification, the Clerk shall cause the measure to be submitted to a
vote of the people at a special election called for such purpose.  The date
of such election shall not be less than 30 nor more than 60 days from the
date the City Council received notification pursuant to § 36.36.



(Neb. RS 18-2525)



   (D)   If a majority of voters voting on the initiative measure shall
vote in favor of such measure, it shall become a valid and binding measure of
the city 30 days after certification of the election results, unless the City
Council by resolution orders an earlier effective date or the measure itself
provides for a later effective date, which resolution shall not be subject to
referendum or limited referendum.  A measure passed by such method shall not
be amended or repealed except by 2/3 majority of the members of the City
Council.  No such attempt to amend or repeal shall be made within one year
from the passage of the measure by the electors.



(Neb. RS 18-2526) ('72 Code, § 1-1211) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord.
1264, passed 11-13-86)



§ 36.41  REFERENDUM LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   The power of referendum allows citizens the right to repeal or
amend existing measures, or portions thereof, affecting the governance of the
municipality.



(Neb. RS 18-2527)



   (B)   The following measures shall not be subject to referendum or
limited referendum:



      (1)   Measures necessary to carry out contractual obligations
including, but not limited to, those relating to the issuance of or provided
for in bonds, notes, warrants, or other evidences of indebtedness, for
projects previously approved by a measure which was, or is, subject to
referendum or limited referendum or previously approved by a measure adopted
prior to July 17, 1982;



      (2)   Measures relating to any industrial development
projects, subsequent to measures giving initial approval to such projects;



      (3)   Measures adopting proposed budget statements following
compliance with procedures set forth in the Nebraska Budget Act;



      (4)   Measures relating to the immediate preservation of the
public peace, health, or safety which have been designated as urgent measures
by unanimous vote of those present and voting of the governing body and
approved by its Executive Officer;



      (5)   Measures relating to projects for which notice has been
given as provided for in division (E) of this section for which a sufficient
referendum petition was not filed within the time limit stated in such notice
or which received voter approval after the filing of such petition;



      (6)   Resolutions directing the Municipal Clerk to cause
measures to be submitted to a vote of the people at a special election as
provided in Neb. RS 18-2524 and 18-2529;



      (7)   Resolutions ordering an earlier effective date for
measures enacted by initiative as provided in Neb. RS 18-2526;



      (8)   Measures relating to any facility or system adopted or
enacted pursuant to the Integrated Solid Waste Management Act by the
Municipality and which are necessary to carry out contractual obligations
provided for in previously issued bonds, notes, warrants, or other evidence
of indebtedness;



      (9)   Measures that amend, supplement, change, modify, or
repeal a zoning regulation, restriction, or boundary and are subject to
protest as provided in Neb. RS 19-905;



      (10)    Measures relating to personnel issues, including, but
not limited to, establishment, modification, or elimination of any personnel
position, policy, salary, or benefit and any hiring, promotion, demotion, or
termination of personnel; and



      (11)    Measures relating to matters subject to the provisions
of the Municipal Natural Gas System Condemnation Act.



   (C)   The following measures shall be subject to limited referendum:



      (1)   Measures in furtherance of a policy of the Municipality
or relating to projects previously approved by a measure which was subject to
referendum or which was enacted by initiative or has been approved by the
voters at an election, except that such measures shall not be subject to
referendum or limited referendum for a period of one year after any such
policy or project was approved at a referendum election, enacted by
initiative, or approved by the voters at an election;



      (2)   Measures relating to the acquisition, construction,
installation, improvement, or enlargement, including the financing or
refinancing of the costs of public ways, public property, utility systems,
and other capital projects and measures giving initial approval for
industrial development projects;



      (3)   Measures setting utility system rates and charges,
except for measures necessary to carry out contractual obligations provided
for in previously issued bonds, notes, warrants, or other evidences of
indebtedness, and pay rates and salaries for municipal employees other than
the members of the governing body and the Executive Officer; and



      (4)   Measures relating to any facility or system adopted or
enacted pursuant to the Integrated Solid Waste Management Act by the
municipality except for measures necessary to carry out contractual
obligations provided for in previously issued bonds, notes, warrants, or
other evidence of indebtedness.



   (D)   Measures subject to limited referendum shall ordinarily take
effect 30 days after their passage by the Governing Body, including an
override of any veto, if necessary.  Referendum petitions directed at
measures subject to limited referendum shall be filed for signature
verification pursuant to Neb. RS 18-2518 within 30 days after such measure's
passage by the governing body, including an override of any veto, if
necessary, or after notice is first published pursuant to subdivision (E)(3)
of this section.  If the necessary number of signatures as provided in Neb.
RS 18-2529 or 18-2530 has been obtained within the time limitation, the
effectiveness of the measure shall be suspended unless approved by the voters.



   (E)   For any measure relating to the acquisition, construction,
installation, improvement, or enlargement of public ways, public property,
utility systems, or other capital projects or any measure relating to any
facility or system adopted or enacted pursuant to the Integrated Solid Waste
Management Act, the municipality may exempt all subsequent measures relating
to the same project from the referendum and limited referendum procedures
provided for in this subchapter by the following procedure:



      (1)   By holding a public hearing on the project, the time and
place of such hearing being published at least once not less than five days
prior to the date set for hearing in a newspaper of general circulation
within the municipality;



      (2)   By passage of a measure approving the project, including
an override of a veto, if necessary, at a meeting held on any date subsequent
to the date of hearing; and



      (3)   After passage of such measure, including an override of
a veto, if necessary, by giving notice as follows:



         (a)   For those projects for which applicable statutes
require an ordinance or resolution of necessity, creating a district or
otherwise establishing the project, notice shall be given for such project by
including either as part of such ordinance or resolution or as part of any
publicized notice concerning such ordinance or resolution a statement that
the project as described in the ordinance or resolution is subject to limited
referendum for a period of 30 days after the first publication of such notice
and that, after such 30-day period, the project and measures related to it
will not be subject to any further right of referendum; and



         (b)   For projects for which applicable statutes do not
require an ordinance or resolution of necessity, notice shall be given by
publication of a notice concerning such projects stating in general terms the
nature of the project and the engineer's estimate of costs of such project
and stating that the project described in the notice is subject to limited
referendum for a period of 30 days after the first publication of such notice
and that, after such 30-day period, the project and measures related to it
will not be subject to any further right of referendum.  The notice required
by this subdivision shall be published in at least one newspaper of general
circulation within the Municipality and shall be published not later than 15
days after passage by the Governing Body, including an override of a veto, if
necessary, of a measure approving the project.



      The right of the Municipality to hold such a hearing prior to the
passage of the measure by the Governing Body and give such notice after
passage of such measure by the Governing Body to obtain exemption for any
particular project in a manner described in this division is optional, and
the Municipality shall not be required to hold such a hearing or give such
notice for any particular project.



   (F)   Nothing in divisions (C) and (E) of this section shall be
construed as subjecting to limited referendum any measure related to matters
subject to the provisions of the Municipal Natural Gas System Condemnation
Act.



   (G)   All measures, except as provided in divisions (B), (C), and
(E) of this section, shall be subject to the referendum procedure at any time
after such measure has been passed by the Governing Body, including an
override of a veto, if necessary, or enacted by the voters by initiative. 



(Neb. RS 18-2528)



('72 Code, § 1-1212) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord. 1264, passed
11-13-86; Am. Ord. 1762, passed 3-22-01; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04)



§ 36.42  REFERENDUM PASSAGE.



   (A)   Whenever a referendum petition bearing signatures equal in
number to at least 15% of the qualified electors of the city has been filed
with the Clerk and verified pursuant to § 36.35, it shall be the duty of the
City Council to reconsider the measure or portion of such measure which is
the object of the referendum.  If the City Council fails to repeal or amend
the measure or  portion  thereof in the manner proposed by the referendum,
including an override of any veto, if necessary, within 30 days from the date
the City Council receives notification pursuant to § 36.35, the Clerk shall
cause the measure to be submitted to a vote of the people at the next
regularly scheduled primary or general election held within the city.  If
the City Council desires to submit the measure to a vote of the people at a
special election prior to the next regularly scheduled primary or general
election held within the city, the City Council shall, by resolution, direct
the Clerk to cause the measure to be submitted at a special election.  Such
resolution shall not be subject to referendum or limited referendum.



(Neb. RS 18-2529)



   (B)   Whenever a referendum petition bearing signatures equal in
number to at least 20% of the qualified voters of the city which requests
that a special election be called to submit the referendum measure to a vote
of the people, has been filed with the Clerk and verified, it shall be the
duty of the City Council to reconsider the measure or portion of such measure
which is the object of the referendum.  If the City Council fails to repeal
or amend the measure or portion thereof, in the manner proposed by the
referendum, including an override of any veto, if necessary, the Clerk shall
cause the measure to be submitted to a vote of the people at a special
election called for such purpose within 30 days from the date the City
Council received notification.  The date of such special election shall not
be less than 30 nor more than 60 days from the date the City Council received
notification.



(Neb. RS 18-2530)



   (C)   If a majority of the electors voting on the referendum measure
shall vote in favor of such measure, the law subject to the referendum shall
be repealed or amended.  A measure repealed or amended by referendum shall
not be reenacted or returned to its original form except by a 2/3 majority of
the members of the City Council.  No such attempt to reenact or return the
measure to its original form shall be made within one year of the repeal or
amendment of the measure by the electors.  If the referendum measure does
not receive a majority vote, the ordinance shall immediately become effective
or remain in effect.



(Neb. RS 18-2531) ('72 Code, § 1-1213) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord.
1264, passed 11-13-86)



§ 36.43  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   The provisions of the statutes of the State of Nebraska
relating to election officers, voting places, election apparatus and blanks,
preparation and form of ballots, information to voters, delivery of ballots,
calling of elections, conduct of elections, manner of voting, counting of
votes, records and certificates of election, and recounts of votes, so far as
applicable, shall apply to voting on ordinances by the electors pursuant to
this subchapter.



(Neb. RS 18-2536)



   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall apply to procedures for
initiatives or referendums provided in Neb. RS 18-412 and 18-412.02 relating
to city light and power plants, Neb. RS 70-504 and 70-650.01 relating to
public power districts, and Neb. RS 80-203 to 80-205 relating to soldiers and
sailors monuments.



(Neb. RS 18-2537) ('72 Code, § 1-1215) (Ord. 1213, passed 9-22-83)



Statutory reference:



   Statutory penalties for violation of state election laws, see Neb. RS
18-2532 to 18-2535



CHAPTER 37: CIVIL DEFENSE



Section



   37.01   Organization



   37.02   Mayor's duties



   37.03   Disaster control plan



   37.04   Emergency Succession Act



§ 37.01  ORGANIZATION.



   A civil defense organization is hereby created utilizing to the fullest
extent personnel and facilities of existing city departments and agencies.
The Mayor shall be responsible for its organization, administration, and
operation. The organization shall consist of the following:



   (A)   A Department of Civil Defense within the executive department
of the city government. There shall be an executive head of the Department of
Civil Defense, appointed by the Mayor, by and with the approval of the
Council who shall be known as the Director of Civil Defense, and such
assistants, clerical help, other employees, and civil defense volunteers as
are deemed necessary to the proper functioning of the organization.



   (B)   Five deputy directors with responsibility for financial
services, law enforcement, fire control, engineering services, and health and
medical services appointed by the Mayor. These shall, so far as possible, be
additional duty assignments to existing personnel, and it is the intent of
this chapter that civil defense and disaster assignments shall be as nearly
consistent with normal duty assignment as possible.



   (C)   The employees, equipment, and facilities of all city
departments and agencies suitable for or adaptable to civil defense and
designated by the Mayor to participate in the civil defense activity.



   (D)   Civil defense volunteers, including persons and private
agencies or governmental units offering services to the organization.



('72 Code, § 1-1101)



§ 37.02  MAYOR'S DUTIES.



   (A)   The powers and duties of the Mayor pertaining to civil defense
in time of normal city operation are to maintain general supervision over the
planning and administration for the civil defense organization and the
execution of the civil defense duties and civil defense forces in order to
meet situations not covered in the normal duties of such forces. The Mayor
may take all seemingly necessary action to conduct tests of the civil defense
and natural disaster plans. In the event of actual or threatened enemy attack
or natural disaster, the Mayor, or in his or her absence or inability to
serve the President of the Council, as conservator of the peace shall have
authority to:



      (1)   Declare a state of emergency within the city thereby
placing in effect the civil defense and disaster control plan.



      (2)   Convene the City Council to perform its legislative and
administrative functions as the situation may demand. The Council shall have
the power to terminate the state of emergency.



      (3)   Assemble and utilize civil defense forces and prescribe
the manner and conditions of their use.



      (4)   Request the state, its agencies or political
subdivisions to send aid if the situation is beyond the control of the
regular and emergency city forces.



      (5)   Command the services and the use of equipment and
facilities for such work and duties as the city may require to aid the
regular and volunteer city forces in time of emergency.



      (6)   Promulgate such emergency regulations as may be deemed
necessary to protect life and property and conserve critical resources and
such regulations may be invoked when necessary for tests of civil defense and
disaster plans. All such regulations shall be subject to approval of the
Council as soon as practicable subsequent to promulgation.



   (B)   The Mayor shall designate a line of succession among the
department heads to exercise the powers and duties of the Director of Civil
Defense in event of the absence or inability of the Director to serve. The
Mayor, or in his or her absence or inability to serve the President of the
Council, shall have the power to order civil defense forces to aid the state
or political subdivisions thereof subject to Council review as soon as
practicable.



('72 Code, § 1-1102)



§ 37.03  DISASTER CONTROL PLAN.



   A comprehensive Civil Defense and Disaster Control Plan shall be
adopted by resolution of the Council upon the recommendation of the Mayor. In
the preparation of this Plan, as it pertains to city organization, it is the
intent that the services, equipment, facilities, and personnel of all
existing departments and agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent
possible. When approved, it shall be the duty of all city departments and
agencies to perform the functions and duties assigned by the Plan and to
maintain their portion of the Plan in a current state of readiness at all
times. All officers and employees of the city shall cooperate with and give
active support to the Mayor and Director of Civil Defense in all civil
defense operations, and they shall comply with all orders of the Mayor and
Director of Civil Defense issued pursuant to this chapter.



('72 Code, § 1-1103)



§ 37.04  EMERGENCY SUCCESSION ACT.



   (A)   The Mayor and Council has invoked the provisions of the
Emergency Succession Act as passed by the state of Nebraska. All the
provisions of the said act are invoked in this code as though fully set out
herein as it now exists or may hereafter be amended to provide. In compliance
with the said act, the following officers of the city shall appoint emergency
interim successors to the powers and duties of their respective offices:



      (1)   Each member of the City Council.



      (2)   The Sewage Plant Operator.



      (3)   The Chief of Police.



      (4)   The Chief of the Fire Department.



      (5)   The City Attorney.



      (6)   The City Clerk.



      (7)   The City Treasurer.



      (8)   The City Engineer.



      (9)   The Utilities General Manager.



      (10)   The Streets Superintendent.



   (B)   The provisions of division (A) of this section are not
exclusive, however, and shall not be construed in such a manner as to
prohibit the appointment of alternates by any other duly, elected or
appointed officers of this city, including but not limited to the head of any
department or section, or the members of any board or other agency of the
city government; or as to excuse the failure on the part of any such officer
to make such appointments, when clearly required by the act.



('72 Code, § 1-1104)



CHAPTER 38: UTILITY RATES



Section



General Provisions



   38.01   Utility rate setting



Electric Department Rates



   38.10   Electric Department rates



   38.11   Definitions (Electric Department)



   38.12   Municipal service electrical rates



   38.13   Residential service electrical rates



   38.14   Small commercial service electrical rates



   38.15   Large commercial service electrical rates



   38.16   Wholesale service electrical rates



   38.17   Irrigation service electrical rates



   38.18   Industrial service electrical rates



Natural Gas Department Rates



   38.30   Natural Gas Department rates



   38.31   Residential general service natural gas rates



   38.32   Nonresidential general service natural gas rates



   38.33   Nebraska Public Power District natural gas rates



Sewer Department Rates



   38.40   Sewer Department rates



   38.41   Definitions (Sewer Department)



   38.42   Residential service sewer rates



   38.43   Commercial service sewer rates



   38.44   Municipal service sewer rates



Water Department Rates



   38.50   Water Department rates



   38.51   Definitions (Water Department)



   38.52   Residential service water rates (minimum)



   38.53   Commercial service water rates (minimum)



   38.54   Wholesale service water rates



   38.55   Municipal service water rates (minimum)



   38.56   Water rate schedule in excess of minimum



   38.57   Per person service contract rate



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 38.01  UTILITY RATE SETTING.



   The Mayor and Council shall set the utility rates to be charged to
customers of the Electric Department, Natural Gas Department, Sewer
Department and Water Department of the city.  All such utility rates shall
be set by ordinance and on file in the office of the City Clerk. The Council
may classify customers of the city for the purpose of providing more
equitable utility rates.  No utility rates shall be discriminatory against
any other customer of the same class.  All other provisions relative to said
utility rates, such as, but not limited to, the calculation of utility usage,
the generation of a statement, the terms of payment, the collection thereof,
the commencement of utility service, tap fees, deposit amounts, and
termination of utility service, shall be as determined by the Wahoo Board of
Public Works and as codified in the Wahoo Board of Public Works Code Book.



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09)



ELECTRIC DEPARTMENT RATES



§ 38.10  ELECTRIC DEPARTMENT RATES.



   The Mayor and Council of the city have established the rates to be
charged all customers of the Electric Department of the city as set forth in
this chapter.



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09)



§ 38.11  DEFINITIONS (ELECTRIC DEPARTMENT).



   For purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
to the Electric Department unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   CONSUMER.  Any and all users of the electrical system of the Electric
Department, including all persons, firms or corporations whose premises are
served thereby and all owners and tenants of real estate connected to said
electrical system of the Electric Department.



   DEMAND CHARGE.  Peak kW in the current billing period necessary to
supply the total kilowatt hours during 30 consecutive minutes of
consumption.  kW demand shall be determined by continuous metering or at the
option of the utility, any industry standard method.



   INDUSTRIAL SERVICE. Applicable at services for loads with a monthly
demand greater than 500 kW.  Industrial service is master metered three
phase primary voltage.  Load factor shall be maintained greater than 50%. 
Electrical power factor shall be maintained greater than 92% at NPPD billing
times.



   IRRIGATION SERVICE. Supplied for seasonal use.  Maximum period of
consumption shall be no more than six months during any 11-month period. 
Pumped water shall be for nonpotable use and applied to the land.



   LARGE COMMERCIAL SERVICE.  Applicable to three phase nonresidential
customers with more than 15,000 kWh monthly consumption and 50 kW demand for
four months billing during any 12-month period.  All services shall be at
the available Electric Department electrical system standards.



   LOAD FACTOR.  Percentage ratio of measured kilowatt hours (kWh) to
maximum demand in kW as determined during the specific billing period.



   MUNICIPAL SERVICE.  Applicable to facilities owned and/or operated by
the City of Wahoo, Nebraska.



   POWER FACTOR.  Customer is responsible for maintaining a minimum power
factor equal to the system average of 92% as determined at intervals as
defined in NPPD GFPS rate for system coincident basis.  Kilovolt amp
reactive (kVar) is defined as the vector sum and cosine of the angle between
true power and volt amperes.  kVar shall be determined by continuous
metering or at the option of the utility, any industry standard method.



   RESIDENTIAL SERVICE.  Applicable to all separately metered
single-family living facilities which include cooking, bath and sleeping
accommodations, to include separately metered apartments, mobile home parks,
motel units and rental units. Residential service shall not be applicable to
structures/houses where commercial business or income generating activity is
conducted in the major part of the premise. All residential service shall be
single phase electricity. When units are individually metered for some
services and other services are supplied in different metering
configurations, the various services shall be billed in accordance with their
individual characteristics.



   SMALL COMMERCIAL SERVICE.  Applicable to any single phase or three
phase non-residential customer with less than 15,000 kWh monthly consumption
and less than 50 kW demand.  All services shall be provided at the available
Electric Department electrical system standards.



   WHOLESALE SERVICE.  Applicable to any user of the electrical system of
the Electrical Department pursuant to a contract entered into between the
City and said user.  Said contract to be entered into at the discretion of
the Wahoo Board of Public Works, subject to the approval by the Mayor and
Council of the city, when said user desires service in excess of normal
Electric Department standards for retail purposes.



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09)



§ 38.12  MUNICIPAL SERVICE ELECTRICAL RATES.



   The Electric Department rates for municipal service shall be as
follows: 



   (A)   One phase (minimum rate) per month   $16.50



      Three phase (minimum rate) per month   $20.56



   (B)   October through May energy; per month   $0.0480/kWh



      June through September energy; per month   $0.0570/kWh



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09)



§ 38.13  RESIDENTIAL SERVICE ELECTRICAL RATES.



   The Electric Department rates for residential service shall be as
follows:



   (A)   One phase (minimum rate) per month   $ 7.00



   (B)   October through May energy; per month:



      First 825 kWh, per month   $0.0630/kWh



      Over 825 kWh, per month   $0.0427/kWh



   (C)   June through September energy; per month:



      First 825 kWh, per month   $0.0675/kWh



      Over 825 kWh, per month   $0.0700/kWh



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09)



§ 38.14  SMALL COMMERCIAL SERVICE ELECTRICAL RATES.



   The Electric Department rates for small commercial service shall be as
follows:



   (A)   One phase (minimum rate) per month   $16.50



      Three phase (minimum rate) per month   $20.60



   (B)   October through May energy; per month:



      First 1900 kWh, per month   $0.0636/kWh



      Over 1900 kWh, per month   $0.0480/kWh



   (C)   June through September energy; per month:



      First 1900 kWh, per month   $0.0675/kWh



      Over 1900 kWh, per month   $0.0720/kWh



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09)



§ 38.15  LARGE COMMERCIAL SERVICE ELECTRICAL RATES.



   The Electric Department rates for large commercial service shall be as
follows:



   (A)   One phase (minimum rate) per month   $42.00



      Three phase (minimum rate) per month   $46.00



   (B)   October through May energy; per month   $0.0260/kWh



      June through September energy; per month   $0.0280/kWh



   (C)   October through May demand charge, per month:



      On peak/kW per month   $9.15/kW



      Off peak/kW per month   $9.15/kW



   (D)   June through September demand:



      On peak/kW per month   $10.80/kW



      Off peak/kW per month   $  8.20/kW



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09)



§ 38.16  WHOLESALE SERVICE ELECTRICAL RATES.



   The Electric Department rates for wholesale service shall be as follows:



   (A)   Three phase (minimum rate) per month   $300.00



   (B)   October through May energy; per month   $0.0285/kWh



      June through September energy; per month   $0.0325/kWh



   (C)   October through May demand:



      On peak/kW per month   $10.90/kW



      Off peak/kW per month   $10.90/kW



   (D)   June through September demand:



      On peak/kW per month   $14.15/kW



      Off peak/kW per month   $14.08/kW



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09)



§ 38.17  IRRIGATION SERVICE ELECTRICAL RATES.



   The Electric Department rates for irrigation service shall be as
follows:



   (A)   Three phase (minimum rate) per month   $22.00



   (B)   October through May energy:



      First 1900 kWh per month   $0.0420/kWh



      Over 1900 kWh per month   $0.0460/kWh



   (C)   June through September energy:



      First 1900 kWh per month   $0.0500/kWh



      Over 1900 kWh per month   $0.0500/kWh



   (D)   Annual horsepower charge:



      Firm service/ per horse power   $60.00



      Interruptible service/per horse power   $  9.36



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09)



§ 38.18  INDUSTRIAL SERVICE ELECTRICAL RATES.



   The Electric Department rates for industrial service shall be as
follows:



   (A)   One phase (minimum rate) per month   $42.00



      Three phase (minimum rate) per month   $46.00



   (B)   October through May energy; per month     $0.0260/kWh



      June through September energy; per month     $0.0270/kWh



   (C)   October through May demand charge:



      On peak/kW per month   $ 9.15/kW



      Off peak/kW per month   $ 9.15/kW



   (D)   June through September demand charge:



      On peak/kW per month   $10.70/kW



      Off peak/kW per month   $ 7.43/kW



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09)



NATURAL GAS DEPARTMENT RATES



§ 38.30  NATURAL GAS DEPARTMENT RATES.



   The Mayor and Council of the city have established the rates to be
charged all customers of the Natural Gas Department of the city as set forth
in this chapter.



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09)



§ 38.31  RESIDENTIAL GENERAL SERVICE NATURAL GAS RATES.



   (A)   Availability and priority of service.  Natural gas shall be
furnished, subject to availability, to all residential customers on the
city's existing gas distribution facilities supplied at one point of delivery
for which no other specific schedule is provided.  This service shall have
the highest priority regarding availability.



   (B)   Character of service.  Natural gas will be supplied at the
standard pressures and quality.



   (C)   Residential general service natural gas rate schedule.



      (1)   Customer charge/per month   $12.50



      (2)   Base rate:



         0-15 ccf    .03150/ccf



         Over 15 ccf     .1300.ccf



      (3)   Purchase gas adjustment:  PGA formula.



         (a)   Step 1.  Sum the previous month's future purchase
of market purchased costs minus the proceeds of any resale credits and divide
by the ccf delivered for that billing period to the power plant meter.



         (b)   Step 2.  Sum the previous month's transmission
service, surcharges and service fees and divide by the ccf delivered for that
billing period to the power plant meter.



         (c)   Step 3.  Sum the gas and transmission costs and
multiply by the system average loss of 4.8% (or other value that may be
estimated from time to time) and add to average costs, then add .001.



         (d)   Step 4.  The resulting sum will be used as the
PGA for the next monthly billing period.



   (D)   Minimum bill.  The minimum bill shall be the customer charge.



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2026, passed 9-24-09; Am. Ord. 2030,
passed 11-24-09)



§ 38.32  NONRESIDENTIAL GENERAL SERVICE NATURAL GAS RATES.



   (A)   Availability and priority of service.  Natural gas shall be
furnished, subject to availability, to all nonresidential customers on the
city's existing gas distribution facilities supplied at one point of delivery
whose maximum monthly requirement has not exceeded 3,000 DTH during the most
recent 12-month period.  This service shall have the second highest priority
regarding availability.



   (B)   Character of service. Natural gas will be supplied at the
standard pressures and quality.



   (C)   Nonresidential general service natural gas rate schedule. 



      (1)   Customer charge/per month   $13.90



      (2)   Base rate



         0 – 55 ccf     .6400/ccf



         Over 55 ccf     .1290/ccf



      (3)   Purchased gas adjustment:  PGA formula.



         (a)   Step 1.  Sum the previous month's future purchase
of market purchased costs minus the proceeds of any resale credits and divide
by the ccf delivered for that billing period to the power plant meter.



         (b)   Step 2.  Sum the previous month's transmission
service, surcharges and service fees and divide by the ccf delivered for that
billing period to the power plant meter.



         (c)   Step 3.  Sum the gas and transmission costs and
multiply by the system average loss of 4.8% (or other value that may be
estimated from time to time) and add to average costs, then add .001.



         (d)   Step 4.  The resulting sum will be used as the
PGA for the next monthly billing period.



   (D)   Minimum bill.  The minimum bill shall be the customer charge.



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09)



§ 38.33  NEBRASKA PUBLIC POWER DISTRICT NATURAL GAS RATES.



   (A)   Availability and priority of service.  Natural gas may be
furnished, subject to availability, to all nonresidential customers on the
city's existing gas distribution system supplied at one point of delivery
whose maximum monthly requirement has not exceeded 3,000 DTH during the most
recent 12-month period.  This service shall have the second highest priority
regarding availability.



   (B)   Character of service.  Natural gas will be supplied at the
standard pressures and quality.



   (C)   Nebraska Public Power service natural gas rate schedule.



      (1)   Customer charge/per month   $475.00



      (2)   Base rate



         0 – 1500 ccf     .6300/ccf



         Over 1500 ccf     .1260/ccf



      (3)   Purchase gas adjustment: PGA formula.



         (a)   Step 1.  Sum the previous month's future purchase
of market purchased costs minus the proceeds of any resale credits and divide
by the ccf delivered for that billing period to the power plant meter.



         (b)   Step 2.  Sum the previous month's transmission
service, surcharges and service fees and divide by the ccf delivered for that
billing period to the power plant meter.



         (c)   Step 3.  Sum the gas and transmission costs and
multiply by the system average loss of 4.8% (or other value that may be
estimated from time to time) and add to average costs, then add .001.



         (d)   Step 4.  The resulting sum will be used as the
PGA for the next monthly billing period.



   (D)   Minimum bill.  The minimum bill shall be the customer charge.



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09)



SEWER DEPARTMENT RATES



§ 38.40  SEWER DEPARTMENT RATES.



   The Mayor and Council of the city have established the rates to be
charged all customers of the Sewer Department of the city as set forth in
this chapter.



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09)



§ 38.41  DEFINITIONS (SEWER DEPARTMENT).



   For purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMERCIAL SERVICE.  Applicable to use by any consumer which is not a
residential consumer.  All services shall be provided at the available Sewer
Department system standards.  High strength or excessive volume requires
special contracts with appropriate rates.



   CONSUMER.  Any and all users of the sewer system of the Sewer
Department, including all persons, firms or corporations whose premises are
served thereby, and all owners and tenants of real estate connected to said
sewer system.



   MUNICIPAL SERVICE. Applicable to facilities owned by the City of Wahoo,
Nebraska.



   RESIDENTIAL SERVICE.  Shall be supplied to single-family living
facilities which include cooking, bath and sleeping accommodations. 
Separately water metered apartments, mobile home parks, motel units and
rental units are applicable to this schedule.  Residential service shall not
be applicable to structures/houses where commercial business or income
generating activity is conducted in the major part of the premise. When units
are individually metered for some services and other services are supplied
under different metering configuration, the various services shall be billed
in accordance with their individual characteristics.



   VOLUME RATE CHARGE.  Rate multiplied per gallons of potable water
metered every month for all services except residential.  Residential rates
are multiplied by an average of gallons of potable water metered in January,
February, and March.  This is an annual charge starting in April of each
year.



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09)



§ 38.42  RESIDENTIAL SERVICE SEWER RATES.



   The Sewer Department rates for residential service shall be as follows:



   (A)   Customer service charge   $20.00 per month



   (B)   Volume rate charge      $3.10 per 1,000 gallons/per month



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09)



§ 38.43  COMMERCIAL SERVICE SEWER RATES.



   The Sewer Department rates for commercial service shall be as follows:



   (A)   Customer service charge:



      3/4 inch water meter   $20.00 per month



      1 inch water meter   $20.00 per month



      1 1/2 inch water meter   $25.98 per month



      2 inch water meter   $35.02 per month



      3 inch water meter   $45.36 per month



      4 inch water meter   $65.73 per month



   (B)   Volume rate charge   $3.10 per 1,000 gallons/per month



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09)



§ 38.44  MUNICIPAL SERVICE SEWER RATES.



   The Sewer Department rates for municipal service shall be as follows:



   (A)   Customer service charge:



      3/4 inch water meter   $20.00 per month



      1 inch water meter   $20.00 per month



      1 1/2 inch water meter   $25.98 per month



      2 inch water meter   $35.02 per month



      3 inch water meter   $45.36 per month



      4 inch water meter   $65.73 per month



   (B)   Volume rate charge:   $3.10 per 1,000 gallons/per month



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09)



WATER DEPARTMENT RATES



§ 38.50  WATER DEPARTMENT RATES.



   The Mayor and Council of the city have established the rates to be
charged all customers of the Water Department of the city as set forth in
this chapter.



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09)



§ 38.51  DEFINITIONS (WATER DEPARTMENT).



   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMERCIAL SERVICE.  Applicable to any consumer which is not a
residential service or a municipal service consumer.  All services shall be
provided at the available Water Department  system standards.



   CONSUMER.  Any and all users of the water system of the Water
Department, including all persons, firms or corporations whose premises are
served thereby, and all owners and tenants of real estate connected to said
water system.



   MINIMUM CHARGE SCHEDULE.  There shall be a minimum water use charge
per month to each consumer located within the corporate limits of the city
which shall be determined by the size of the consumer's meter.



   MUNICIPAL SERVICE.  Applicable to facilities owned and/or operated by
the City of Wahoo, Nebraska.



   RESIDENTIAL SERVICE.  Shall be supplied to separately metered
single-family living facilities which include cooking, bath and sleeping
accommodations and includes separately metered apartments, mobile home parks,
motel units and rental units are applicable to this schedule. Residential
service shall not applicable to structures/houses where commercial business
or income generating activity is conducted in the major part of the premise.



   WHOLESALE SERVICE.  Applicable to any user of water of the water
system of the Water Department pursuant to a contract entered into the city
and said user, said contract to be entered into at the discretion of the
Wahoo Board of Public Works when said user desires service in excess of
normal water system standards for retail purposes, subject to approval by the
Mayor and Council of the city.



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09)



§ 38.52  RESIDENTIAL SERVICE WATER RATES (MINIMUM).



   The Water Department rates for residential service shall be as follows:



         Residential Meter Size    Consumer Charge



         3/4   inch         $ 5.35



         1 inch            $ 8.90



         1 1/2 inch         $21.95



         2 inch            $29.25



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09)



§ 38.53  COMMERCIAL SERVICE WATER RATES (MINIMUM).



   The Water Department rates for commercial service shall be as follows:



         Commercial Meter Size    Consumer Charge



         3/4 inch         $ 5.35



         1 inch            $ 8.90



         1 1/2 inch         $21.95



         2 inch            $29.25



         3 inch            $34.87



         4 inch            $53.10



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09)



§ 38.54  WHOLESALE SERVICE WATER RATES.



   The Water Department rate for wholesale service shall be as follows:
Contract Rate.



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09)



§ 38.55  MUNICIPAL SERVICE WATER RATES (MINIMUM).



   The Water Department rates for municipal service shall be as follows:



         Municipal Meter Size       Consumer Charge



         3/4 inch         $ 5.35



         1 inch            $ 8.90



         1 1/2 inch         $21.95



         2 inch            $29.25



         3 inch            $34.87



         4 inch            $53.10



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09)



§ 38.56  WATER RATE SCHEDULE IN EXCESS OF MINIMUM.



   The following rate schedule shall apply to all city water consumers
located within the corporate limits of the city.  Any use less than 1,000
gallons of water per month shall be charged at the minimum charge as
specified in §§ 38.52, 38.53 or 38.55. For water used in excess of 1,000
gallons per month, the rate charged, in addition to the applicable minimum
charge, shall be:



   1,000 gallons and over   $1.80 per thousand



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09)



§ 38.57  PER PERSON SERVICE CONTRACT RATE.



   The Utilities General Manager shall be responsible for determining
sales and charges of bulk water from hydrants or wells.



(Ord. 2010, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2030, passed 11-24-09)



TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



      Chapter



         50.   SOLID WASTE



CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE



Section



   50.01   Title



   50.02   Definitions



   50.03   Mandatory removal and disposal



   50.04   Supervision



   50.05   Exclusive right to collect; exceptions



   50.06   Unlawful disposal and transportation



   50.07   Receptacles; specifications



   50.08   Group dwelling and commercial units



   50.09   Containers or receptacles for city use



   50.10   Recycling



   50.11   Limited landfills



   50.12   Specifications for company granted non-exclusive collection
right and privilege



   50.13   Rate regulation



   50.14   Collection service



   50.15   Complaints regarding service



   50.16   Vehicles; requirements



   50.17   Conduct of employees



 



   50.99   Penalty



Cross reference:



   Board of Public Works, see § 33.07



§ 50.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and cited as the Solid Waste Ordinance of
the City of Wahoo, Nebraska.



(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)



§ 50.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BULKY WASTE.  Large appliances, pieces of furniture or waste materials
other than demolition debris or hazardous waste, with a weight or volume
greater than that allowed for residential type containers.



   CITY.  The City of Wahoo, Nebraska.



   COMMERCIAL UNIT.  All those entities that are commercial in nature and
located generally in the commercially zoned areas of the city, and shall
include also schools, hospitals, governmental facilities, except the city,
religious establishments, charitable institutions, hotels and motels, and
other like entities, residential apartments located within commercial
buildings, and the business offices of industrial units.



   COMPANY.  Any entity that collects and transports solid waste for
hire, whether hired by a singular source/generator of solid waste, or
multiple sources/generators, and whether collection and transportation is on
a daily, weekly, or other periodic or irregular basis within the city.



   DEMOLITION DEBRIS. That portion of solid waste which includes all
discarded or unwanted material, or waste material from construction,
remodeling, and repair operations on houses, commercial buildings, and other
structures, including, but not limited to excavated earth, stones, brick,
plaster, lumber, concrete, and waste parts occasioned by installations and
repairs, and all combustible and noncombustible waste material resulting from
the demolition of structures, roadways, or other paved surfaces, but
excluding garbage, refuse and hazardous wastes.



   GARBAGE.  Rejected food wastes, including waste accumulation of
animal, fruit, or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that attend
the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or storing of meat, fish, fowl,
fruit, or vegetables, and dead animals rejected by rendering plants.



   GROUP DWELLING UNIT.  Any boarding or lodging houses, or apartment
buildings which have living quarters for four or more family units, but shall
not mean a hotel or motel.



   HAZARDOUS WASTE. That portion of solid waste which because of quantity,
concentration or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may:



      (1)   Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in
mortality, or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating
irreversible illness; or



      (2)   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human
or animal health, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.



   INDUSTRIAL UNIT.  All those entities that are industrial in nature and
located in industrially zoned areas of the city.



   JUNK.  Old scrap, copper, brass, iron, steel, rope, rags, batteries,
paper, trash, rubber debris, waste, dismantled or wrecked automobiles, or
parts thereof, and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material.



   LIMITED LANDFILL. A type of operation in which only demolition debris,
tree branches, yard waste, and street cleanings may be disposed of on a
specified parcel of land and operated and maintained in such a manner as to
present no danger to the health and safety and welfare of human beings.



   MAYOR and COUNCIL.  The chief executive officer and the governing body
of the city.



   MUNICIPAL UNIT.  The city  and shall include, but not be limited to,
the following locations of city: City Hall, City Library, City Fire Hall,
Street Department Building, Sunrise Cemetery, Wastewater Treatment Facility,
Power Plant, Distribution Building, Civic Center, Senior Center, Smith Park,
Westside (Hackberry) Park, Placek Park, Aquatic Center, during its season,
Sam Crawford Field, during its season, and the central business district
public trash containers.



   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
limited liability company or organization of any kind.



   REFUSE. Putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body
wastes, and includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator
residue, and solid market and industrial waste.



   REFUSE VEHICLE.  Any vehicle with or without a packing unit or
mechanism used to collect, haul, or convey solid waste.



   RESIDENTIAL UNIT.  A building or portion thereof, including a mobile
home used as living quarters for at least one family unit, but not more than
three family units.



   RUBBISH.  Nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, consisting of
both combustible and noncombustible waste, such as paper, cardboard, tin
cans, yard waste, wood, cut trees and/or tree branches and shrubbery, glass,
bedding, crockery, or litter of any kind that will be a detriment to the
public health and safety.



   SOLID WASTE.  Any garbage, refuse, or sludge from an air pollution
control facility and other discarded material, including solid, liquid,
semi-solid, or contained gaseous material, resulting from industrial,
commercial, and mining operations, and from community activities, but SOLID
WASTE shall not include solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return
flows or industrial discharges which are point sources subject to permits
under Section 402 of the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.,
or source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the Atomic
Energy Act of 1954, as amended, 68 Stat. 923.



   SOLID WASTE FACILITY.  Any site owned and operated or utilized by any
person for the collection, source preparation, storage, transportation,
transfer, processing, treatment, or disposal of solid waste, operated
pursuant to requirements of the State of Nebraska and any department or
agency thereof.



   SOLID WASTE SYSTEM. Any equipment, vehicles, facilities, personnel, or
contractors utilized for the purpose of collection, source separation,
storage, transportation, transfer, processing, treatment or disposal of solid
wastes.



   STREET/ALLEY. The surface of any public street, right of way, road,
highway, freeway, bridge, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, drive, now
or hereafter existing as such within the city.



   YARD WASTE.  Grass and leaves.



(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)



§ 50.03  MANDATORY REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL.



   The removal and disposal of solid waste within the city, under the
provisions of this chapter, is hereby made compulsory and universal for the
maintenance, health, and sanitation of the city and its inhabitants.



(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.04  SUPERVISION.



   The Mayor of the city shall have supervision and control over the
collection of all solid waste within city and shall have supervision and
control of the manner of the disposal thereof as established by the city. 
The Mayor may delegate this responsibility to the appropriate department of
the city.



(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)



§ 50.05  EXCLUSIVE RIGHT TO COLLECT; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   The city, in order to more effectively promote and protect the
public health and welfare, hereby reserves unto itself the exclusive right to
collect all solid waste, or any portion thereof, in the city at such times
and for such periods as in its judgment is in the best interest of the city,
provided, however, the city may grant to one or more companies the
non-exclusive right and privilege to collect, for hire, solid waste, or any
portion thereof, within the city, pursuant to terms and conditions as set
forth in this chapter.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to collect and/or dispose
of their solid waste, or any portion thereof, except said prohibition shall
not apply to the following:



      (1)   The city; or



      (2)   The holder of a right and privilege hereunder; or



      (3)   Any person who lawfully collects and hauls their own
solid waste, or any portion thereof, or yard waste of their own, or of other
persons within the corporate limits of the city, to:



         (a)   A solid waste facility with which the city has a
written contract; or



         (b)   An entity that recycles or reuses any portion of
the person's solid waste; or



         (c)   A limited landfill maintained by the city; or



         (d)   Meets the criteria established by Mayor and
Council of the city pursuant to Neb. RS 13-2020(4).



   (C)   All solid waste collected within the city shall be disposed of
in a solid waste facility with which the city maintains or with which the
city has a written contract or with which company and/or companies has a
written contract.



(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)



§ 50.06  UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL AND TRANSPORTATION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or suffer any
solid waste to be discharged out of or flow from any premises owned or
occupied by said person, or to let any solid waste generated in or upon said
premises owned by said person to be left in or thrown into, deposited or
placed upon any street, public grounds, vacant lot, or other place within the
city, other than on the designated day for the collection of solid waste from
said premises.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to transport solid waste,
or any portion thereof, from any private premise and deposit the same in any
public receptacle, provided for the deposit of solid waste, or any portion
thereof, which is located on any street, park, or other publicly owned
property.



(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.07  RECEPTACLES; SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every owner, agent, or manager of a
residential unit to provide and maintain one or more of the following
receptacles or containers for the holding of all garbage and/or refuse
generated from said residential unit:



      (1)   Garbage can. A container or receptacle constructed of a
metal treated to prevent rusting, or heavy duty plastic, of substantial
construction with a matching overhanging, tight-fitting lid and provided with
handles sufficient for safe and convenient handling. Such receptacles or
containers shall be water-tight and fly-tight, having a capacity of not more
than 35 gallons, a loaded weight of no more than 50 pounds, and shall be kept
in serviceable conditions at all times.



      (2)   Toter.  A container or receptacle with a capacity not
to exceed 100 gallons which shall have a lid so constructed so as to prevent
insect and rodent entry. It shall have a wheel or wheels and a handle for
easy and safe mobility and shall be water-tight.



   (B)   A sufficient number of containers shall be provided to store
garbage and/or refuse prior to removal from the residential unit. Such
containers or receptacles shall be kept on the premises in a place accessible
and convenient for the collection thereof and kept in a sanitary and
serviceable condition. All containers used for garbage and/or refuse shall be
kept covered or closed to prevent the entrance of insects and rodents. The
location of the containers or receptacle shall be kept clean and
well-maintained.



   (C)   In addition to the aforenoted containers, the city may require
every owner, agent, or manager of a residential unit, to provide yard waste
containers or other container of suitable, two-ply moisture resistant
materials that will not adversely impact composting. Yard waste may also be
contained in separate garbage cans, or toters, provided that such containers
shall have suitable tight-fitting lids, be water-tight and fly-tight, and be
kept in serviceable condition at all times.



   (D)   Any company may provide one or more containers for garbage
and/or refuse for its customers. Each container so furnished shall have
thereon the name and telephone number of the company furnishing said
container.



(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.08  GROUP DWELLING AND COMMERCIAL UNITS.



   (A)   The owner, agent, or manager having charge of a group dwelling
unit and/or commercial unit shall furnish the same with containers or
receptacles for solid waste for the purpose of receiving such wastes from
their place of business. Such receptacles or containers shall comply with all
the specifications set forth in § 50.07.



   (B)   If the group dwelling unit and/or commercial unit disposes of
infectious solid waste materials, the waste receptacle shall be provided with
a locking assembly so as to maintain controlled access to the container for
depositing and removing the infectious solid waste.



   (C)   Solid waste accumulated by a group dwelling unit and/or
commercial unit shall be removed from the group dwelling unit and/or
commercial unit's premises at intervals necessary to maintain proper sanitary
conditions but not less than once a week.



   (D)   Any company may provide one or more containers for solid waste
for its group dwelling unit and/or commercial unit and/or industrial unit
customers. Each container so furnished shall have thereon the name and
telephone number of the company furnishing said container.



(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.09  CONTAINERS OR RECEPTACLES FOR CITY USE.



   The city shall furnish containers or receptacles for its own solid
waste, or any portion thereof. In addition thereto, any company may provide
one or more containers for solid waste for the city. Each container so
furnished shall have thereon the name and telephone number of the company
furnishing said container.



(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)



§ 50.10  RECYCLING.



   Any company that collects garbage and/or refuse from residential units,
group dwelling units, and/or commercial units may provide hereunder a system
for the collection of the following items for recycling purposes:



   (A)   Newspaper;



   (B)   Corrugated cardboard, pasteboard:



   (C)   Steel;



   (D)   Copper and brass;



   (E)   Scrap tin;



   (F)   Appliances;



   (G)   Aluminum scrap, including aluminum cans;



   (H)   Yard waste;



   (I)   Unregulated hazardous waste, except household hazardous waste,
which are exempt from the regulations under the Environmental Protection Act;



   (J)   Discarded tires;



   (K)   Waste oil;



   (L)   Lead-acid batteries;



   (M)   Bulky waste.



(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)



§ 50.11  LIMITED LANDFILLS.



   The city may provide one or more limited landfills for the disposal of
the following solid waste only:



   (A)   Clean brick, rock, stone, soil, concrete and street cleanings,
all having been generated from within the city;



   (B)   Tree limbs, brush, clean lumber and untreated wood, all having
been accumulated from within the city;



   (C)   Yard waste having been generated from within the city.



(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)



§ 50.12  SPECIFICATIONS FOR COMPANY GRANTED NON-EXCLUSIVE COLLECTION RIGHT
AND PRIVILEGE.



   (A)   Compliance with terms of chapter.  Any company to which the
city has granted a non-exclusive right and privilege to collect, for hire,
solid waste, or any portion thereof, from one or more persons located within
the city, pursuant to this chapter, in accepting said non-exclusive right and
privilege, agrees to comply with all the terms and conditions of this chapter.



   (B)   Compliance with statutes.  Said company shall operate and
maintain its business in full compliance with all applicable statutes of the
State of Nebraska, federal statutes, and all rules and regulations of any
agency having regulatory authority over company or its business.



   (C)   Business office. Each company shall maintain a business office
or agent to which its customers may telephone during regular business hours
without incurring added message or toll charges so that solid waste service
shall be promptly available. Should a customer have an unresolved complaint
regarding solid waste service, the customer shall be entitled to meet jointly
with a representative of the city and a representative of said company within
30 days to fully discuss and resolve such matters.



   (D)   Application; rate schedule. Prior to beginning operations in
the city, each company that desires to collects solid waste from within the
corporate limits of the city shall:



      (1)   File with the city an application, to include a
non-refundable application processing fee of  $200, said application to
include information as may be required pursuant to this chapter and a
schedule of tariffs to include all fees, charges and rates to be charged to
its customers.  The application and the schedule of tariffs shall be on
forms as provided by the city. Thereafter, said application shall be reviewed
by the City Clerk and approved by the Mayor and Council.  After approval by
the Mayor and Council, the City Clerk shall issue to the company a permit to
haul which shall commence on March 1 and terminate on the last day of
February of the following year.



      (2)   If any of said fees, charges or rates, as set forth in a
company's schedule of tariffs are changed during the term of the company's
permit to haul, said company shall notify the city of said changes in writing
at least 30 days before said changes take effect.



   (E)   Knowledge and understanding of chapter requirements. As a
condition of the permit to haul, the owner of vehicles operated or utilized
to provide for the transport for hire of solid waste, or any portion thereof,
shall be required to certify his/her knowledge and understanding of the
provisions of this chapter and of the provisions of Neb. RS 13-2001 et seq.
as it relates to the handling, transportation, and disposal of solid waste,
or any portion thereof. Information shall be provided on each vehicle used
for the transport for hire of solid waste, such as, but not limited to,
license information, make and year and D.O.T. required information.



   (F)   Customer list.  Any company that collects garbage and refuse,
or any portion thereof, from residential units, group dwelling units, and
commercial units, shall, within the first 15 days of each month, present to
the City Clerk an itemized listing of all customers of company in the city
and an itemized listing of all changes made to the listing of customers since
the previous report indicating changes to date for which said company has
provided solid waste removal services during the preceding month.  Said list
shall include the charge to each customer for which company is entitled to
payment. Company shall pay to the city the occupation tax as set forth in §
112.01 of this code based upon said itemized listing of its customers.



   (G)   Discrimination.  Neither any company nor any officer,
employee, agent, or any person acting on said company's behalf shall
discriminate against any person because of race, sex, age, creed, color,
religion, or national origin.



   (H)   Indemnification. Each company shall indemnify and save
harmless the city, its officers, agents, servants and employees from and
against any and all suits, actions, legal proceedings, claims, demands,
damages, costs, expenses and attorney fees resulting from a willful or
negligent act or omission of said company, its officers, agents, servants and
employees in the performance of this franchise, provided, however, that said
company shall not be liable for any suits, actions, legal proceedings,
claims, demands, damages, costs, expenses and attorney fees due to the
willful or negligent act or omission of the city, its officers, agents,
servants and employees.



   (I)   Insurance.



      (1)   Each company shall maintain in full force and effect the
following types of insurance in at least the limits specified below:



         Coverages            Minimum Limits of Liability



         Workmen's Compensation      Statutory requirement



         General Liability:



            Bodily Injury         $1,000,000 each person



                        $1,000,000 aggregate



            Property Damage      $1,000,000 each person



                        $1,000,000 aggregate



         Automobile Liability:



            Bodily Injury         $1,000,000 each person



                        $1,000,000 aggregate



            Property Damage      $1,000,000 each person



                        $1,000,000 aggregate



      (2)   All insurance will be by insurers acceptable to the city
and authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska. At the time of
application, each company shall furnish the city with Certificates of
Insurance or other satisfactory evidence that such insurance has been
produced and is in force. Said policies shall not thereafter be canceled,
permitted to expire, or be changed without 30 days advance written notice to
the city. To the extent permitted by law, all or any part of required
insurance coverage(s) may be provided under a plan of self-insurance, subject
to approval by the city.



   (J)   Records.  Each company shall maintain records of the number
of tons of solid waste collected by the company in the city, the number of
loads of solid waste taken from the city to a facility by said company,
specified by facility and gate fees paid to the facility, specified by
facility, on a calendar year basis. Each company shall report this
information to the city by March 1 annually thereafter. The calculation of
tonnage shall be based upon number of truckloads and weight of loads. Weight
of loads may be estimated, provided that estimates are based on actual
weighing of no less than 10% of loads collected in the city. Weighing of
loads shall be distributed throughout the calendar year and provide a
representative sample of total loads collected in the city. All scale records
shall be kept and submitted as a part of the report.



   (K)   Assignment. Any company shall not assign its rights granted by
the city to said company under this chapter to any other person, in whole or
in part, without the express written consent of the city, which consent shall
not be unreasonably withheld, except the city shall be entitled to a 60-day
notice of said assignment.



   (L)   Waiver.  A waiver by either the city or any company of any
breach of any provision hereof shall not be taken or held to be a waiver of
any succeeding breach of such provision or as a waiver of any provision
itself.



(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.13  RATE REGULATION.



   (A)   At the time of the adoption of this chapter, the city chooses
not to become involved in the rate making process believing that supply and
demand will be an effective rate control. However, the city reserves the
right, at any future date, to become involved in the rate making process and
to approve or disapprove proposed rates.



   (B)   Each company shall not as to their rates, charges, service
facilities, rules, regulations or in any other respect make or grant any
preference or advantage to any person nor subject any person to any prejudice
or disadvantage, provided that nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of charges and classified
rate schedules to which any customer coming within such classification would
be entitled, and provided further, that said rates and charges may be waived
or modified during promotional campaigns of any company.



(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)



§ 50.14  COLLECTION SERVICE.



   (A)   Any company that collects garbage and refuse from residential
units shall provide curb side collection service for the collection of
garbage and refuse from residential units at least once every other week. It
is the responsibility of the resident of a residential unit to arrange that
the garbage cans or toters are placed within five feet of the curb or street,
or as close as practicable to collection vehicle routes by 6:00 a.m. on the
designated collection day. Any company may decline to collect any garbage can
or toter not so placed, any garbage can or toter that contains sharp objects
or liquids, or any garbage and refuse not properly contained. Where any
company has reason to leave solid waste uncollected at a residential unit,
said company or said company's agents shall inform the resident, owner,
manager, or agent, within one day by written notice, mailing, or telephone as
to why the solid waste was not collected, i.e., non-residential solid waste,
hazardous waste, unapproved garbage can or toter, improper placement, or such
other valid reason. Collection of bulky waste will be made upon request of
the customer. The fee for collection of bulky waste shall be negotiated
between each company and its customers on an individual basis.



   (B)   Normal hours of collection are to be from 3:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. Monday through Saturday, except for the collection of garbage and refuse
from residential units and/or group dwelling units which shall be from 6:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m., either Monday, Tuesday, or Friday of each week. 
Exceptions may be made only when any company has reasonably determined that
an exception is necessary to complete collection of an existing route due to
unusual circumstances and upon the mutual agreement of the city and the
company.



   (C)   In the event that a regularly scheduled collection is missed
and a complaint received by either the city or any company, and where no
fault can be found on the generator's part, a special collection of the solid
waste shall be required of said company within eight hours of receipt of the
complaint by said company from either the generator or the city. The city
shall notify said company of any complaints it receives regarding said
company within one normal business day of the city.



   (D)   The following holidays, if any, are optional as to whether or
not a company chooses to observe them as non-collection days; New Year's Day,
Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas. The
suspension of collection service on any such holiday in no way relieves a
company of its obligation to provide collection service during the week of
the holiday period at least once per week. Extending the hours of service to
meet this obligation is subject to the city's approval.



(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.15  COMPLAINTS REGARDING SERVICE.



   (A)   Each company shall receive and respond to all complaints
regarding services provided under the grant of franchise. Any complaints
received by the city will be directed to said company's office. A written
record shall be made by the city of any complaint received by it regarding
any company, which shall include, at a minimum, the following information:



      (1)   Name of complainant;



      (2)   Date and time of complaint;



      (3)   Nature of complaint;



      (4)   Date reported to company.



   (B)   Each company, shall within two working days thereafter, inform
the city of said company's response to the complaint, the date and means of
resolution of the complaint, or an explanation of non-resolution of the
complaint.



(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)



§ 50.16  VEHICLES; REQUIREMENTS.



   An adequate number of vehicles shall be provided by each company to
collect solid waste in accordance with the terms of this chapter. The
vehicles shall be licensed in the State of Nebraska and shall operate in
compliance with all applicable state, federal and municipal regulations. All
vehicles shall be manufactured and maintained to conform with the applicable
standards of the American National Standards Institute. All vehicles and
equipment shall be kept in proper repair and sanitary condition. Each vehicle
shall bear, as a minimum, the name and phone number of its company plainly
visible on both cab doors in numbers and letters at least three inches high.
All vehicles shall be sufficiently secure as to prevent any littering of
solid waste and/or leakage of fluid. No vehicles shall be willfully
overloaded.



(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.17  CONDUCT OF EMPLOYEES.



   Each company shall require its employees to be courteous at all times,
to work quietly and not to use loud or profane language. Each company's
employees shall follow the regular walks for pedestrians while on private
property, shall not trespass or loiter on private property, shall not cross
property to adjoining property, and shall not meddle or tamper with property
which does not or should not concern them. Each employee assigned to drive a
vehicle shall, at all times, carry a valid driver's license for the type of
vehicle he or she is driving. The city shall have the right to make a
complaint regarding any employee of any company who violates any provision
hereof or who is wanton, negligent, or discourteous in the performance of his
or her duties. The city may suggest action to be taken in its complaint but
it shall not be binding on said company.



(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person or any company who violates the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the
penalties as set forth in § 10.99 of this code, as amended from time to time
hereafter. The city may further penalize licensed haulers the following
amounts as liquidated damages as follows:



      (1)   For overloading any conveyance used in collection and
removal: a minimum of $200 for each occurrence;



      (2)   For failure to clean up spilled refuse from the provided
containers: a minimum of $50 for each occurrence;



      (3)   For permitting conveyances used in the collection and
removal of refuse to stand in the City no longer than 24 hours: a minimum of
$50 for each occurrence;



      (4)   For failure to keep conveyances in sanitary condition: a
minimum of $50 for each occurrence;



      (5)   For failure to dispose of refuse, garbage, trash and
rubbish only by means of a sanitary landfill, and in accordance with the
codes of the city: a minimum of $200 for each occurrence.



   (B)   If any company should violate any of the terms, conditions or
provisions of this chapter or if any company should fail to comply with any
reasonable provisions of any ordinance of the city regulating the use by any
company of the streets, alleys, easements or public ways of the city, or if
any company should fail to comply with any material representation of fact in
its application, and should said company further continue to violate or fail
to comply with the same for a period of 30 days after said company shall have
been notified in writing by the city to cease and desist from any such
violation or failure to comply so specified, then said company may be deemed
to have forfeited and annulled and shall thereby forfeit and annul all the
rights and privileges granted hereunder to said company; provided, however,
that such forfeiture shall be declared only by written decision of the Mayor
and Council after an appropriate public proceeding before the Mayor and
Council affording said company due process and full opportunity to be heard
and to respond to any such notice of violation or failure to comply; and
provided further that the Mayor and Council may, in its discretion, and upon
a finding of violation or failure to comply, impose a lesser penalty than
forfeiture or excuse the violation of failure to comply upon a showing by
said company of mitigating circumstances. Said company shall have the right
to appeal any finding of violation of failure to comply and any resultant
penalty to any court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 2011, passed 2-19-09)



TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



         Chapter



            70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



            71.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   70.01   State law adopted



   70.02   Negligent driving



   70.03   Off-road designed vehicles



   70.04   Off street parking



   70.05   Definitions



   70.06   Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited; exceptions



   70.07   Parking regulations; signs; control by governing body



Parking; Administration and Enforcement



   70.20   Bureau of Violations



   70.21   Presumption of control by owner



   70.22   Citations, duty of police



   70.23   Closing streets and alleys to parking



   70.24   Removal of illegally parked vehicles



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 70.01  STATE LAW ADOPTED.



   All portions of the Nebraska Rules of the Road, as now found in the
statutes of the state, are incorporated by reference, as they now exist and
as they may from time to time be amended, except as specifically indicated
otherwise by ordinance.



§ 70.02  NEGLIGENT DRIVING.



   Any person who operates a motor vehicle in such a manner as to indicate
a want of ordinary care and caution that a person of ordinary prudence would
use under like circumstances shall be deemed guilty of negligent driving.



(Neb. RS 60-4,182) ('72 Code, § 5-714.02) (Am. Ord. passed 10-11-73)
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.03  OFF-ROAD DESIGNED VEHICLES.



   (A)   Any person desiring to operate an off-road designed vehicle
upon the public streets of the city,  other than in parades which have been
authorized by the Mayor and Council of the city, and which has not been
specifically prohibited to be upon the public streets of the city as herein
indicated, shall first apply for a permit upon application forms furnished by
the City Clerk  and receive from the City Clerk  a permit for said
operation of said off-road designed vehicle, the requirements and criteria
for obtaining said permit to be as follows:



      (1)   Off-road designed vehicle requirements:



         (a)   Sixty inches or less in width;



         (b)   Dry weight of 900 pounds or less;



         (c)   Travels on four or more low pressure tires;



         (d)   Has a seat for the operator;



         (e)   Has handle bars or other steering assembly for
steering control;



         (f)   Is equipped with a bicycle safety flag that
extends not less than five feet above ground attached to the rear of such
vehicle; the bicycle safety flag shall be triangular in shape with an area of
not less than 30 square inches and shall be day-glow in color;



         (g)   Is equipped with a slow moving vehicle emblem on
the rear of the vehicle;



         (h)   Shall display a lighted headlight and taillight
during the period of time from sunset to sunrise and at all times when
visibility is reduced due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric
conditions;



         (i)   Has a brake system maintained in good operating
condition;



         (j)   Has an adequate muffler system in good working
condition.



      (2)   Applicant's requirements:



         (a)   Applicant must be 19 years of age;



         (b)   Applicant must demonstrate Applicant does not own
or have access to a motor vehicle for transportation purposes;



         (c)   That operating said off-road designed vehicle is
necessary as the only reasonable means of transportation for such Applicant
to maintain employment;



         (d)   That Applicant's license to operate a motor
vehicle is not currently suspended or revoked by the laws of the State of
Nebraska for loss of points or driving under the influence of alcohol or
other similar driving offenses, causing a revocation or suspension of said
person's operators license;



         (e)   That Applicant must be able to obtain and submit
proof of financial responsibility evidencing Applicant's ability to respond
in damages for liability, on account of accidents occurring subsequent to the
effective date of such proof, arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or
use of said off-road designed vehicle, in the amount of $25,000.00 because of
bodily injury to or death of one person in any one accident, subject to such
limit for one person in the amount of $50,000.00 because of bodily injury or
death of two or more persons in any one accident and, in the amount of
$25,000.00 because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any
one accident;



         (f)   That Applicant acknowledges that Applicant shall
abide by the terms and conditions of this section;



         (g)   That a non refundable application fee of $10.00
shall accompany each application. Further, Applicant shall pay all other
expenses and costs associated with Applicant's application.



   (B)   Upon satisfaction of the above conditions, the Clerk may issue
a permit for such person to operate the off-road designed vehicle on the
streets of the city, under the following rules and regulations:



      (1)   That said permit is valid for only one  year from the
date of its issuance;



      (2)   That Applicant shall operate such off-road designed
vehicle subject to the following:



         (a)   All rules of the road of the State of Nebraska as
found in Chapter 60 of the Revised Statutes of the State of Nebraska, not in
conflict herewith;



         (b)   All Ordinances of the city, as found in the
Municipal Code of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska, not in conflict herewith;



         (c)   Not upon the highways of the State of Nebraska
located within the corporate limits of the city, except, at a street
intersection, to cross said highway, in a quick and safe manner, at an angle
of approximately 90 degrees to the direction of the highway;



         (d)   That said off-road vehicle shall not be operated
at a speed in excess of 10 miles per hour;



         (e)   That said off-road designed vehicle shall not be
operated within the corporate limits of the city during the time period
commencing at 8:00 P.M. to 2:00 o'clock A.M. of the subsequent day.



         (f)   That said off-road vehicle shall be occupied only
by the operator thereof or persons deemed necessary to occupy said off-road
vehicle by the operator's employer in the course of the operator's employment
for the employer.



   (C)   By Applicant's signing an application for a permit to operate
an off-road designed vehicle upon the public streets of the city pursuant to
this section, said Applicant consents to the release of all information
deemed relevant by the City Clerk, in determining whether or not to issue a
permit to said Applicant based upon said Applicant's application.



   (D)   The Mayor of the city  and its Clerk are hereby authorized
and directed to implement this section.



   (E)   Should a permit be issued, pursuant to this section, said
permit is subject to immediate revocation and impoundment for any violation
of the terms and conditions of this section. All law enforcement officers
having arrest jurisdiction within the corporate limits of the city are hereby
authorized to enforce the terms and conditions of this section. In addition
thereto, any person found to be in violation of this section shall be subject
to the penalty provision of  the Municipal Code of the City of Wahoo,
Nebraska.



(Ord. 1752, passed 3-22-01; Am. Ord. 1925, passed 3-23-06)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 70.04  OFF STREET PARKING.



   (A)   VEHICLE shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any
person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except
devices moved solely by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails
or tracts.



   (B)   All residents of the city, during the hours specified herein,
shall provide facilities on the real estate upon which they reside, to
include that portion of the street adjacent thereto between the curb lines
and the adjacent property lines, denoted as SIDEWALK SPACE, and as defined in
§ 95.030, for parking of vehicles which they own and/or operate and/or
control, without parking said vehicle on a sidewalk in violation of Neb. RS
60-6,166(1)(a)(ii).



   (C)   No person shall park any vehicle on the traveled portion of
streets in the city, between the hours of midnight and 5:00 a.m., Sunday
through Saturday, inclusive, except for the following areas in which parking
shall be prohibited between the hours as indicated, Sunday through Saturday,
inclusive:



      (1)   Between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.:



         (a)   Broadway Street from the intersection of 4th
Street to the intersection of 7th Street;



         (b)   Linden Avenue from the intersection of 4th Street
to the intersection of 7th Street;



         (c)   4th Street from the intersection of Beech Street
to the intersection of Maple Street;



         (d)   5th Street from the intersection of Beech Street
to the intersection of Chestnut Street;



         (e)   6th Street from the intersection of Beech Street
to the intersection of Maple Street;



         (f)   7th Street from the intersection of Linden Avenue
to the intersection of Broadway Street.



      (2)   Between midnight and 6:00 a.m.:



         (a)   4th Street from the intersection of Orange Street
to the intersection of Beech Street;



         (b)   Beech Street from the intersection of 4th Street
to the intersection of 5th Street;



         (c)   Elm Street from the intersection of 4th Street to
the intersection of 5th Street.



   (D)   Residents and/or non-residents of the city may obtain
permission for on-street parking, for a  period of time not to exceed 24
hours, as an exception to this section, permission to be obtained in advance
from the Police Department.



(Ord. 1811, passed 8-8-02; Am. Ord. 1817, passed 10-10-02)



§ 70.05  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, the definitions as found at Neb. RS
60-606 to 60-676, as they now exist, or may hereafter be amended, shall be
incorporated herein by reference.  Further, specifically, Neb. RS 60-624,
Highway defined, shall include for purposes of this chapter, all alleys which
are publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.  In addition, the definitions as
set forth in § 10.05 of this code shall be incorporated within this chapter
by reference.



(Ord. 1818, passed 10-10-02)



§ 70.06  STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
when in compliance with law or the directions of a peace officer or
traffic-control device, no person shall:



      (1)   Stop, stand or park any vehicle:



         (a)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or
parked at the edge or curb of a street;



         (b)   On a sidewalk, except in a residentially zoned
district of the city, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., of the
succeeding day, Sunday through Saturday, inclusive;



         (c)   Within an intersection;



         (d)   On a crosswalk;



         (e)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or
within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a
safety zone unless the Governing Body indicates a different length by signs
or markings;



         (f)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;



         (g)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure over a
highway or within a highway tunnel;



         (h)   On any railroad track;



         (i)   At any place where official signs prohibit
stopping;



         (j)   On any highway without first securing a current
registration as provided by law; or



         (k)   For more than 24 hours at one general location.



         (l)   On the north side of 10th Street, from the
intersection of Chestnut Street and 10th Street to the intersection of Laurel
Street and 10th Street except as may be permitted by divisions (A)(2) and (3)
of this section.



      (2)   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:



         (a)   In front of a public or private driveway or alley
or be within five feet from the entrance of said public or private driveway
or alley;



         (b)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;



         (c)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;



         (d)   Within 30 feet of any flashing signal, stop sign,
yield sign, or other traffic-control device located at the side of a roadway;



         (e)   Within 15 feet of the driveway entrance to any
fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire
station within 25 feet of such entrance when properly signposted; or



         (f)   At any place where official signs prohibit
standing.



      (3)   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading merchandise or passengers:



         (a)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing; or



         (b)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.



   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her
control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as
shall be unlawful.



   (C)   The provisions of this chapter regulating the stopping,
standing, or parking of vehicles shall not apply to authorized emergency
vehicles while the driver of such vehicle is operating the same in an
emergency in the necessary performance of public duties.



(Ord. 1818, passed 10-10-02; Am. Ord. 1841, passed 6-12-03; Am. Ord. 1932,
passed 5-25-06)



§ 70.07  PARKING REGULATIONS; SIGNS; CONTROL BY GOVERNING BODY.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, any vehicle
stopped or parked upon a two-way roadway where parking is permitted shall be
so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels parallel to and within 12
inches of the right-hand curb or edge of such roadway so as to leave at least
4 feet between the vehicles so parked and any other parked vehicles.  No
vehicle shall be parked upon a roadway when there is a shoulder adjacent to
the roadway which is available for parking.



   (B)   Except when otherwise provided by the Governing Body, every
vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so stopped or
parked parallel to the curb or edge of such roadway, in the direction of
authorized traffic movement, with its right-hand wheels within 12 inches of
the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway or its left-hand wheels within 12
inches of the left-hand curb or edge of such roadway.



   (C)   A Governing Body may permit angle or center parking on any
roadway, except that angle or center parking shall not be permitted on any
federal-aid highway or on any part of the state highway system within the
jurisdiction of the Governing Body of the city, unless the Director-State
Engineer has determined that such roadway is of sufficient width to permit
angle or center parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic.



   (D)   The Governing Body may prohibit or restrict stopping,
standing, or parking on highways under its jurisdiction and erect and
maintain proper and adequate signs thereon.  No person shall stop, stand, or
park any vehicle in violation of the restrictions stated on such signs.



(Ord. 1818, passed 10-10-02)



PARKING; ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 70.20  BUREAU OF VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   There is hereby created the Bureau of Violations within the
powers and duties of the office of the City Clerk. A copy of each citation
issued for nonmoving traffic violations or violations of the Rules and
Regulations of the Park and Recreation Commission shall be deposited by the
City Police Department with the City Clerk, whose duty it shall be to collect
all fines and, to maintain appropriate and accurate records of all such fines
paid.



   (B)   Any person having been issued a citation for a nonmoving
traffic violation or a violation of the Rules and Regulations of the Park and
Recreation Commission desiring to plead guilty and waive court appearance,
may pay the City Clerk according to the following fine schedule based upon
elapsed time from the occurrence of the violation, excluding weekends and
legal holidays:



      (1)   Handicapped parking violations.



         1-5 days:      $25 (Fine- $20.05; Administrative
Costs- $4.95)



         6-15 days:      $50 (Fine- $45.05; Administrative
Costs- $4.95)



      (2)   All other nonmoving traffic violations.



         1-5 days:      $5 (Fine- $.05; Administrative Costs-
$4.95)



         6-15 days:      $10 (Fine- $5.05; Administrative
Costs- $4.95)



         16+ days:      $25 (Fine - $5.05; Administrative
Costs - $19.95)



      (3)   Park and Recreation Commission violations.



         1-5 days:      $5 (Fine- $.05; Administrative Costs-
$4.95)



         6-15 days:      $10 (Fine- $5.05; Administrative
Costs- $4.95)



         16+ days:      $25 (Fine - $5.05; Administrative
Costs - $19.95)



   (C)   The applicable fine shall be payable at the office of the City
Clerk during hours which said office shall be open to the public for
transaction of business either in person or by mail. Further, said applicable
fine may be paid by placing the money for said applicable fine in the night
depository of the City Hall, 605 North Broadway, Wahoo, Nebraska 68066.



   (D)   In the event that any person having been issued a citation for
a nonmoving traffic violation or a violation of the Rules and Regulations of
the Park and Recreation Commission fails to pay the applicable fine within
the allotted time period, such violator or the owner of the offending motor
vehicle shall be liable to prosecution in the County Court for the offense or
offenses charged and subject to the penalty provided for by § 10.99 of this
code.



   (E)   Whenever any person refuses, neglects, or fails to comply with
any of the requirements of this section as herein provided, he or she shall
be denied the benefits of any of the provisions thereof.



('72 Code, § 5-417.02) (Ord. 1174, passed 9-24-81; Am. Ord. 1256, passed
7-10-86; Am. Ord. 1677, passed 4-8-99; Am. Ord. 1881, passed 12-9-04; Am.
Ord. 1942, passed 9-28-06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Bureau of Violations authorized, see Neb. RS 18-1729



§ 70.21  PRESUMPTION OF CONTROL BY OWNER.



   In any prosecution charging a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, proof that the particular vehicle described in the citation was
parked in violation of such chapter, together with proof that the defendant
named in the complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner
of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that
the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such
vehicle at the point where and for the time during which such violation
occurred.



('72 Code, § 5-417) (Ord. 1174, passed 9-24-81)



§ 70.22  CITATIONS, DUTY OF POLICE.



   It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city, whenever they
observe a violation of this chapter, to attach to such vehicle at the time
such vehicle is found in violation, a citation to the owner or operator
thereof that such vehicle is or has been parked in violation of a provision
of this chapter, which citation shall describe such violation and instruct
such owner or operator to report to the City Hall in regard to such violation.



('72 Code, § 5-417.01) (Ord. 1174, passed 9-24-81)



§ 70.23  CLOSING STREETS AND ALLEYS TO PARKING.



   The City Street Commissioner shall have the power and authority to
prohibit the parking of motor vehicles on any street or alley whenever he or
she deems it necessary for the removal of snow, or the repair of said street
or alley. The Street Commissioner shall have the power and authority to have
any vehicle parked in violation of such order removed from the street or
alley at the cost of the owner. Any person refusing to obey such an order of
the Street Commissioner shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished
as provided in this chapter.



('72 Code, § 5-418) (Am. Ord. 1359, passed 1-10-91) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.24  REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES.



   (A)   Whenever any police officer shall find a vehicle standing upon
a street or alley in violation of any of the provisions of the chapter, such
individual may remove or have such vehicle removed or require the driver or
other person in charge of the vehicle to move such vehicle to a position off
the roadway of such street or alley or from such street or alley.



   (B)   The owner or other person lawfully entitled to the possession
of any vehicle towed or stored shall be charged with the reasonable cost of
towing and storage fees.  Any such towing or storage fee shall be a lien
upon the vehicle prior to all other claims.  Any person towing or storing a
vehicle shall be entitled to retain possession of such vehicle until such
charges are paid.  The lien provided for in this section shall not apply to
the contents of any vehicles.



(Neb. 60-6,165) ('72 Code, § 5-419) (Ord. 1248, passed 10-10-85)



CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedules



   I.   Speed limits



   II.   School crossing zones



SCHEDULE I.  SPEED LIMITS.



   The following speed zones are hereby created:



   (A)   Twenty-five miles per hour in any residential district, EXCEPT
as provided herein.



      (1)   Twenty miles per hour in Country Club Acres Subdivision
to the City of Wahoo.



   (B)   Twenty miles per hour in any business district, EXCEPT as
provided herein.



   (C)   Forty-five miles per hour on South Chestnut Street from the
south boundary line of the city limits to the intersection of South Chestnut
Street and Sloup Drive.



   (D)   Forty miles per hour on South Chestnut Street from the
intersection of South Chestnut Street and Sloup Drive to the intersection of
South Chestnut Street and First Street.



   (E)   Forty miles per hour on Highway 77/92 from the west boundary
line of the city limits to the intersection of Highways 77/92 and South
Chestnut Street.



   (F)   Thirty miles per hour on Highways 77/92 from the intersection
of Highways 77/92 and South Chestnut Street to the intersection of Highways
77/92 and Elm Street.



   (G)   Thirty-five miles per hour on Highways 77/92 from the
intersection of Highways 77/92 and Elm Street to that point on Highways 77/92
which would intersect with Thirteenth Street, extended east to said highway.



   (H)   Forty-five miles per hour on Highways 77/92 from the point on
said highway which would intersect with Thirteenth Street extended east to
Commercial Park Road.



(’72 Code, § 5-711(part)) (Am. Ord. 1321, passed 12-28-89; Am. Ord. 1505,
passed 7-27-95; Am. Ord. 1796, passed 3-14-02; Am. Ord. 1926, passed 4-13-06;
Am. Ord. 2017, passed 5-28-09) Penalty, see § 10.99



SCHEDULE II.  SCHOOL CROSSING ZONES.



   The following areas in the city are hereby declared to be school
crossing zones:



   (A)   On Linden Avenue between Second Street and "C" Street;



   (B)   On Fifteenth Street at the intersection of Locust Street;



   (C)   On First Street from Broadway Street to Beech Street including
the intersections of First Street and Broadway Street and First Street and
Beech Street;



   (D)   On Locust Street from 15th Street to 23rd Street, including
the intersection of Locust Street and 23rd Street;



   (E)   On Hackberry Street from 15th Street to 23rd Street, including
the intersection of Hackberry Street and 15th Street and Hackberry Street and
23rd Street;



   (F)   On 23rd Street from Hackberry Street to Locust Street.



('72 Code, § 5-223(2)) (Ord. 1589, passed 9-25-97; Am. Ord. 1819, passed
10-10-02; Am. Ord. 1834, passed 4-10-03; Am. Ord. 1850, passed 10-23-03)
Penalty, see § 10.99



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



      Chapter



         90.   FAIR HOUSING



         91.   FIRE REGULATIONS



         92.   CEMETERIES



         93.   LIBRARY



         94.   HEALTH AND SAFETY



         95.   PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY



         96.   ANIMALS



         97.   NOISE CONTROL



         98.   TREES AND SHRUBS



CHAPTER 90: FAIR HOUSING



Section



   90.01   Purpose



   90.02   Definitions



   90.03   Information



   90.04   Unlawful acts



   90.05   Handicapped person; discriminatory practices prohibited;
design and construction standards



   90.06   Transaction related to residential real estate;
discriminatory practices prohibited



   90.07   Multiple listing service; other service; discriminatory
practices prohibited



   90.08   Religious organization, private home, private club, or
housing for older persons; restricting use not prohibited



§ 90.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the general welfare of the
residents of the city by endorsing the provisions of the Nebraska Fair
Housing Act, Neb. RS 20-301 through 23-344, to the effect that there shall be
no discrimination in the city, in the acquisition, ownership, possession, or
enjoyment of housing in accordance with Article I Section 25 of the
Constitution of the State of Nebraska.



('72 Code, § 10-701) (Ord. 1396, passed 6-9-92)



§ 90.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGGRIEVED PERSON.  A person who:



      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing
practice; or



      (2)   Believes that he or she will be injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.



   COMMISSION.  The Nebraska Equal Opportunity Commission.



   DWELLING.  Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is
occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence for one or
more families and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion
thereof.



   FAMILIAL STATUS.  One or more minors being domiciled with:



      (1)   A parent or another person having legal custody of such
individual; or



      (2)   The designee of a parent or other person having legal
custody, with written permission of the parent or other person.



   HANDICAP.  With respect to a person:



      (1)   A physical or mental impairment, excluding the current
illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in Neb. RS
28-401, which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life
activities:



      (2)   A record of having such an impairment; or



      (3)   Being regarded as having such an impairment.



   RENT.  Lease, sublease, let, and otherwise grant for consideration the
right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.



   RESTRICTIVE COVENANT.  Any specification limiting the transfer,
rental, or lease of any housing because of race, creed, religion, color,
national origin, sex, handicap, familial status, or ancestry.



('72 Code, § 10-702) (Ord. 1396, passed 6-9-92)



§ 90.03  INFORMATION.



   The City Clerk, upon request, shall make available to an aggrieved
person or any other person information regarding the Nebraska Fair Housing
Act and the Nebraska Equal Opportunity Commission without cost to such
individual.



(Neb. RS 20-301 through 20-322) ('72 Code, § 10-708) (Ord. 1396, passed
6-9-92)



§ 90.04  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   (A)   Except as exempted by § 90.08, it shall be unlawful to:



      (1)   Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide
offer, refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make
unavailable or deny, refuse to show, or refuse to receive and transmit an
offer for a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, national
origin, familial status, or sex;



      (2)   Discriminate against any person in the terms,
conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision
of services or facilities in connection therewith because of race, color,
religion, national origin, familial status, or sex;



      (3)   Make, print, publish, or cause to be made, printed, or
published any notice, statement, or advertisement with respect to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, national origin, handicap,
familial status, or sex, or an intention to make any such preference,
limitation, or discrimination;



      (4)   Represent to any person because of race, color,
religion, national origin, handicap, familial status, or sex that any
dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling
is in fact so available;



      (5)   Cause to be made any written or oral inquiry or record
concerning the race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial
status, or sex of a person seeking to purchase, rent, or lease any housing;



      (6)   Include in any transfer, sale, rental, or lease of
housing any restrictive covenants or honor or exercise or attempt to honor or
exercise any restrictive covenant pertaining to housing;



      (7)   Discharge or demote an employee or agent or discriminate
in the compensation of such employee or agent because of such employee's
compliance with this chapter on the Nebraska Fair Housing Act; and



      (8)   Induce or attempt to induce, for profit, any person to
sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or
prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a
particular race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, familial status,
or sex.



   (B)   The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis
of familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the
process of securing legal custody of any minor.



('72 Code, § 10-703) (Ord. 1396, passed 6-9-92) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.05  HANDICAPPED PERSON; DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED; DESIGN
AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   (A)   Except as exempted by § 90.08, it shall be unlawful to:



      (1)   Discriminate in the sale or rental of or otherwise make
unavailable or deny a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap
of:



         (a)   The buyer or renter;



         (b)   Any person associated with the buyer or renter;



         (c)   A person residing in or intending to reside in the
dwelling after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or



      (2)   Discriminate against any person in the terms,
conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision
of services or facilities in connection with a dwelling because of a handicap
of:



         (a)   Such person;



         (b)   Any person associated with such person; or



         (c)   A person residing in or intending to reside in the
dwelling after it is so sold, rented, or made available.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, discrimination shall include:



      (1)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped
person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be
occupied by the person if the modifications may be necessary to afford the
person full enjoyment of the premises, except that in the case of rental, the
landlord may, when it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a
modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises
to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and
tear excepted;



      (2)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules,
policies, practices, or services when such accommodations may be necessary to
afford the handicapped person equal opportunity to use or enjoy a dwelling;
and



      (3)   In connection with the design and construction of
covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after September 1, 1991, a
failure to design and construct the dwellings in such manner that:



         (a)   The public use and common use portions of the
dwelling are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;



         (b)   All the doors designed to allow passage into and
within all premises within the dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow
passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and



         (c)   All premises within the dwellings contain the
following features of adaptive design:



            1.   An accessible route into and through the
dwelling;



            2.   Light switches, electrical outlets,
thermostats, and other environmental controls in accessible locations;



            3.   Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow
later installation of grab bars; and



            4.   Kitchens and bathrooms such that a
handicapped person in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.



   (C)   Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American
National Standards Institute standard for buildings and facilities providing
accessibility and usability for physically handicapped people, ANSI Al17.1,
shall satisfy the requirements of subdivision (B)(3)(c) of this section.



   (D)   For purposes of this section, covered multifamily dwellings
shall mean:



      (1)   Buildings consisting of four or more units if such
buildings have one or more elevators; and



      (2)   Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four
or more units.



   (E)   Nothing in this section shall require that a dwelling be made
available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to
the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in
substantial physical damage to the property of others.



('72 Code, § 10-704) (Ord. 1396, passed 6-9-92) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.06  TRANSACTION RELATED TO RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE; DISCRIMINATORY
PRACTICES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose
business includes engaging in transactions related to residential real estate
to discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction
because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national
origin.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, "transaction related to
residential real estate" shall mean any of the following:



      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other
financial assistance:



         (a)   For purchasing, constructing, improving,
repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or



         (b)   Secured by residential real estate; or



      (2)   The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential
real property.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person engaged in the
business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into
consideration factors other than race, color, religion, national origin,
handicap, familial status, or sex.



('72 Code, § 10-705) (Ord. 1396, passed 6-9-92) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.07  MULTIPLE LISTING SERVICE; OTHER SERVICE; DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICE
PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers
organization, or other service, organization, or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against any
person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or
participation on account of race, color, religion, national origin, handicap,
familial status, or sex.



('72 Code, § 10-706) (Ord. 1396, passed 6-9-92) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.08  RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION, PRIVATE HOME; PRIVATE CLUB, OR HOUSING FOR
OLDER PERSONS; RESTRICTING USE NOT PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious
organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or
organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a
religious organization, association, or society from limiting the sale,
rental, or occupancy of a dwelling which it owns or operates for other than
commercial purposes to persons of the same religion or from giving
preferences to such persons unless membership in such religion is restricted
on account of race, color, national origin, handicap, familial status, or sex.



   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a private club not in
fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or
purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than
commercial purposes, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to
its members or from giving preference to its members.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit or limit the right of
any person or his or her authorized representative to refuse to rent a room
or rooms in his or her own home for any reason or for no reason or to change
tenants in his or her own home as often as desired, except that this
exception shall not apply to any person who makes available for rental or
occupancy more than four sleeping rooms to a person or family within his or
her home.



   (D)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status shall apply
with respect to housing for older persons. For purposes of this subsection,
housing for older persons shall mean housing:



      (1)   Provided under any state program that the commission
determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons or
defined in the program;



      (2)   Intended for and solely occupied by persons 62 years of
age or older; or



      (3)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one
person 55 years of age or older per unit.



('72 Code, § 10-707) (Ord. 1396, passed 6-9-92)



CHAPTER 91: FIRE REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   91.01   Preservation of property



   91.02   Disorderly spectator



   91.03   Equipment



   91.04   Interference



   91.05   Obstruction



   91.06   Assistance



   91.07   Driving over hose



   91.08   Traffic



   91.09   False alarm



   91.10   Pedestrians



Fire Prevention



   91.25   Fire Prevention Code



   91.26   Modifications



   91.27   Fire Code enforcement



   91.28   Lawful entry



   91.29   Notice of violation



   91.30   Fire limits defined



   91.31   Fire limits building permit



   91.32   Building moving



   91.33   Fire limits material



   91.34   Explosives; blasting permits



   91.35   Removal required



   91.36   Walls



   91.37   Stacking combustibles



   91.38   Smoking in public places



   91.39   Fire prohibited



   91.40   Fires regulated



   91.41   Stoves, furnaces, and chimneys



   91.42   Poisonous and flammable gas



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 91.01  PRESERVATION OF PROPERTY.



   The Fire Chief, or any officer in charge of the Fire Department, shall
have the authority and power to cause the removal of property whenever it
shall become necessary for the preservation of more valuable property, the
protection of human life, or to prevent the spreading of fire to adjoining
property.  The Fire Chief may direct the city firefighters to remove any
building, structure, or fence for the purpose of checking the progress of any
fire.  The Fire Chief shall have the authority to blow up, or cause to be
blown up, with explosives, any building or structure during the progress of a
fire for the purpose of checking the progress of the same.



('72 Code, § 7-101)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate, see Neb. RS 17-549



§ 91.02  DISORDERLY SPECTATOR.



   It shall be unlawful for any person during the time of a fire and for a
period of 36 hours after its extinguishment to hinder, resist, or refuse to
obey the City Fire Chief or to act in a noisy or disorderly manner.  The
Fire Chief and Assistant Fire Chief shall have the power and authority during
such time to arrest or command any such person to assist them in the
performance of their official duties.



('72 Code, § 7-102) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Interference with firefighters, see Neb. RS 28-908



§ 91.03  EQUIPMENT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person except the Fire Chief and the
members of the City Fire Department to molest, destroy, handle, or in any
other way to interfere with the use and storage of any of the fire trucks and
other apparatus belonging to the city.



('72 Code, § 7-103) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Criminal mischief, see Neb. RS 28-519



§ 91.04  INTERFERENCE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to hinder or obstruct
the City Fire Chief or the members of the Fire Department in the performance
of their duty.



('72 Code, § 7-104) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Interference with firefighters, see Neb. RS 28-908



§ 91.05  OBSTRUCTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the use of a fire
hydrant or have or place any material within 15 feet of the hydrant.  Any
vehicle or material found as an obstruction may be immediately removed by the
Fire Chief or any member of the Fire Department, at the risk, cost, and
expense of the owner or claimant.



('72 Code, § 7-105) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Parking prohibited, see Neb. RS 60-6,166



§ 91.06  ASSISTANCE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, after the command of the
Fire Chief or Assistant Fire Chief, to aid in extinguishing a fire or to
assist in the removal and protection of property.



('72 Code, § 7-106) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Interference with firefighters, see Neb. RS 28-908



§ 91.07  DRIVING OVER HOSE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the Fire
Chief or Assistant Fire Chief, to drive any vehicle over unprotected hose of
the Fire Department.



(Neb. RS 60-6,184) ('72 Code, § 7-107) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.08  TRAFFIC.



   Every vehicle already stationary when the fire alarm shall have been
sounded must remain so for a period of five minutes after the sounding of the
fire alarm.  No vehicle, except by the specific direction of the Fire Chief
or Assistant Fire Chief, shall follow, approach, or park closer than 500 feet
to any fire vehicle, or to any fire hydrant to which a hose is connected. 
Nothing herein shall be construed to apply to vehicles carrying doctors,
members of the Fire Department, or emergency vehicles.



('72 Code, § 7-108) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see Neb. RS 60-6,183



§ 91.09  FALSE ALARM.



   It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without good and
reasonable cause to raise any false alarm of fire.



('72 Code, § 7-109) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   False reporting prohibited, see Neb. RS 28-907



   False fire alarms prohibited, see  Neb. RS 35-520



§ 91.10  PEDESTRIANS.



   It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to enter or remain in any
street after a fire alarm shall have sounded until the fire trucks shall have
completely passed.



('72 Code, § 7-110) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Interference with firefighters, see Neb. RS 28-908



FIRE PREVENTION



§ 91.25  FIRE PREVENTION CODE.



   The rules and regulations promulgated by the office of the State Fire
Marshal of the state of Nebraska relating to fire prevention are incorporated
by reference into this code and made a part of this chapter as though spread
at large herein together with all subsequent amendments thereto.  One copy
of the Uniform Fire Code shall be on file with the City Clerk and shall be
available for public inspection at any reasonable time.



('72 Code, § 7-201) (Am. Ord. 1080, passed 11-11-76) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to adopt, see Neb. RS 18-132



   Zoning and building regulations authorized, see Neb. RS 19-901 through
19-933



   Powers and duties of State Fire Marshal, see Neb. RS 81-502



§ 91.26  MODIFICATIONS.



   The Chief of the Fire Department shall have power to modify any of the
provisions of the Code hereby adopted upon application in writing by the
owner or lessee, or his or her duly authorized agent, when there are
practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the
Code, provided that the spirit of the Code shall be observed, public safety
secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modifications
when granted or allowed and the decision of the Chief of the Fire Department
thereon shall be entered up on the records of the Department and a signed
copy shall be furnished the applicant. Procedural sections of this Code shall
not be subject to modification by the Chief of the Fire Department.



('72 Code, § 7-202)



§ 91.27  FIRE CODE ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be the duty of all city officials to enforce the incorporated
Fire Code provisions and all infractions shall be immediately brought to the
attention of the Fire Chief.



('72 Code, § 7-203)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate, see Neb. RS 17-549



§ 91.28  LAWFUL ENTRY.



   It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, or occupant of any building
or structure, except the interiors of private dwellings, to allow the Fire
Chief to inspect, or cause to be inspected, as often as necessary the said
structure for the purpose of ascertaining and enumerating all conditions
therein that are likely to cause fire, or any other violations of the
provisions of the city ordinances affecting the hazard of fire.



('72 Code, § 7-204)



Statutory reference:



   Inspections under Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act and Petroleum
Products and Hazardous Substances Storage and Handling Act, see Neb. RS 81-512



§ 91.29  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, or occupant of any building
or structure that was lawfully inspected as prescribed, and who receives
written or verbal notice of a violation of any of the provisions of the city
ordinances to correct the condition that violates the said ordinance or
ordinances within five  days from the date of receipt of such notice.



('72 Code, § 7-205) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.30  FIRE LIMITS DEFINED.



   The following zoned districts in the city shall be in the following
listed fire zones in accordance with Table 5-A of the Uniform Building Code:



   A   Agricultural District - Fire Zone 3



   R-1   Residential District - Fire Zone 3



   R-2   Residential District - Fire Zone 3



   R-3   Residential District - Fire Zone 3



   R-4   Multiple Family Residential District - Fire Zone 2



   R-5   Mobile Home Residential District - Fire Zone 3



   R-6   Modular Home Residential District - Fire Zone 3



   R-O    Residential Office District - Fire Zone 2



   C-1    Highway Commercial - Fire Zone 2



   C-2    Light Commercial District - Fire Zone 2



   C-3    Central Business District -  Fire Zone 1



   C-4    General Commercial District - Fire Zone 1



   M-1    Industrial Park District - Fire Zone 2



   M-2   Light Industrial District - Fire Zone 1



   M-3    Heavy Industrial District - Fire Zone 1



   P    Parking District - Fire Zone 2



   F-1   Flood Plain District - Fire Zone 3



('72 Code, § 7-206) (Am. Ord. 1080, passed 11-11-76)



§ 91.31  FIRE LIMITS BUILDING PERMIT.



   Prior to the moving or construction of any building in the fire limits,
application must be made to the City Council.  Construction shall include
the enlarging or alteration of any building in the fire limits. Such
application shall be furnished by the City Clerk and shall require such
information as the City Council deems necessary to determine whether or not
to grant a building permit.



('72 Code, § 7-207) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.32  BUILDING MOVING.



   No person shall move any building of combustible material into the fire
limits or move any such building from one place to another within the fire
limits.  However, upon application to the City Council, and agreement by
two-thirds of the City Council, a combustible building may be temporarily
moved to another location within the fire limits if the owner or agent
desires to immediately build a noncombustible building on the present site of
the combustible building which is to be moved. This temporary relocation
within the fire limits may only continue until the new structure is completed
or the building permit for the new structure expires, whichever is sooner.
Each and every 24 hour period for which the moved building remains in the
fire limits after this temporary permit expires shall be deemed a separate
and distinct violation of this section. Before any temporary permit is issued
under this section, a bond as required in § 32.25 of this city code shall be
secured.



('72 Code, § 7-208) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.33  FIRE LIMITS MATERIALS.



   Within the aforesaid fire limits, no structure shall be built, altered,
moved, or enlarged unless such structure will be enclosed with walls
constructed wholly of stone, well-burned brick, terra cotta, concrete, or
other such noncombustible materials as will satisfy the Fire Chief that the
said structure will be reasonably fireproof.



('72 Code, § 7-209) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.34  EXPLOSIVES; BLASTING PERMITS.



   In addition to notifying the Fire Department pursuant to Neb. RS
28-1233(3), any person desiring to discharge explosive materials, as defined
in Neb. RS 28-1213, within the city, shall apply for and secure a permit from
the City Council 24 hours prior to such discharge, and shall discharge such
explosive materials in conformance with the conditions specified in the
permit.  In no case shall any person perform blasting operations unless
operating under the direct supervision of a person in possession of a valid
user's permit issued by the Nebraska State Patrol. 



(Neb. RS 17-549, 17-556, 28-1229, 28-1233) ('72 Code, § 7-301) (Ord. 1327,
passed 12-28-89) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.35  REMOVAL REQUIRED.



   In the event that any wooden or combustible building or structure, or
any noncombustible building which stands within the fire limits, is damaged
to the extent of 50% or more of its value, exclusive of the foundation, it
shall not be repaired or rebuilt, but shall be taken down and removed within
60 days from the date of such fire or other casualty.



('72 Code, § 7-211) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.36  WALLS.



   (A)   All exterior or division walls of buildings hereafter erected
in the fire limits shall be of sufficient thickness to support the load to be
carried. All exterior or division brick walls:



      (1)   In one story buildings shall be not less than eight
inches in thickness;



      (2)   In two story buildings shall be not less than 12 inches
in thickness in the first story and shall be not less than eight inches in
thickness in the second story;



      (3)   In three story buildings shall be not less than 17
inches in thickness in the first story, not less than 12 inches in thickness
in the second story, and not less than eight inches in thickness in the
third  story.



   (B)   Reinforced stone or gravel concrete exterior or division walls
with steel reinforcements running both horizontally and vertically and
weighing not less than one half pound per square foot must have a thickness
of not less than eight inches. That portion of exterior brick walls exposed
to the street shall be faced with pressed brick. That portion of exterior
hollow tile walls exposed to the street or alley shall be faced with stucco
not less than one inch in thickness, or at the discretion of the owner, that
portion of wall exposed to the street may be faced with pressed brick. Fire
walls shall be not less than eight inches in thickness. All division walls
shall be constructed so that their thickness shall be not less than 12
inches. No brick veneer buildings will be permitted or allowed to be
constructed in the fire limits. Foundations, excavations, and cement
basements shall be constructed of fireproof material and in the manner
approved by the Building Code, adopted in Chapter 150 of this code.



('72 Code, § 7-212) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.37  STACKING COMBUSTIBLES.



   It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person or persons, firm, or
corporation to have or keep any hay, straw, stalks, excelsior, empty boxes,
barrels, or other combustible materials, which are hereby designated as
nuisances, scattered, stacked, or piled up or exposed, unenclosed by a
building upon any street, alley, or lot within the fire limits.



('72 Code, § 7-213) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.38  SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite a lighter, strike a
match, or indulge in the smoking of tobacco on or in any building or
structure where public gatherings take place within the corporate limits
while any entertainment, program show, amusement, game, exhibition, or other
spectacle to which the general public is invited is in progress, or while
patrons thereof are finding or leaving seats and standing room; provided, the
foregoing shall not be construed to apply to banquets, dinners, or
entertainments held in any of the aforesaid buildings or structures where
food is served and the entertainment takes place incidental thereto or in
connection therewith.



('72 Code, § 7-215) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.39  FIRE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to set out a fire on the pavement,
or near any curb, now built or hereafter to be built, within the city.



(Neb. RS 17-556) ('72 Code, § 7-216) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.40  FIRES REGULATED.



   It shall be lawful to build or set out certain fires, provided, that
the person building such fires shall have the substance to be burned in a
fireproof trash burner or incinerator with a metal fireproof screen of not
more than one inch mesh and located at least 20 feet from any building. The
incinerator shall be built in such a way as to not permit the escape of
burning paper or other substance. If any person shall require a fire in the
course of his or her trade as a blacksmith or mechanic, such fire shall be
built and maintained in the manner prescribed by the Fire Chief. All fires
shall be built after 7:00 a.m. and completely extinguished by sunset, except
the aforesaid fires used in the course of a trade which shall be allowed
during such hours as the Fire Chief shall prescribe. It shall be unlawful for
any person to set fire to, burn, or cause to be burned any garbage, animal
matter, or vegetable matter. The burning of straw, hay, leaves, or brush in
the open air is hereby permitted and allowed, provided that the person
setting out the same request permission and receive an open burning permit in
writing, signed by the local Fire Chief, on a form provided by the State Fire
Marshal; and provided further, that any such burning shall be done while the
said fire is attended by the person setting out the same at all times, and
that the said fire shall be located at least 20 feet from any building.



('72 Code, § 7-217) (Am. Ord. 1210, passed 9-22-83) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate, see Neb. RS 17-549 and 17-556



   Statewide ban; exemptions, see Neb. RS 81-520.01



§ 91.41  STOVES, FURNACES, AND CHIMNEYS.



   All stoves and other heating devices shall be installed at a proper
distance from combustible materials and portions of the building.  Any
combustible materials or portions of the building that are dangerously close
to such heating devices shall be protected by noncombustible material.  This
section shall apply both to existing structures and those which may hereafter
be erected.



(Neb. RS 17-549) ('72 Code, § 7-218) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.42  POISONOUS AND FLAMMABLE GAS.



   Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to store or keep in the city
for any period of time any form of poisonous or flammable gas or liquefied
petroleum gas or add to, enlarge, or replace any facility used for the
storage of such gases, must first get permission from the City Council and
State Fire Marshall. The City Council  shall require the name of the gas,
the place of storage, and the amount of gas stored.  If permission is
granted, the City Council shall prescribe such rules, regulations, and
precautionary actions as they may deem necessary. Permit requirements for the
initial construction or location of storage facilities shall not apply to
those facilities in existence on the effective date of this chapter;
provided, any such present use that is discontinued for a period of 60 days
shall not be revived without a permit. The provisions of this section shall
be controlling throughout the city and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.



(Neb. RS 17-549) ('72 Code, § 7-214) Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 92: CEMETERIES



Section



   92.01   Operation and funding



   92.02   Conveyance of lots



   92.03   Burial of indigents



   92.04   Veterans



   92.05   Destruction of property



§ 92.01  OPERATION AND FUNDING.



   The city owns and manages the city's cemeteries.  The City Council,
for the purpose of defraying the cost of the care, management, maintenance,
and beautification of the cemeteries, may each year levy a tax not exceeding
the maximum limit prescribed by state law, on the taxable value of all
taxable property within the city subject to taxation for general purposes. 
The revenue from the said tax shall be known as the Cemetery Fund and shall
include all gifts, grants, deeds of conveyance, bequests, money, stocks,
bonds, or other valuable income-producing personal property and real estate
from any source for the purpose of endowing the cemetery. The Cemetery Fund
shall at all times be in the custody of the City Treasurer. The City Council
shall have the power and authority to pass such rules and regulations,
including, but not limited to, a schedule of fees and costs for the operation
of the cemeteries as may be proper for their efficient operation.



('72 Code, § 3-301) (Am. Ord. 1898, passed 5-12-05)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 12-401 through 12-403



§ 92.02  CONVEYANCE OF LOTS.



   The City Council may convey cemetery lots by certificate signed by the
Mayor, and countersigned by the City Clerk under the City Seal specifying
that the person to whom the same is issued is the owner of the lot described
therein by number for the purpose of interment.  The said certificate shall
give a right in fee simple to the proprietor, his heirs, and assigns.  The
certificate shall then be recorded in the office of the County Clerk.



(Neb. RS 17-941) ('72 Code, § 3-302) (Am. Ord. 1099, passed 10-13-77)



§ 92.03  BURIAL OF INDIGENTS.



   Within one of the city's cemeteries there shall be included a plot of
ground, known as the potter's field,  which shall be available for the
burial of indigents and unknown travelers who may die while they are within
the city.



('72 Code, § 3-304)  (Am. Ord. 1898, passed 5-12-05)



§ 92.04  VETERANS.



   The city shall set aside a certain area within one of its cemeteries as
a memorial and free burial place for deceased veterans who were residents of
the city.



('72 Code, § 3-305)  (Am. Ord. 1898, passed 5-12-05)



§ 92.05  DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.



   Any person who shall willfully destroy, mutilate, deface, injure, or
remove any tomb, monument, or gravestone placed in the cemeteries, or any
fence, railing, or other work for the protection or ornamentation of the
cemeteries, or who shall willfully destroy, cut, break, or injure any tree,
shrub, or plant shall be deemed to be guilty of an offense.



(Neb. RS 28-512) ('72 Code, § 3-310) (Am. Ord. 1898, passed 5-12-05) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 93: LIBRARY



Section



   93.01   Operation and funding



   93.02   Rules and regulations



   93.03   Books



   93.04   Damaged and lost books



   93.05   Book removal



   93.06   Cost of use



   93.07   Money collected



   93.08   Reports



   93.09   Donations



§ 93.01  OPERATION AND FUNDING.



   The city owns and manages the city library through the Library Board. 
The City Council, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the management,
purchases, improvements, and maintenance of the library, may each year levy a
tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by state law, on the taxable
value of all taxable property within the city.  The revenue from the tax
shall be known as the Library Fund and shall include all gifts, grants, deeds
of conveyance, bequests, or other valuable income-producing personal property
and real estate from any source for the purpose of endowing the city
library.  The Library Fund shall at all times be in the custody of the City
Treasurer.  The Board shall have the power and authority to appoint a
director and to hire such other employees as it may deem necessary and may
pass such other rules and regulations for the operation of the library as may
be proper for its efficient operation.  All actions by the Board shall be
under the supervision and control of the City Council.



('72 Code, § 3-201)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to create; powers and duties, see Neb. RS 51-201 through
51-219



Cross reference:



   Library Board, see § 33.01



§ 93.02  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Library Board shall establish rules and regulations for the
governing of the city library for the preservation and efficient management
thereof.  It shall fix and impose by general rules, penalties, and
forfeitures for injury to the library grounds, rooms, books, or other
property, or for failure to return a book.  All fees, penalties, and
forfeitures may be collected in civil action in the event of failure,
neglect, or refusal to pay any assessments.



('72 Code, § 3-203)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to enact regulations, see Neb. RS 51-205



   Civil actions authorized, see Neb. RS 51-214



§ 93.03  BOOKS.



   The Library Board may authorize the sale, exchange, or disposal of any
surplus, damaged, defective, obsolete, or duplicate books in the library. 
Records shall be kept of any such surplus, damaged, defective, obsolete, or
duplicate books so disposed of.



('72 Code, § 3-202)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 51-207



§ 93.04  DAMAGED AND LOST BOOKS.



   Any person who injures or fails to return any book taken from the
library shall forfeit and pay to the library not less than the value of the
book in addition to any replacement costs and penalty which the Library Board
may assess.



('72 Code, § 3-204)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to determine and impose penalties, see Neb. RS 51-211



§ 93.05  BOOK REMOVAL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the regulations
made by the Library Board to take a book from the library without the consent
of the director or an authorized employee of the library.  Any person
removing a book from the library without properly checking it out shall be
deemed to be guilty of an offense.



('72 Code, § 3-205) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to determine and impose penalties, see Neb. RS 51-211



§ 93.06  COST OF USE.



   The city library shall be free of charge for the use of the inhabitants
of the city and any other city in Saunders County.  Persons living outside
the limits of any city in Saunders County shall be charged an annual usage
fee.  The director may exclude from the use of the library and reading rooms
any person who shall willfully violate or refuse to comply with the rules and
regulations established for the government thereof.



('72 Code, § 3-206)



Statutory reference:



   Library use free of charge, see Neb. RS 51-201, 51-212



§ 93.07  MONEY COLLECTED.



   Any money collected by the library shall be turned over monthly by the
director to the City Treasurer along with a report of the sources of the
revenue.



('72 Code, § 3-207)



Statutory reference:



   Funds generated by library to be used for library purposes, see Neb. RS
51-209



§ 93.08  REPORTS.



   The Library Board shall, at the first regular meeting of the Mayor and
City Council in August each year, make a report to the City Council of the
condition of their trust on the first day of August of each year, showing all
moneys received and expended, number of books or periodicals on hand,
newspapers and current literature subscribed for or donated to the reading
room, the number of books or periodicals purchased or acquired by gift during
the year, the number lost or missing, the number of visitors attending, the
number and character of books loaned or issued, with such statistics,
information, and suggestions as may be deemed of general interest to or as
the City Council may require. The Library Board shall make such other reports
from time to time as the Mayor and Council may request or order.



('72 Code, § 3-208)



§ 93.09  DONATIONS.



   Any person may make a donation of money, lands, or other property for
the benefit of the library, and the title to the property donated may be made
to and shall vest in the city for the "Public Library," and such property
shall thereupon be exempt from taxation. The President of the Library Board
shall have the power to release, upon full payment, any mortgage constituting
a credit to the Library Fund outstanding in the name of the Library Board,
and the signature of the President on any such release shall be authenticated
by the Secretary of the Board. The President and Secretary in like manner,
upon a resolution duly passed and adopted by the Board, may renew any such
mortgage.



('72 Code, § 3-209)



CHAPTER 94: HEALTH AND SAFETY



Section



General Provisions



   94.01   Health regulations



   94.02   State health rules



   94.03   Enforcement official



   94.04   County Health Board



Nuisances



   94.20   Definition, general and specific



   94.21   Jurisdiction



   94.22   Duty



   94.23   Nonexclusive procedure



   94.24   Enforcement



   94.25   Form of proper service of notice



   94.26   Affect of failure to abate



   94.27   Hearing



   94.28   Extension of time



   94.29   Abatement by city



   94.30   Record of expenses



   94.31   Hearing on statement of expenses



   94.32   Expenses a special assessment against the property



   94.33   Notice of special assessment



   94.34   Alternatives



   94.35   Procedure in case of emergency



   94.36   Expenses collected by civil action



Rodents and Insects



   94.55   Extermination



   94.56   Occupant



   94.57   Owner



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 94.01  HEALTH REGULATIONS.



   For the purpose of promoting the health and safety of the residents of
the city, the Board of Health shall, from time to time, adopt such rules and
regulations relative thereto and shall make such inspections, prescribe such
penalties, and make such reports as may be necessary toward that purpose.



('72 Code, § 4-101)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate, see Neb. RS 17-121



§ 94.02  STATE HEALTH RULES.



   The "Rules and Regulations Relating to Public Health," Department of
Health of the state of Nebraska are hereby incorporated by reference when the
same are applicable to the city, in their present form and as they may
hereafter be amended.  One copy of each of the said pamphlets is filed at
the office of the City Clerk and shall be available for public inspection at
any reasonable time.



(Neb. RS 18-132, 19-902) ('72 Code, § 4-103)



§ 94.03  ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.



   The Chief of Police, as the Quarantine Officer, shall be the chief
health officer of the city.  It shall be his or her duty to notify the City
Council and the Board of Health of health nuisances within the city and its
zoning jurisdiction.



('72 Code, § 4-102)



Statutory reference:



   Quarantine officer, see Neb. RS 17-121



§ 94.04  COUNTY HEALTH BOARD.



   It shall be the duty of the Board of Health to work closely with the
County Health Board in protecting the health and welfare of the residents of
the city.



('72 Code, § 4-104)



NUISANCES



§ 94.20  DEFINITION, GENERAL AND SPECIFIC.



   (A)   General definition. A nuisance consists in doing any unlawful
act, or omitting to perform a duty, or suffering or permitting any condition
or thing to be or exist, which act, omission, condition or thing either:



      (1)   Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, or
safety of others;



      (2)   Offends decency;



      (3)   Is offensive to the senses;



      (4)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, tends to
obstruct, or renders dangerous for passage any stream, public park, parkway,
square, street, or highway in the city;



      (5)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the
use of property; or



      (6)   Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of
life and property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others.



('72 Code, § 4-301)



   (B)   Specific definition. The maintaining, using, placing,
depositing, leaving, or permitting of any of the following specific acts,
omissions, places, conditions, and things are hereby declared to be nuisances:



      (1)   Any odorous, putrid, unsound, or unwholesome grain,
meat, hides, skins, feathers, vegetable matter, or the whole or any part of
any dead animal, fish, or fowl;



      (2)   Privies, vaults, cesspools, dumps, pits, or like places
which are not securely protected from flies or rats, or which are foul or
malodorous;



      (3)   Filthy, littered, or trash-covered cellars, houseyards,
barnyards, stable-yards, factory-yards, mill yards, vacant areas in rear of
stores, granaries, vacant lots, houses, buildings, or premises;



      (4)   Animal manure in any quantity which is not securely
protected from flies and the elements, or which is kept or handled in
violation of any ordinance of the city;



      (5)   Liquid household waste, human excreta, garbage,
butcher's trimmings and offal, parts of fish, or any waste vegetable or
animal matter in any quantity, provided that nothing herein contained shall
prevent the temporary retention of waste in receptacles in a manner provided
by the health officer of the city, nor the dumping of non-putrefying waste in
a place and manner approved by the health officer;



      (6)   Tin cans, bottles, glass, cans, ashes, small pieces of
scrap iron, wire metal articles, bric-a-brac, broken stone or cement, broken
crockery, broken glass, broken plaster, and all trash or abandoned material,
unless the same be kept in covered gins or galvanized iron receptacles;



      (7)   Litter, accumulations of barrels, boxes, crates, packing
crates, mattresses, bedding, excelsior, packing hay, straw or other packing
material, lumber not neatly piled, scrap iron, tin or other metal not neatly
piled, old automobiles or parts thereof, or any other waste materials; litter
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:



         (a)   Trash, rubbish, refuse, garbage, paper, rags, and
ashes;



         (b)   Wood, plaster, cement, brick, or stone building
rubble;



         (c)   Grass, leaves, and worthless vegetation;



         (d)   Any machine or machines, vehicle or vehicles, or
vehicles, or parts of a machine or vehicle which have lost their identity,
character, utility, or serviceability as such through deterioration,
dismantling, or the ravages of time, are inoperative or unable to perform
their intended functions, or are cast off, discarded, or thrown away or left
as waste, wreckage, or junk;



      (8)   Any unsightly building, billboard, or other structure,
or any old, abandoned or partially destroyed building or structure or any
building or structure commenced and left unfinished;



      (9)   All places used or maintained as junk yards, or dumping
grounds, or for the wrecking and dissembling of automobiles, trucks,
tractors, or machinery of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of
worn-out, wrecked or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of
any kind, or of any of the parts thereof, or for the storing or leaving of
any machinery or equipment used by contractors or builders or by other
persons;



      (10)   Stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or
piece of ground;



      (11)   Stockyards, granaries, mills, pig pens, cattle pens,
chicken pens or any other place, building, or enclosure, in which animals or
fowls of any kind are confined or on which are stored tankage or any other
animal or vegetable matter, or on which any animal or vegetable matter
including grain is being processed, when the places in which the animals are
confined, or the premises on which the vegetable or animal matter is located
are maintained and kept in such a manner that foul and noxious odors are
permitted to emanate therefrom;



      (12)   Storage, accumulation, keeping, placing, or allowing to
remain of trash, garage, scrap and wrecked, worn-out, broken or inoperative,
or partially destroyed or disassembled personal or real property of any kind,
including any motor vehicles, tractors, trailers, machinery, and equipment;



      (13)   The practice of engine braking within the corporate
limits of the city or within one mile thereof, which is hereby prohibited
unless the motor vehicle upon which the engine braking is being performed has
an adequate muffler system to muffle the noise emitted from the motor vehicle
when engine breaking;



      (14)   The growth of 12 inches or more in height of weeds,
grasses, or worthless vegetation on any lot or parcel of ground within the
city; the term weeds, shall include, but not be limited to, the following:



         (a)   Bindweed (convolvulus arvensis);



         (b)   Puncture vine (tribulus terrestris);



         (c)   Leafy spurge (euphorbia esula);



         (d)   Canada thistle (cirsium arvense);



         (e)   Perennial peppergrass (lepidium draba);



         (f)   Russian knapweed (centaurea picris);



         (g)   Johnson grass (sorghum halepense);



         (h)   Nettle (solanum carolinense);



         (i)   Bull thistle (cirsium lanceolatum);



         (j)   Buckthom (rhamus sp.) (toum);



         (k)   Hemp plant (cannabis sativa);



         (l)   Ragweed (ambrosiaceae);



      (15)   The permitting of a refrigerator, icebox, freezer, or
other dangerous appliance to be in the open and accessible to children
whether on private or public property unless all doors are first removed and
the appliance is made reasonably safe;



      (16)   The storage or keeping of one or more motor vehicles,
each not having a properly issued current motor vehicle registration and
current motor vehicle license plate properly displayed; provided, however,
that this section shall not apply to the storage of unlicensed and/or
unregistered motor vehicles in a fully enclosed garage or where otherwise
authorized by city zoning regulations;



      (17)   The storage, keeping or abandonment of parts, including
scrap metals, from motor vehicles or machinery, or parts thereof, except in
enclosed buildings or garages or where otherwise authorized by the city
zoning regulations;



      (18)   The permitting, allowing, or maintaining of any dead or
diseased trees within the right-of-way of streets within the corporate limits
of the city adjacent to any lot or parcel of ground within the city;



      (19)   The permitting, allowing, or maintaining of any dead or
diseased trees on private property within the corporate limits of the city;



      (20)   The keeping of bees within the corporate limits of the
city 200 feet or less from any dwelling other than that of the owner of the
bees;



      (21)   The permitting of emission of smoke from any source
that is polluted. The standards for air pollution established or adopted by
the State of Nebraska shall be presumptive evidence as to when the air is
deemed to be polluted under this section;



      (22)   The obstruction or impeding without legal authority any
river or collection of water or to corrupt and render unwholesome or impure
any watercourse, stream, or other water within the corporate limits of city.
The standards for water quality established or adopted by the State of
Nebraska shall be presumptive evidence as to when the water is deemed to be
polluted under this section;



      (23)   The abandoning, on public property, of personal
property. For purposes of this division, PUBLIC PROPERTY shall mean any
public right-of-way, street, highway, alley, park, or other state, county, or
city owned property. For purposes of this division, ABANDON shall mean any
personal property left on public property for more than 24 hours, except when
the leaving of said personal property on said portion of public property, at
that location, is legally permitted. For purposes of this division, PERSONAL
PROPERTY shall not include any motor vehicle for which a registration, from
the State of Nebraska, is required to operate said motor vehicle on those
portions of public property which constitute a street, highway, or alley.



      (24)   All other things specifically designated as nuisances
elsewhere in this code.



('72 Code, § 4-302)



(Am. Ord. 1056, passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 1465, passed 8-11-94; Am. Ord.
1466, passed 8-11-94; Am. Ord. 1715, passed 2-10-00; Am. Ord. 1943, passed
11-9-06; Am. Ord. 1999, passed 7-24-08)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate and abate nuisances, see Neb. RS 18-1720



§ 94.21  JURISDICTION.



   The Mayor and Chief of Police of the city are directed to enforce this
city code against all nuisances.  The jurisdiction of the Mayor, Chief of
Police, and court shall extend to and the territorial application of this
chapter shall include all territory adjacent to the limits of the city within
one mile thereof and all territory within the corporate limits.



('72 Code, § 4-304)



Statutory reference:



   Zoning jurisdiction, see Neb. RS 17-1001



   Authority to regulate and abate nuisances, see Neb. RS 18-1720



§ 94.22  DUTY.



   It shall be the duty of every owner, occupant, lessee, or mortgagee of
real estate in the city to keep such real estate free of public nuisances.
All, or any part of said premises found, as provided herein, to constitute a
public nuisance shall be abated by rehabilitation, demolition, or repair
pursuant to procedures set forth herein.



('72 Code, § 4-303) (Am. Ord. 1056, passed 12-11-75; Am. Ord. 1238, passed
3-28-85)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 17-123, 17-123.01



§ 94.23  NONEXCLUSIVE PROCEDURE.



   The procedure set forth in this subchapter for abatement of a nuisance
is nonexclusive and is in addition to the procedure for abatement which is
set forth in §§ 94.55 and/or 94.56 of this code.



('72 Code, § 4-305) (Ord. 1238, passed 3-28-85)



§ 94.24  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   When the Mayor, or the Chief of Police of the city or the
Chief of Police's deputy declare or find that any premises within the city
may be maintained contrary to one or more of the provisions of § 94.20,
except § 94.20(B)(23), he or she shall mail a notice to the owner, occupant,
lessee, and/or mortgagee of the premises. The notice shall state the
conditions which constitute the public nuisance and shall order the abatement
of the nuisance within the time period set forth in the notice, and shall be
substantially in the following form:



   NOTICE OF NUISANCE



   TO:   (OWNER, OCCUPANT, LESSEE, MORTGAGEE)



                  (ADDRESSES)



   Pursuant to § 94.24 of the City Code of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska,
I, the undersigned, declare that the following premises in the City of Wahoo,
Nebraska, known as             (street address)          and more
particularly described as follows:



   (legal description)



is being maintained as a public nuisance contrary to § 94.20 of the City
Code of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska. The conditions which constitute the
public nuisance upon the above described real estate are as follows:



   You shall have         days from the date of receipt of this Notice
to abate said above described nuisance.



   If you are of the opinion that my determination of the above conditions
does not constitute a public nuisance, you may within         days of the
date of receipt of this Notice, file a written notice with the Clerk of the
City of Wahoo, Nebraska, for a hearing before the Wahoo City Council
concerning such determination.  The City Clerk shall then fix a date and
time for the City Council of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska, to hear this
matter.  The address and telephone number of the City Clerk is as follows:



   City Hall



   605 North Broadway



   Wahoo, NE 68066



   402-443-3222



   DATED                    , 20  .



      CITY OF WAHOO, NEBRASKA



      by                                          
   



      Its Mayor, or Chief of Police, or the Chief of Police's Deputy



   CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE



   The undersigned hereby certifies that a copy of the foregoing Notice of
Nuisance was mailed by registered or certified U. S. Mail, postage prepaid,
on the           day of                         , 20  , to
the individuals, at their respective addresses, as noted above.



      CITY OF WAHOO, NEBRASKA



      by                                          
 



      Its Mayor, or Chief of Police, or the Chief of Police's Deputy



cc. City Council



   (B)   As to § 94.20(B)(23) of this code, said division shall be
enforced pursuant to § 34.40 of this code.



('72 Code, § 4-306) (Ord. 1238, passed 3-28-85; Am. Ord. 1943, passed
11-9-06)



§ 94.25  FORM OF PROPER SERVICE OF NOTICE.



   Service of said notice shall be by depositing a copy of said notice in
the United States Postal Service enclosed in a sealed envelope and with
postage thereon fully prepaid. Said mail shall be registered or certified and
addressed to said owner, occupant, lessee, and/or mortgagee at the last known
address of said parties as disclosed by the current tax rolls, and if there
is no known address, then in care of the property address. Service is
complete at the time of such deposit. OWNER as used herein shall mean any
person in possession and also any person having or claiming to have any legal
or equitable interest in said premises. The failure of any person to receive
such notice shall not affect the validity of the proceedings hereunder.



('72 Code, § 4-307) (Ord. 1238, passed 3-28-85)



§ 94.26  AFFECT OF FAILURE TO ABATE.



   If the nuisance is not abated within the period given in the notice,
the Mayor, or the Chief of Police or the Chief of Police's deputies, may
determine to proceed to abate the nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this
code.



(Neb. RS 17-123, 17-123.01, 18-1720) ('72 Code, § 4-308) (Ord. 1238, passed
3-28-85; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 11-9-06)



§ 94.27  HEARING.



   (A)   If the owner, as defined in § 94.25 hereof, of the premises
upon which the Mayor, or the Chief of Police or the Chief of Police's
deputies, has determined that there exists a nuisance, shall, within the time
period given to the owner by the Mayor or Chief of Police or the Chief of
Police's deputies for the abatement of said nuisance, file a written notice
with the City Clerk for a hearing before the City Council concerning such
determination, the City Clerk shall fix a date and time to hear the matter. 
The written notice shall include the name and address, including mailing
address, of the owner.  The City Clerk shall then issue a notice of the
hearing date and time by mailing a copy to the petitioner's address no later
than five days prior to the date of the hearing.



   (B)   At the time fixed in the Notice, the City Council shall hear
the testimony of all competent persons desiring to testify respecting the
condition constituting the nuisance, including the estimated cost of
abatement and other matters which may be pertinent. At the conclusion of the
hearing, the City Council shall, by resolution, declare its findings. If the
City Council so concludes, it may declare the condition existing to be a
nuisance and direct the Mayor or the Chief of Police to proceed to abate the
nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this code. Such final determination
shall be considered a final order of the city. Said notice shall be
substantially in the following form:



   NOTICE OF ADOPTION OF RESOLUTION NO.____



TO:



   YOU ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED THAT ON             , 20  , the City
Council of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska, by Resolution No.____ , after notice
and hearing as specified in said Resolution, did determine that the following
constitute a public nuisance, to wit:



Upon the following described real estate, to wit:



   You are granted         days from the date of this notice to abate
said nuisance. Failure to abate said nuisance shall result in said nuisance
being abated by the City of Wahoo and the cost of abatement shall be assessed
upon said premises and constitute a lien upon said premises until paid.



DATED                        , 20  .



   CITY OF WAHOO, NEBRASKA



   by                                            



      City Clerk



   CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE



   The undersigned hereby certifies that a copy of the foregoing Notice
was posted on the premises afore-described and mailed by registered or
certified U.S. Mail, postage prepaid, on this         day of       
                , 20  , to the following:



   CITY OF WAHOO, NEBRASKA



   by                                            



      City Clerk



('72 Code, § 4-309) (Ord. 1238, passed 3-28-85; Am. Ord. 1943, passed
11-9-06)



§ 94.28  EXTENSION OF TIME.



   The Mayor, or the Chief of Police or the Chief of Police's deputies,
may grant an extension of time to abate the nuisance if, in the Mayor's, or
the Chief of Police's or the Chief of Police's deputies opinion, good cause
for an extension exists.



('72 Code, § 4-310) (Ord. 1238, passed 3-28-85; Am. Ord. 1943, passed
11-9-06)



§ 94.29  ABATEMENT BY CITY.



   If the person fails to abate the nuisance within the time set forth,
the Mayor, or the Chief of Police or the Chief of Police's deputies may order
the abatement of the nuisance.



('72 Code, § 4-311) (Ord. 1238, passed 3-28-85; Am. Ord. 1943, passed
11-9-06)



§ 94.30  RECORD OF EXPENSES.



   The City Clerk shall keep an itemized account of the expenses involved
in abating the nuisance. The City Clerk shall post conspicuously on the
property and it shall also mail to the owner of the property a statement
showing the expense of the abatement, together with a notice of the time and
place when the statement will be submitted to the City Council for approval
and confirmation and at which time the City Council may consider the
objections and protests to the cost of the work. Said notice shall be
substantially in the following form:



   NOTICE OF HEARING ON EXPENSE



   OF ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE



TO:



   Pursuant to § 94.30 of the Municipal Code of the City of Wahoo,
Nebraska, you are hereby notified that the following is a statement showing
the expense incurred by the City of Wahoo in abating a nuisance upon the
following described real estate, to wit:



Said expenses are as follows:



   You are further notified that said Statement of Expenses shall be
submitted to the City Council for consideration on the             day
of               , 20  , at   o'clock -M.,                
                  , Wahoo, Nebraska, at which time you may appear to
object or protest the expense incurred in the abatement of said nuisance.



   CITY OF WAHOO, NEBRASKA



   by                                            



      City Clerk



   CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE



   The undersigned hereby certifies that a copy of the foregoing Notice
was posted on the premises afore-described and mailed by Registered or
Certified U. S. Mail, postage prepaid, this             day of     
            , 20  , to the following:



   CITY OF WAHOO, NEBRASKA



   by                                            



      City Clerk



('72 Code, § 4-312) (Ord. 1238, passed 3-28-85; Am. Ord. 1943, passed
11-9-06)



§ 94.31  HEARING ON STATEMENT OF EXPENSES.



   At the time fixed for hearing on the statement of expense, the City
Council shall consider the statement and protest or objections raised by the
persons liable to be assessed for the costs of the abatement. The City
Council may revise, correct, or modify the statement as it considers just and
thereafter shall confirm the statement by motion or resolution. The decision
of the City Council on all protests and objections which may be made shall be
final and conclusive. The procedure governing the hearing shall be provided
by § 94.27 of this chapter.



('72 Code, § 4-313) (Ord. 1238, passed 3-28-85)



§ 94.32  EXPENSES A SPECIAL ASSESSMENT AGAINST THE PROPERTY.



   If the property owner does not pay the expense of abating the nuisance
within five days after the City Council confirms the cost of abatement, the
costs shall become a special assessment against the real estate upon which
the nuisance was abated. The assessment shall continue until it is paid,
together with interest as set by the applicable statutes of the state of
Nebraska.



('72 Code, § 4-314) (Ord. 1238, passed 3-28-85)



§ 94.33  NOTICE OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT.



   The city shall file in the offices of the County Register of Deeds and
County Treasurer a certificate substantially in the following form:



   NOTICE OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT



   Under the authority of the Wahoo Municipal Code, the City did on    
                , 20  , abate a nuisance upon the real estate
hereinafter described and then on                     , 20  , did
assess the cost of the abatement upon the real estate. The City of Wahoo
claims a special assessment on the real estate for the expense of doing the
work in the amount of $            . This amount is a special
assessment against the real estate until it is paid, with interest as set by
the applicable statutes of the State of Nebraska, until discharged of record.
The real estate referred to above, and upon which the special assessment is
claimed is that certain parcel of land situated within the City of Wahoo,
County of Saunders, State of Nebraska and more particularly described as
follows:



DATED                       



   CITY OF WAHOO, NEBRASKA



   by                                            



      City Clerk



('72 Code, § 4-315) (Ord. 1238, passed 3-28-85)



§ 94.34  ALTERNATIVES.



   Nothing in the foregoing sections shall be deemed to prevent the Mayor,
or the Chief of Police or the Chief of Police's deputies from directing the
City Attorney to commence a civil and/or criminal proceeding to abate a
public nuisance under applicable civil or penal code provisions as an
alternative to the proceedings set forth herein.



('72 Code, § 4-316) (Ord. 1238, passed 3-28-85; Am. Ord. 1943, passed
11-9-06)



§ 94.35  PROCEDURE IN CASE OF EMERGENCY.



   When the conditions which constitute the nuisance pose an immediate
threat to the public peace, health, or safety, the Mayor, or the Chief of
Police or the Chief of Police's deputies may order the nuisance abated
immediately.



('72 Code, § 4-317) (Ord. 1238, passed 3-28-85; Am. Ord. 1943, passed
11-9-06)



§ 94.36  EXPENSES COLLECTED BY CIVIL ACTION.



   If the property owner does not pay the expense of abating the nuisance
within five days after the City Council confirms the cost of abatement, the
city may collect the costs associated with said abatement from the property
owner and enforce the collection by civil action of any court of competent
jurisdiction.



('72 Code, § 4-319) (Ord. 1361A, passed 2-28-91)



RODENTS AND INSECTS



§ 94.55  EXTERMINATION.



   It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, or occupant of any dwelling
or building to be responsible for the active and continued extermination of
any insects, rodents, or other pests therein, or on the premises.  In the
event that the owner, lessee, or occupant of any dwelling or building
neglects, fails, or otherwise refuses to control and actively exterminate the
insects, rodents, and other pests in and about his or her premises, the Board
of Health shall issue notice for that person to do so.  If the owner,
lessee, or occupant has not made a good faith effort to exterminate the pests
within five days, the premises shall be deemed to be a nuisance and a health
hazard.



('72 Code, § 4-501)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to abate nuisances, see Neb. RS 18-1720



   Nuisances prohibited, see Neb. RS 28-1321



§ 94.56  OCCUPANT.



   It shall be the responsibility of the occupant in a single dwelling
unit, whether or not the dwelling unit is located in a multiple unit
structure, to exterminate the rodents and insects infesting the premises when
it is found by the Board of Health that only the occupant's dwelling is so
infested.



('72 Code, § 4-502)



§ 94.57  OWNER.



   The owner of a multiple dwelling unit shall have the duty to
exterminate therein for rodents and insects when infestation exists in two or
more units or when infestation exists in shared or public areas of a multiple
unit structure when the infestation is due to failure by the owner to
maintain the dwelling in an insect and rodent proof condition.  The owner of
a single dwelling unit shall have the duty to exterminate therein
notwithstanding the occupancy of a renter or lessee when the infestation of
insects or rodents is due to the said owner's failure to construct or
maintain the premises in such a manner as to make it reasonably resistant to
the entrance and habitability of such pests.



('72 Code, § 4-503)



CHAPTER 95: PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY



Section



City Property



   95.001   Maintenance and control



   95.002   Opening, widening, improving or vacating



   95.003   Protection from damage



   95.004   Obstructions prohibited; permitted exceptions



   95.005   Weeds



   95.006   Sale and conveyance of real property



   95.0061   Sale and conveyance of personal property



   95.007   Special improvement district; assessment and creation
procedure



   95.008   Land adjacent to improvement district



   95.009   Acquisition of real property



   95.010   Acquisition of real property; appraisal



   95.011   Public works involving architecture or engineering;
requirements



Sidewalks



   95.030   Definitions



   95.031   (Reserved)



   95.032   Requirement to keep clean



   95.033   (Reserved)



   95.034   Construction by owner



   95.035   Repair



   95.036   Construction by city



   95.037   Construction bids



   95.038   Construction by petition



   95.039   Construction specifications



   95.040   Notice requirements



Streets



   95.055   Numbering required



   95.056   Names and numbers



   95.057   Excavation



   95.058   Harmful liquids



   95.059   Eave and gutter spouts



   95.060   Heavy equipment



   95.061   Construction notice



   95.062   Pipe lines and wires



   95.063   Construction assessment



   95.064   Petition for improvements



   95.065   Deferral from special assessments



   95.066   Driveway approaches



   95.067   Vacating public ways



Curb and Gutter



   95.080   Cutting curb



CITY PROPERTY



§ 95.001  MAINTENANCE AND CONTROL.



   The City Council shall have the care, supervision, and control of all
public highways, bridges, streets, alleys, public squares, and commons within
the city and shall cause the same to be kept open and in repair and free from
nuisances.



(Neb. RS 17-567(1)) ('72 Code, § 8-101)



§ 95.002  OPENING, WIDENING, IMPROVING, OR VACATING.



   (A)   (1)   The municipality shall have power to open, widen, or
otherwise improve or vacate any street, avenue, alley, or lane within the
limits of the municipality and also to create, open, and improve any new
street, avenue, alley, or lane.  All damages sustained by the citizens of
the municipality, or by the owners of the property therein, shall be
ascertained in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance.



      (2)   Whenever any street or alley is vacated, the same shall
revert to the owners of the abutting real estate, one-half on each side
thereof and become a part of such property, unless the city reserves title in
the ordinance vacating such street or alley.  If the title is retained by
the city, such property may be sold, conveyed, exchanged or leased upon such
terms and conditions as shall be deemed in the best interests of the city.



      (3)   When a portion of a street, avenue, alley, or lane is
vacated only on one side of the center thereof, the title to such land shall
vest in the owner of the abutting property and become a part of such
property, unless the city reserves title in the ordinance vacating such
street or alley.  If title is retained by the city or village, such property
may be sold, conveyed, exchanged or leased upon such terms and  conditions
as shall be deemed in the best interests of the city.



      (4)   When the municipality vacates all or any portion of a
street, avenue, alley, or lane, the Municipality shall, within 30 days after
the effective date of the vacation, file a certified copy of the vacating
ordinance with the Register of Deeds for the county in which the vacated
property is located to be indexed against all affected lots.



      (5)   The title to property vacated pursuant to this section
shall be subject to the following:



         (a)   There is reserved to the city the right to
maintain, operate, repair and renew public utilities existing at the time
title to the property is vacated there; and



         (b)   There is reserved to the city, any public
utilities and any cable television systems the right to maintain, repair,
renew and operate water mains, gas mains, pole lines, conduits, electrical
transmission lines, sound and signal transmission lines and other similar
services and equipment and appurtenances, including lateral connections or
branch lines, on, or below the surface of the ground that are existing as
valid easements at the time title to the property is vacated for the purposes
of serving the general public or the abutting properties and to enter upon
the premises to accomplish such purposes at any and all reasonable times.



(Neb. RS 17-558)



   (B)   The municipality shall have power to create, open, widen, or
extend any street, avenue, alley, off-street parking area, or other public
way, or annul, vacate, or discontinue the same. 



(Neb. RS 17-559)



('72 Code, § 8-102) (Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04)



§ 95.003  PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.



   No person shall remove, destroy, or tear down any signal, barricade,
fence, railing, or other device erected or constructed for the purpose of
protecting paving or any other work while in course of construction or after
it has been constructed on any of the streets, alleys, or public grounds. No
person shall drive over or upon or go upon any paving or other public works
in any of the streets, alleys, or public grounds while the same is protected
by any signal, barrier, fence, or railing, or until the same has been removed
by the contractors or by the duly authorized officials of the city. It is
hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to mar, deface, destroy,
remove, or carry away any street sign or highway marker erected either by
authority of the city or by the state of Nebraska, within the corporate
limits.



('72 Code, § 8-105) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.004  OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED; PERMITTED EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Trees and shrubs growing upon or near the lot line, or upon
public ground, and interfering with the use or construction of any public
improvements shall be deemed an obstruction under this chapter.  The roots
may be removed by the city at the expense of the owner of the property upon
which the tree is located should the owner fail, or neglect, after notice, to
do so.  It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm, or corporation
to obstruct, or encumber, by fences, gates, buildings, structures, or
otherwise, any of the streets, alleys, or sidewalks.  The public ways and
property shall be considered to be obstructed when the owner or occupant of
the adjacent property shall permit or suffer to remain on any premises owned
or controlled by him or her any hedge, shrubbery, bush, or similar growth
within two feet adjacent to the lot line whether there is a sidewalk abutting
or adjoining such premises or not.  It shall be the duty of owners and
occupants to at all times keep trimmed and pruned all such similar growth. 
Whenever any such growth is allowed to grow within two feet of the lot line
contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the City Council may pass a
resolution ordering the owner or occupant to remove such obstructions within
five days after having been served with a copy of the resolution by the city
stating that the city will do so and will charge the costs thereof to the
owner or occupant as a special assessment for improvements as herein
provided, or shall collect the same by civil suit brought in the name of the
city against the owner or occupant.  It shall be the duty of an owner or
occupant engaged in construction of any building or improvement upon or near
the public ways and property to have all excavations or exposures of any kind
protected and guarded by suitable guards or barricades by day and by warning
lights at night.  In the event of failure, neglect, or refusal to comply
with the provisions of this subchapter, it shall be the duty of the city to
stop all work upon the buildings and improvements until suitable guards are
erected and kept in the manner aforesaid.  Trees and shrubs growing upon the
lot line partially on public ground and partially upon the abutting property,
or wholly upon the abutting property, but so close to the lot line as to
interfere with the making of any public improvement or so that the roots
thereof interfere with any utility wires or pipe shall be deemed an
obstruction, and such trees, shrubs, and roots may be removed by the city
pursuant to the procedure prescribed above.  In the event the property owner
is a nonresident of the county in which the property lies, the city shall,
before levying any special assessment against that property, send a copy of
any notice required by law to be published by means of certified mail, return
receipt requested to the last known address of the nonresident property
owner.  The last known address shall be that address listed on the current
tax rolls at the time such required notice was first published.



('72 Code, § 8-106)



   (B)   Persons engaged in the erection, construction, reconstruction,
wrecking, or repairing of any building, or the construction, or repair, of a
sidewalk along any street, may occupy the public street space with such
building material and equipment as long as is necessary if such persons shall
make application to and receive a permit in writing from the city official in
charge of city streets to do so, provided that no permit for the occupancy of
the sidewalk space and more than one-third of the roadway of the public space
adjacent to the real estate on which said building is to be constructed,
erected, reconstructed, wrecked, or repaired shall be granted, and provided
further that a suitable passageway for pedestrians shall be maintained within
the public space included in the permit which shall be protected and lighted
in the manner required by the official issuing the permit.



('72 Code, § 8-107)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to remove obstructions, see Neb. RS 17-142 and 17-555



   Authority to regulate and abate obstructions, see Neb. RS 17-557 and
17-557.01



§ 95.005  WEEDS.



   It is hereby the duty of the Street Commissioner or his or her duly
authorized agent to view and inspect the sidewalk space within the corporate
limits for growing weeds during the growing season, and if rank and noxious
weeds are found growing thereon, he or she shall notify the owner or occupant
thereof to cut down such weeds as close to the ground as can be practicably
done and keep the weeds cut thereon in like manner during the growing season
for weeds, provided that any weeds growing in excess of six inches on any
sidewalk space shall be considered a violation of this section.  In the
event that the owner of the lot or parcel of land abutting said sidewalk
space within the city is a nonresident of the city or cannot be found
therein, the notice may be given to any person having the care, custody, or
control of such lot or parcel of land.  In the event that there can be found
no one within the city to whom notice can be given, it shall be the duty of
the Street Commissioner or his or her agent to post a copy of the notice on
the premises and then to cut or cause the weeds thereon to be cut as therein
provided and report the cost thereof in writing to the Council.  The cost
shall then be audited and paid by the city and the amount thereof shall be
assessed against the lot or parcel of land as a special tax thereon and shall
be collected as are other taxes of the city or may be recovered by civil suit
brought by the city against the owner of the parcel of land.  In the event
the property owner is a nonresident of the county in which the property lies,
the city shall, before levying any special assessment against that property,
send a copy of any notice required by law to be published by means of
certified mail, return receipt requested to the last known address of the
nonresident property owner.  The last known address shall be that address
listed on the current tax rolls at the time such required notice was first
published.



('72 Code, § 8-108)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 17-563



§ 95.006  SALE AND CONVEYANCE OF REAL PROPERTY.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (G) of this section, the power
of the city to convey any real property owned by it, including land used for
park purposes and public squares, except real property used in the operation
of public utilities, shall be exercised by resolution, directing the sale at
public auction or by sealed bid of such property and the manner and terms
thereof, except that such property shall not be sold at public auction or by
sealed bid when:



      (1)   Such property is being sold in compliance with the
requirements of federal or state grants or programs;



      (2)   Such property is being conveyed to another public
agency; or



      (3)   Such property consists of streets and alleys.



   (B)   The City Council may establish a minimum price for real
property at which bidding shall begin or shall serve as a minimum for a
sealed bid.



   (C)   After the passage of the resolution directing the sale, notice
of all proposed sales of property described in division (A) of this section
and the terms thereof shall be published once each week for three consecutive
weeks in a legal newspaper published in or of general circulation in the city.



   (D)   (1)   If within 30 days after the third publication of the
notice a remonstrance against such sale is signed by registered voters of the
City equal in number to 30% of the registered voters of the city voting at
the last regular municipal election held therein and is filed with the City
Council, such property shall not then, nor within one year thereafter, be
sold.  If the date for filing the remonstrance falls upon a Saturday,
Sunday, or legal holiday, the signatures shall be collected within the 30-day
period, but the filing shall be considered timely if filed or postmarked on
or before the next business day. 



      (2)   Upon the receipt of the remonstrance, the City Council,
with the aid and assistance of the Election Commissioner or County Clerk,
shall determine the validity and sufficiency of signatures on the
remonstrance.  The City Council shall deliver the remonstrance to the
Election Commissioner or County Clerk by hand carrier, by use of law
enforcement officials, or by certified mail, return receipt requested.



      (3)   Upon receipt of the remonstrance, the Election
Commissioner or County Clerk shall issue to the City Council a written
receipt that the remonstrance is in the custody of the Election Commissioner
or County Clerk.  The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall compare
the signature of each person signing the remonstrance with the voter
registration records to determine if each signer was a registered voter on or
before the date on which the remonstrance was filed with the City Council. 
The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall also compare the signer's
printed name, street and number or voting precinct, and city or post office
address with the voter registration records to determine whether the signer
was a registered voter.  The signature and address shall be presumed to be
valid only if the Election Commissioner or County Clerk determines that the
printed name, street and number or voting precinct, and city or post office
address matches the registration records and that the registration was
received on or before the date on which the remonstrance was filed with the
City Council.  The determinations of the Election Commissioner or County
Clerk may be rebutted by any credible evidence which the City Council finds
sufficient.  The express purpose of the comparison of names and addresses
with the voter registration records, in addition to helping to determine the
validity of the remonstrance, the sufficiency of the remonstrance, and the
qualifications of the signer, shall be to prevent fraud, deception, and
misrepresentation in the remonstrance process.



      (4)   Upon completion of the comparison of names and addresses
with the voter registration records, the Election Commissioner or County
Clerk shall prepare in writing a certification under seal setting forth the
name and address of each signer found not to be a registered voter and the
signature page number and line number where the name is found, and if the
reason for the invalidity of the signature or address is other than the
non-registration of the signer, the Election Commissioner or County Clerk
shall set forth the reason for the invalidity of the signature.  If the
Election Commissioner or County Clerk determines that a signer has affixed
his or her signature more than once to the remonstrance and that only one
person is registered by that name, the Election Commissioner or County Clerk
shall prepare in writing a certification under seal setting forth the name of
the duplicate signature and shall count only the earliest dated signature.



      (5)   The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall certify
to the City Council the number of valid signatures necessary to constitute a
valid remonstrance.  The Election Commissioner or County Clerk shall deliver
the remonstrance and the certifications to the City Council within 40 days
after the receipt of the remonstrance from the City Council.  The delivery
shall be by hand carrier, by use of law enforcement officials, or by
certified mail, return receipt requested.  Not more than 20 signatures on
one signature page shall be counted.



      (6)   The City Council shall, within 30 days after the receipt
of the remonstrance and certifications from the Election Commissioner or
County Clerk, hold a public hearing to review the remonstrance and
certifications and receive testimony regarding them.  The City Council
shall, following the hearing, vote on whether or not the remonstrance is
valid and shall uphold the remonstrance if sufficient valid signatures have
been received. 



   (E)   Real estate now owned or hereafter owned by the city may be
conveyed without consideration to the State of Nebraska for state armory
sites or, if acquired for state armory sites, shall be conveyed strictly in
accordance with the conditions of Neb. RS 18-1001 to 18-1006.



   (F)   Following:



      (1)   Passage of the resolution directing a sale,



      (2)   Publishing of the notice of the proposed sale, and



      (3)   Passing of the 30-day right-of-remonstrance period, the
property shall then be sold.



   Such sale shall be confirmed by passage of an ordinance stating the
name of the purchaser and terms of the sale.



(Neb. RS 17-503)



   (G)   Divisions (A) through (F) of this section shall not apply to
the sale of real property if the authorizing resolution directs the sale of
real property, the total fair market value of which is less than $5,000. 
Following passage of the resolution directing the sale of the property,
notice of the sale shall be posted in three prominent places within the city
for a period of not less than seven days prior to the sale of the property. 
The notice shall give a general description of the property offered for sale
and state the terms and conditions of sale.  Confirmation of the sale by
passage of an ordinance may be required.



(Neb. RS 17-503.01)



('72 Code, § 8-109) (Ord. 1214, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord. 1532, passed
1-25-96; Am. Ord. 1657, passed 7-23-98; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04)



§ 95.0061  SALE AND CONVEYANCE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.



   The power of the City to convey any personal property owned by it shall
be exercised by resolution directing the sale and the manner and terms
thereof. Following passage of the resolution directing the sale of the
property, notice of the sale shall be posted in three (3) prominent places
within the city for a period of not less than seven (7) days prior to the
sale of the property. If the fair market value of the property is greater
than $5000, notice of the sale shall also be published once in a legal
newspaper published in or of general circulation in the City at least seven
(7) days prior to the sale of the property. The notice shall give a general
description of the property offered for sale and state the terms and
conditions of sale.



(Neb. RS 17-503.02)  (Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04)



§ 95.007  SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT; ASSESSMENT AND CREATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The City Council may, by ordinance, create a special
improvement district for the purpose of replacing, reconstructing, or
repairing an existing street, alley, water line, sewer line, or any other
such improvement.



   (B)   Except as provided in Neb. RS 19-2428 to 19-2431, the City
Council shall have power to assess, to the extent of such benefits, the costs
of such improvements upon the properties found especially benefitted thereby,
whether or not such properties were previously assessed for the same general
purpose.  In creating such special improvement district, the City Council
shall follow procedures applicable to the creation and assessment of the same
type of improvement district as otherwise provided by law.



(Neb. RS 18-1751) ('72 Code, § 8-110) (Ord. 1285, passed 9-24-87)



§ 95.008  LAND ADJACENT TO IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT.



   Supplemental to any existing law on the subject, a city may include
land adjacent to such city when creating an improvement district, such as a
sewer, paving, water, water extension, or sanitary sewer extension
district.  The City Council shall have power to assess, to the extent of
special benefits, the costs of such improvements upon the properties found
especially benefitted thereby, except as provided in § 95.065.



(Neb. RS 19-2427)



('72 Code, § 8-111) (Ord. 1286, passed 9-24-87)



§ 95.009  ACQUISITION OF REAL PROPERTY.



   When acquiring an interest in real property by purchase or eminent
domain, the city shall do so only after the City Council has authorized the
acquisition by action taken in a public meeting after notice and public
hearing.



(Neb. RS 18-1755) ('72 Code, § 8-112) (Ord. 1488, passed 3-9-95)



§ 95.010  ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY; APPRAISAL.



   The city shall not purchase, lease-purchase, or acquire for
consideration real property having an estimated value of $100,000 or more
unless an appraisal of such property has been performed by a certified real
estate appraiser.



(Neb. RS 13-403) ('72 Code, § 8-113) (Ord. 1489, passed 3-9-95)



§ 95.011  PUBLIC WORKS INVOLVING ARCHITECTURE OR ENGINEERING; REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, the city
shall not engage in the construction of any public works involving
architecture or engineering unless the plans, specifications, and estimates
have been prepared and the construction has been observed by an architect, a
professional engineer, or a person under the direct supervision of an
architect, professional engineer, or those under the direct supervision of an
architect or professional engineer.



   (B)   Division (A) of this section shall not apply to the following
activities:



      (1)   Any public works project with contemplated expenditures
for the completed project that do not exceed $40,000;



(Neb. RS 81-3445, 81-3449(3), and 81-3453(3))



      (2)   Any alteration, renovation, or remodeling of a building
if the alteration, renovation, or remodeling does not affect architectural or
engineering safety features of the building;



(Neb. RS 81-3449(3) and 81-3453(4))



      (3)   Performance of professional services for itself if the
city appoints a city engineer or employs a full-time person licensed under
the Engineers and Architects Regulation Act who is in responsible charge of
architectural or engineering work;



(Neb. RS 81-3423, 81-3449(9), and 81-3453(6))



      (4)   The practice of any other certified trade or legally
recognized profession;



(Neb. RS 81-3449(11) and 81-3453(7))



      (5)   Earthmoving and related work associated with soil and
water conservation practices performed on any land owned by the city that is
not subject to a permit from the Department of Environmental Quality;



(Neb. RS 81-3449(13) and 81-3453(12))



      (6)   The work of employees and agents of the city performing,
in accordance with other requirements of law, their customary duties in the
administration and enforcement of codes, permit programs, and land use
regulations and their customary duties in utility and public works
construction, operation, and maintenance;



(Neb. RS 81-3449(14) and 81-3453(13))



      (7)   Those services ordinarily performed by subordinates
under direct supervision of a professional engineer or those commonly
designated as locomotive, stationary, marine operating engineers, power plant
operating engineers, or manufacturers who supervise the operation of or
operate machinery or equipment or who supervise construction within their own
plant;



(Neb. RS 81-3453(10))



      (8)   The construction of city water wells as defined in Neb.
RS 46-1212, the installation of pumps and pumping equipment into city water
wells, and the decommissioning of city water wells, unless such construction,
installation, or decommissioning is required by the city to be designed or
supervised by an engineer or unless legal requirements are imposed upon the
city as a part of a public water supply; and



(Neb. RS 81-3453(15))



      (9)   Any other activities described in Neb. RS 81-3449 to
81-3453.



(Ord. 1658, passed 7-23-98)



Statutory reference:



   Public service provider defined, 81-3423



SIDEWALKS



§ 95.030  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General.  The following definition shall be applied
throughout this subchapter. When no definition is specified, the normal
dictionary usage of the word shall apply.



('72 Code, § 8-201)



   (B)   Specific. The term "sidewalk space," as used herein, shall
mean that portion of a street between curb lines and adjacent property lines.



('72 Code, § 8-202)



§ 95.031 (RESERVED).



§ 95.032  REQUIREMENT TO KEEP CLEAN.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any lot or lots or
the owner of any vacant lot or lots within the corporate limits to allow
snow, sleet, mud, ice, or other substance to accumulate on the sidewalks or
to permit any snow, sleet, ice, mud, or other substance to remain upon the
sidewalk.  All sidewalks within the business district shall be cleaned
within five hours after the cessation of a storm, unless the storm or fall of
snow shall have taken place during the night, in which case the sidewalk
shall be cleaned before 8:30 a.m. the following day, provided that sidewalks
within the residential areas of the city shall be cleaned within 24 hours
after the cessation of the storm.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to place, push or deposit snow, sleet,
ice or mud or any debris from any private property onto the streets of the
city.



('72 Code, § 8-204) (Am. Ord. 1274, passed 3-12-87; Am. Ord. 1866, passed
1-22-04) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate, see Neb. RS 17-557



§ 95.033  (RESERVED).



§ 95.034  CONSTRUCTION BY OWNER.



   (A)   Any person desiring to construct, or cause to be constructed,
any sidewalk shall do so only as herein provided.  It shall be unlawful for
any person to construct any sidewalk without first having obtained a permit.



   (B)   The owner shall make application in writing for a permit and
file such application in the office of the City Clerk.  The permit shall
give a description of the lot or piece of land along which the sidewalk is to
be constructed.  The official in charge of sidewalks shall issue the desired
permit unless good cause shall appear why the permit should be denied,
provided that if it is desired to construct the sidewalk at any other than
the regularly prescribed location, grade, or elevation, the city official in
charge of sidewalks shall submit the application to the City Council who
shall determine whether the permit should be granted or denied.  It shall be
unlawful for any person to construct, or cause to be constructed the sidewalk
at any other location, grade, or elevation than so designated by the city. 
All sidewalks shall be built and constructed on the established grade or
elevation, and if there is no established grade, then on the grade or
elevation indicated by the city official in charge of sidewalks.



('72 Code, § 8-206) (Am. Ord. 1038, passed 6-12-75; Am. Ord. 1040, passed
10-9-75)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to construct and repair, see Neb. RS 17-522



§ 95.035  REPAIR.



   (A)   The Mayor and City Council may construct and repair sidewalks,
or cause the construction and repair of sidewalks in such manner as the Mayor
and City Council deems necessary and assess the expense thereof on the
property in front of which such construction or repairs are made, after
having given notice:



      (1)   By publication in one issue of a legal newspaper of
general circulation in the city; and



      (2)   By either causing a written notice to be served upon the
occupant in possession of the property involved or to be posted upon such
premises ten days prior to the commencement of such repair or construction. 



(Neb. RS 17-522)



   (B)   The notice shall:



      (1)   State that the governing body has ordered repair of the
sidewalk;



      (2)   Contain the city's estimate of the cost of the repair;



      (3)   Notify the property owner that he or she may, within ten
days after the date of publication of the notice, notify the city that he or
she will repair the sidewalk within 30 days after such date of publication;



      (4)   Notify the property owner that if he or she fails to so
notify the city within the ten days or, having so notified the city, fails to
repair the sidewalk within the 30 days, the city will cause the sidewalk to
be repaired and the expense thereof to be assessed against the property.



   (C)   (1)   Before the city imposes any special assessments for
sidewalk repair, a copy of the notice that is required to be published shall
be mailed to the last-known address of all nonresident property owners as
shown on the current tax rolls at the time such notice is first published.



(Neb. RS 13-310)



      (2)   The Municipal Clerk shall mail the notice by certified
mail with return receipt requested. 



(Neb. RS 13-312)



      (3)   For purposes of this division, NONRESIDENT PROPERTY
OWNER means any person or corporation whose residence and mailing address as
shown on the current tax rolls is outside the boundaries of the county in
which the property subject to assessment is located and who is a record owner
of the property.



(Neb. RS 13-314)



   (D)   All sidewalks shall be repaired in conformity with such plans
and specifications as may be approved by the governing body.



   (E)   Assessments made under this section shall be made and assessed
in the manner provided in Neb. RS 17-524.



('72 Code, § 8-207)



§ 95.036  CONSTRUCTION BY CITY.



   (A)   The City Council may, by resolution, order the construction of
a sidewalk on any lot or piece of ground within the city.  Notice of the
City Council's intention to construct the sidewalk shall be given by the City
Clerk by publication of notice one time in a legal newspaper of general
circulation in the city.



   (B)   A copy of the notice shall be personally served upon the
occupant in possession of such property, or, when personal service is not
possible, the notice shall be posted upon such premises ten days prior to the
commencement of construction.  The notice required in this section shall be
prepared by the City Attorney in accordance with the provisions of this
section.  Such service shall include a form of return evidencing personal
service or posting as herein required.



   (C)   The notice shall notify the owner of the premises of the
passage of the resolution ordering him or her to construct or cause to be
constructed a sidewalk within 30 days after the date of publication, and
further that if he or she fails to construct the sidewalk or cause the same
to be done within the time allowed, the city will cause the sidewalk to be
constructed, and the cost thereof shall be levied and assessed as a special
tax against the premises, provided that the notice shall contain the official
estimate of the cost of the construction, and no special assessment in excess
of this estimate shall be assessed against the property.  In the event the
property owner is a nonresident of the county in which the property lies, the
city shall, before levying any special assessment against that property, send
a copy of any notice required by law to be published by means of certified
mail, return receipt requested to the last known address of the nonresident
property owner.  The last known address shall be that address listed on the
current tax rolls at the time such required notice was first published.



('72 Code, § 8-208)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to construct and repair, see Neb. RS 17-522 and 17-523



§ 95.037  CONSTRUCTION BIDS.



   Whenever the city shall construct, widen, replace, or reconstruct any
sidewalk, notice prepared by the City Attorney, specifying the work to be
done and calling for bids for doing such work and supplying the necessary
materials and labor shall be published in at least one issue of a legal
newspaper of general circulation in the city, provided that bids so invited
shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk within ten days after the date
of publication.  Bids shall be opened at the next regular or special meeting
of the City Council, and the City Council shall then award the work to the
lowest responsible bidder.  Upon approval of the work, the City Council may
require the contractor to accept payment in certificates issued to him or her
by the City Clerk entitling him or her to all assessments or special taxes,
against such real estate whenever such assessments or special taxes, shall be
collected together with the interest or penalty collected thereon.  Each
certificate shall give the legal description of the lot, lots, or parcel of
ground against which the assessments or special taxes are assessed.  Such
certificate or certificates may be assigned and transferred, entitling the
holder to the same rights as if held by the original contractor.  The County
Treasurer shall pay over to such contractor or other holder of the
certificate or certificates all assessments or special taxes against such
real estate, together with the interest and penalty thereon, at any time upon
presentation of such certificate or certificates after said assessments or
special taxes against such real estate together with interest or penalty
thereon shall have been collected.



(Neb. RS 18-2442 et seq.) ('72 Code, § 8-209)



§ 95.038  CONSTRUCTION BY PETITION.



   If the owners of the record title representing more than 60% of the
front footage of the directly abutting property, subject to assessment for
sidewalk improvements, petition the City Council to make the same, the City
Council shall proceed in all things as though such construction had been
ordered by it.  Upon the petition of any freeholder who is an abutting owner
in fee simple of property subject to assessment for sidewalk improvements,
the City Council may order permanent sidewalks built in accordance with this
chapter upon the freeholder making, executing, and delivering to the city an
agreement to the effect that the petitioning freeholder will pay the
engineering service fee, that all other incidental construction costs until
paid shall be a perpetual lien upon the real estate along which the
freeholder desires such sidewalk to be constructed, and that the petitioner
gives and grants to the city the right to assess and levy the costs of such
construction against the freeholder's real estate abutting the sidewalk
improvement and promises to pay such costs with interest.  The total cost of
such improvement shall be levied, allocated, financed, and specially assessed
as provided by law.  In the event the property owner is a nonresident of the
county in which the property lies, the city shall, before levying any special
assessment against that property, send a copy of any notice required by law
to be published by means of certified mail, return receipt requested to the
last known address of the nonresident property owner.  The last known
address shall be that address listed on the current tax rolls at the time
such required notice was first published.



('72 Code, § 8-210)



Statutory reference:



   Petition by landowners, see Neb. RS 17-510



§ 95.039  CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS.



   All sidewalks and driveways shall be built in such specifications and
of such materials as may be prescribed by the Street Commissioner; provided,
that the same has previously been approved by the Mayor and City Council.
General specifications and material requirements shall be on file at the
office of the City Clerk for public inspection at any reasonable time.



('72 Code, § 8-211) (Am. Ord. 1038, passed 6-12-75; Am. Ord. 1040, passed
10-9-75) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.040  NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.



   The notice forms prescribed in this subchapter shall be in the form
prescribed by the City Attorney and service of such notice, except as
otherwise prescribed in this chapter, shall in all ways conform to his or her
directives.



('72 Code, § 8-212)



STREETS



§ 95.055  NUMBERING REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every building or residence fronting upon any of the streets
shall be numbered and the following system of numbering the same is hereby
adopted, to wit: All streets shall be numbered north and south from First
Street, and east and west from Broadway. Streets running north from First
Street shall be called north streets, and streets running south from First
Street shall be called south streets, as North Broadway and South Broadway,
North Linden Avenue and South Linden Avenue, and the like. Streets running
east from Broadway shall be called east streets, and those running west from
Broadway shall be called west streets, as East Fifth Street and West Fifth
Street, and the like. All odd numbers shall be given to the buildings and
residences on the south side, and all even numbers shall be given to the
buildings and residences on the north side of each street running east and
west; on all streets running north and south, the odd numbers shall be on the
west side, and the even numbers on the east side of each of such streets.
Numbers shall commence on all streets running south from said First Street
with 100 for the first number in the first block, 200 for the second block,
300 for the third block, and the like, and numbers shall commence on all
streets running north from said First Street with 100 for the first number in
the first block, 200 for the second block, 300 for the third block, and in
like manner to the corporate limits. Numbers shall commence on all streets
running east from Broadway with 100 for the first number in the first block,
200 for the first number in the second block, 300 in the third block, and in
like manner to the city limits; and numbers shall commence on all streets
running west from Broadway with 100 for the first number in the first block,
200 for the first number in the second block, 300 in the third block, and in
like manner to the city limits. On any street where there is a long block
directly opposite to two blocks, the numbers in the long block shall be made
to correspond with the blocks opposite. In all cases where there shall be
short streets, or streets which do not extend to the said basic or starting
streets, to wit: First Street and Broadway, such streets shall be taken to
have the numbered blocks which they would have and receive in case they did
extend to said First Street or Broadway, and shall be designated in their
numbers of buildings or residences as east or west, or north or south, as
they may be east or west from Broadway, or north or south of First Street.



   (B)   The space or distance allowed each number shall be eight feet.
To find a number, measure from the corner of the block, commencing with the
first number of the block, and count one number for each eight feet until
opposite the door, and the number for these eight feet shall be the number
for the door or building. Numbers shall be placed in such manner and shall be
of such type as may be prescribed by the City Council.



('72 Code, § 8-301)



§ 95.056  NAMES AND NUMBERS.



   The City Council may at any time, by ordinance, rename any street or
provide a name for any new street.  Buildings used for residence or business
purposes and located along such streets shall retain such numbers as the City
Council may require.  It shall be the duty of the city official in charge of
streets, upon the erection of any new building or buildings, to assign the
proper numbers to the building or buildings and give notice to the owner or
owners and occupant or occupants of the same.



('72 Code, § 8-302)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to improve, see Neb. RS 17-509



§ 95.057  EXCAVATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to make an excavation in any street
or streets for any purpose whatsoever unless a written permit is issued by
the chief city street official authorizing such excavations.



(Neb. RS 17-567) ('72 Code, § 8-303) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.058  HARMFUL LIQUIDS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to leak in the
gutter of any street, waste gasoline, kerosene, or high lubricating oils,
which damage or act as a solvent upon said streets.



(Neb. RS 17-557) ('72 Code, § 8-304) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.059  EAVE AND GUTTER SPOUTS.



   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any
dwelling house or business building within the limits of the city where the
dwelling or building abuts on any sidewalk or street without providing proper
guttering and eave spouts to receive the waste waters that collect on the
sidewalks and streets.  All eave spouts erected on any dwelling house or
business building shall be constructed to drain into the alleys or shall be
buried beneath the sidewalks and drain into the streets where it is found to
be impossible to drain the eave spouts into the alley.



('72 Code, § 8-305)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 17-557



§ 95.060  HEAVY EQUIPMENT.



   It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person or persons to move or
operate heavy equipment across any curb, gutter, bridge, culvert, sidewalk,
crosswalk, or crossing on any unpaved street without first having protected
such curb, gutter, bridge, culvert, sidewalks, crosswalk, or crossing with
heavy plank sufficient in strength to warrant against the breaking or
damaging of such curb, gutter, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, or
crossing.  Hereafter, it shall be unlawful to run, drive, move, operate, or
convey over or across any paved street a vehicle, machine, or implement with
sharp discs or sharp wheels that bear upon the pavement, with wheels having
cutting edges, with wheels having lugs, any protruding parts, or bolts
thereon that extend beyond a plain tire so as to cut, mark, mar, indent, or
otherwise injure or damage any pavement, gutter, or curb, provided that,
where heavy vehicles, structures, and machines move along paved or unpaved
streets, the city police are hereby authorized and empowered to choose the
route over which the moving of such vehicles, structures, or machines will be
permitted and allowed.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply
to pneumatic tires with metal or metal-type studs not exceeding 5/16 of an
inch in diameter inclusive of the stud-casting with an average protrusion
beyond the tread surface of not more than 7/64 of an inch between November 1
and March 15, provided that school buses and emergency vehicles shall be
permitted to use metal or metal- type studs all year; it shall be permissible
to use farm machinery with tires having protuberances which will not injure
the streets.  It shall be permissible to use a rubber tired crane with a
fixed load when such vehicle will be transported on a state highway or on any
road within the corporate limits of the city, the city in which the crane is
intended to be transported has authorized a one-day permit for the
transportation of the crane and specified the route to be used and the hours
during which the crane can be transported, such vehicle is escorted by
another vehicle or vehicles assigned by the city, and such vehicle's gross
weight does not exceed the limits set out in Neb. RS 60-6,294(10), and it
shall be permissible to use tire chains of reasonable proportions upon any
vehicle when required for safety because of snow, ice, or other condition
tending to cause a vehicle to slide or skid.



('72 Code, § 8-306) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Tire requirements, see Neb. RS 60-6,250



   Rubber-tired cranes, see Neb. RS 60-6,288(2)(j)



§ 95.061  CONSTRUCTION NOTICE.



   The Street Commissioner shall notify the owners in fee simple of real
estate abutting a street, alley, or a part thereof which is to be put under
contract for paving or repaving.  Notice shall also be given to all gas,
electric service, and telephone companies.  Notice shall also be given to
all consumers of gas, water, and sewer services which will be discontinued
during such construction.  The notice shall be published one time in a legal
newspaper at least 20 days prior to the beginning of such construction by the
party undertaking such construction, and the notice shall state at what date
connections must be made and excavation completed.  All gas, water, sewer,
and underground connections must be made prior to the paving or repaving of
the street under construction.  After expiration of such time, permits for
excavation will not be issued, nor will excavation be allowed, until after
the completion of the pavement in the street or alley, and the formal final
acceptance thereof by the proper officials of the city.



('72 Code, § 8-307)



Statutory reference:



   Notice required, see Neb. RS 17-522



§ 95.062  PIPE LINES AND WIRES.



   Poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines, and other appurtenances of public
service companies shall be located, or erected over, upon, or under the
streets, alleys, and common grounds of the city.  Application for location
of the above shall be made to the City Council in writing.  Approval by that
body shall be issued in writing.  Any public service company granted a
right-of-way for the erection and maintenance of poles, conduits, gas mains,
pipe lines, and wires shall at all times erect and locate their poles, wires,
gas mains, pipe lines, and other appurtenances at such places and in such
manner as shall be designated by the City Council.  Such poles, wires, gas
mains, pipe lines, and other appurtenances, shall be removed or relocated by
the companies at their own expense when requested to do so by the City
Council.  Any such relocation shall be ordered by resolution of the City
Council, and the City Clerk shall notify any and all companies affected. 
The companies shall, within 24 hours after receiving notice, at their own
expense, cause the poles, wires, gas mains, pipe lines, or other
appurtenances to be removed.  The City Council shall designate another
location as closely as possible where the poles, wires, gas mains, pipe
lines, or other appurtenances, may be reset or placed.  All poles, wires,
gas mains, pipe lines, or other appurtenances, shall be reset, placed, or
erected in such a manner that they will not interfere with the water system,
sewerage system, poles, wires, and mains of any public utility, adjacent
buildings, or with travel on the public ways and property.  Whenever
possible, all pole lines, wires, gas mains, pipe lines, or appurtenances
shall be confined to the alleys of the city.



('72 Code, § 8-308) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.063  CONSTRUCTION ASSESSMENT.



   To defray the costs and expenses of street improvements, as may be
authorized by law, the City Council shall have power and authority to levy
and collect special taxes and assessments upon the lots and pieces of ground
adjacent to, abutting upon, or especially benefitting from, the street,
avenue, alley, or sidewalk in whole or in part opened, widened, curbed,
curbed and guttered, graded, paved, repaired, graveled, macadamized, parked,
extended, constructed, or otherwise improved or repaired.  The City Council
sitting as the Board of Equalization shall review all such improvements in
accordance with the procedure provided by law.  All special assessments
shall be made by the City Council at a regular or special meeting by
resolution, taking into account the benefits derived or injuries sustained in
consequence of such improvements and the amount charged against same.  The
vote shall be recorded in the minutes.  Notice of the time of holding such
meeting and the purpose for which it is to be held shall be published in some
legal newspaper published, or of general circulation, in the city at least
four weeks before the same shall be held.  In lieu of such aforementioned
notice, personal service may be had upon the persons owning or occupying the
property to be assessed.  Such assessments shall be known as "special
assessments for improvements" and with the cost of notice shall be levied and
collected as a special tax in addition to the taxes for general revenue
purposes, subject to the same penalties and collected in like manner as other
city taxes and shall be certified to the County Clerk by the City Clerk
forthwith after the date of levy, for collection by the Treasurer of the
county unless otherwise specified.  After it shall become delinquent said
assessment shall draw interest at the legal interest rate per annum.  In the
event the property owner is a nonresident of the county in which the property
lies, the city shall, before levying any special assessment against that
property, send a copy of any notice required by law to be published by means
of certified mail, return receipt requested to the last known address of the
nonresident property owner.  The last known address shall be that address
listed on the current tax rolls at the time such required notice was first
published.



('72 Code, § 8-309)



Statutory reference:



   Assessments, see Neb. RS 17-511 and 17-524



   Agricultural land within improvement districts, see Neb. RS 19-2428
through 19-2431



   Maximum interest rates, see Neb. RS 45-104.01



§ 95.064  PETITION FOR IMPROVEMENTS.



   Whenever a petition signed by the owners of record title representing
more than 60% of the front footage of the property directly abutting upon the
street, streets, alley, alleys, public way, or the public grounds proposed to
be improved, shall be presented and filed with the City Clerk, petitioning
therefor, the City Council shall by ordinance create a paving, graveling, or
other improvement district or districts, and shall cause such work to be done
or such improvement to be made, and shall contract therefor, and shall levy
assessments on the lots and parcels of land abutting on or adjacent to such
street, streets, alley, or alleys, especially benefitted thereby in such
district in proportion to such benefits, to pay the cost of such
improvement.  The City Council shall have the discretion to deny the
formation of the proposed district when the area has not previously been
improved with a water system, sewer system, and grading of streets.  If the
City Council should deny a requested improvement district formation, it shall
state the grounds for such denial in a written letter to interested parties.



(Neb. RS 17-510) ('72 Code, § 8-310) (Ord. 1204, passed 9-22-83)



§ 95.065  DEFERRAL FROM SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.



   (A)   Whenever the City Council of a city creates an improvement
district as specified in § 95.010 which includes land adjacent to the city
which is within an agricultural use zone and is used exclusively for
agricultural use, the owners of record title of such adjacent land may apply
for a deferral from special assessments.  For purposes of this section, the
terms agricultural use and agricultural use zone shall have the meaning
specified in Neb. RS 77-1343.



(Neb. RS 19-2428)



   (B)   (1)   Any owner of record title eligible for the deferral
granted by this section shall, to secure such assessment, make application to
the City Council within 90 days after creation of an improvement district as
specified in § 95.009.  Any owner of record title who makes application for
the deferral provided by this section shall notify the County Register of
Deeds of such application in writing prior to approval by the City Council.



      (2)   The City Council shall approve the application of any
owner of record title upon determination that the property:



         (a)   Is within an agricultural use zone and is used
exclusively for agricultural use; and



         (b)   The owner has met the requirements of this section.



(Neb. RS 19-2429)



   (C)   The deferral provided for in this section shall be terminated
upon any of the following events:



      (1)   Notification by the owner of record title to the City
Council to remove such deferral;



      (2)   Sale or transfer to a new owner who does not make a new
application within 60 days of the sale or transfer, except as provided in
this division (C) of this section;



      (3)   Transfer by reason of death of a former owner to a new
owner who does not make application within 125 days of the transfer;



      (4)   The land is no longer being used as agricultural land; or



      (5)   Change of zoning to other than an agricultural zone.



(Neb. RS 19-2430)



   (D)   Whenever property which has received a deferral pursuant to
this section becomes disqualified for such deferral, the owner of record
title of such property shall pay to the city an amount equal to the total
amount of special assessments which would have been assessed against such
property, to the extent of special benefits, had such deferral not been
granted.  Interest upon the special assessments shall be deferred and shall
accrue from the time the property becomes disqualified for deferral.  The
interest rate shall be the same as was charged to other property owners
within the special assessment district in question and amortized over a term
to coincide with the original amortization period.



(Neb. RS 19-2431(1))



   (E)   In cases where the deferral provided by this section is
terminated as a result of a sale or transfer described in subdivision (C)(2)
or (3) of this section, the lien for assessments and interest shall attach as
of the day preceding such sale or transfer.



(Neb. RS 19-2431(2))



('72 Code, § 8-311) (Ord. 1205, passed 9-22-83; Am. Ord. 1283, passed
9-24-87)



§ 95.066  DRIVEWAY APPROACHES.



   (A)   The Street Commissioner may require the owner of property
served by a driveway approach constructed or maintained upon the street
right-of-way to repair or replace any such driveway approach which is
cracked, broken, or otherwise deteriorated to the extent that it is causing
or is likely to cause damage to or interfere with any street structure,
including pavement or sidewalks.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall give the property owner notice by
registered letter or certified mail, directed to the last-known address of
such owner or the agent of such owner, directing the repair or replacement of
such driveway approach.  If within 30 days of mailing such notice the
property owner fails or neglects to cause such repairs or replacements to be
made, the Street Commissioner may cause such work to be done and assess the
cost upon the property served by such approach.



(Neb. RS 18-1748) ('72 Code, § 8-312) (Ord. 1265, passed 11-13-86)



§ 95.067  VACATING PUBLIC WAYS.



   (A)   SPECIAL DAMAGES shall mean only those losses or damages or
injuries which a property owner suffers that are peculiar or special or
unique to his or her property and which result from the City Council vacating
a street, avenue, alley, lane, or similar public way.  SPECIAL DAMAGES shall
not mean those losses or damages or injuries that a property owner suffers
that are in common with the rest of the city or public at large, even though
those losses or damages or injuries suffered by the property owner are
greater in degree than the rest of the city or public at large.



   (B)   Whenever the City Council decides that it would be in the best
interests of the city to vacate a street, avenue, alley, lane, or similar
public way, the City Council shall comply with the following procedure:



      (1)   Notice.  Notice shall be given to all abutting property
owners either by first class mail to their last known address or if there is
no known address then by publishing the notice in a newspaper that is of
general circulation in the city.  The content of the notice shall advise the
abutting property owners that the City Council will consider vacating such
street, avenue, alley, lane, or similar public way at its next regular
meeting or, if a special meeting is scheduled for such discussion, then the
date, time, and place of such meeting.



      (2)   Consent; waiver.  The City Council may have all the
abutting property owners sign a form stating that they consent to the action
being taken by the City Council and waive their right of access.  The
signing of such form shall have no effect on claims for special damages by
the abutting property owners but shall create the presumption that the City
Council's action was proper.  If the abutting property owners do not sign
the consent/waiver form, the City Council may still proceed with vacating the
street, avenue, alley, lane, or similar public way under the authority
granted by Neb. RS 17-558 and 17-559.



      (3)   Ordinance.  The City Council shall pass an ordinance
that includes essentially the following provisions:



         (a)   A declaration that the action is expedient for the
public good or in the best interests of the city.



         (b)   A statement that the city will have an easement
for maintaining all utilities.



         (c)   A method or procedure for ascertaining special
damages to abutting property owners.



   (C)   The Mayor shall appoint three or five or seven disinterested
residents of the city to a special commission to ascertain the amount of
special damages that the abutting property owners are entitled to receive and
which resulted from the City Council vacating the street, avenue, alley,
lane, or similar public way.  The appointees of the special commission shall
be approved by the City Council.  Only special damages shall be awarded to
the abutting property owners.



   (D)   In determining the amount of compensation to award the
abutting property owners as special damages, the commission shall use the
following rule:



An abutting property owner is entitled to recover as compensation the
difference between the value of the property immediately before and
immediately after the vacating of such street, avenue, alley, lane, or
similar public way.  If no difference in value exists, the abutting property
owner is entitled to no compensation.



('72 Code, §§  8-313, 8-314) (Ord. 1270, passed 11-13-86; Am. Ord. 1269,
passed 11-13-86; Am. Ord. 1848, passed 9-25-03; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 17-558 and 17-559



CURB AND GUTTER



§ 95.080  CUTTING CURB.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut into any paving, curb, or
sidewalk for the purpose of constructing a driveway or any other purpose
whatsoever without first having obtained a written permit from the Building
Inspector therefor.  Before any person shall obtain a permit, the person
shall inform the City Clerk of the place where such cutting is to be done,
and it shall be the Utilities General Manager's duty to inspect the place of
entry into the paving, sidewalk, or curb, before the same is cut.  When
cutting into any paving, it shall be the duty of the party to cut the paving
under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the City Council or
the City Engineer.  When the applicant is ready to close the opening made,
the applicant shall inform the Street Commissioner, who shall supervise and
inspect the materials used and the work done in closing the opening.  It
shall be discretionary with the City Council to order the Street
Commissioner, under the supervision and inspection of the Utilities General
Manager or the committee of the City Council on the streets and alleys, to do
the work of cutting and closing the paving and charge the costs thereof to
the party who obtained such permit.  The City Council may consent to the
work of cutting and closing the paving to be done by the party holding such
permit.  Before any permit is issued by the City Council the applicant for
such permit shall deposit with the City Treasurer a sum set by resolution of
the City Council for all paving, curb, or sidewalk to be cut.  Such sum
shall be set on a per square foot cost of construction basis.  The deposit
shall be retained by the city for the purpose of replacing the paving, curb,
or sidewalk, in the event that the work is done by the city.  In the event
that the city elects to require the applicant to replace the paving, curb, or
sidewalk, the deposit shall be retained by the city until the work is
completed to the satisfaction of the Utilities General Manager or of the
committee of the City Council on streets and alleys.  In addition to making
the deposit above set forth, the applicant shall, before any permit is
issued, execute a bond to the city with a good and sufficient surety or
sureties to be approved by the City Council in a sum set by resolution of the
City Council.



('72 Code, § 8-401)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 17-567



CHAPTER 96: ANIMALS



Section



General Provisions



   96.01   Running at large



Dogs



   96.15   Owner defined



   96.16   Animal shelter



   96.17   License



   96.18   License tags



   96.19   Wrongful licensing



   96.20   Running at large



   96.21   Capture impossible



   96.22   Liability of owner



   96.23   Impounding



   96.24   Rabies suspected; impoundment



   96.25   Kennel license



   96.26   Barking and offensive



   96.27   Guide dogs, hearing aid dogs, and service dogs



Dangerous Dogs



   96.40   Definitions



   96.41   Restrained



   96.42   Confinement



   96.43   Failure to comply



   96.44   Proof of insurance



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 96.01  RUNNING AT LARGE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper, or harborer of any
animal, or any person having the charge, custody, or control thereof, to
permit a horse, mule, cow, sheep, goat, swine, or other animal to be driven
or run at large on any of the public ways and property, or upon the property
of another, or to be tethered or staked out in such a manner so as to allow
such animal to reach or pass into any public way.



(Neb. RS 17-547) ('72 Code, § 6-201)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow poultry,
chickens, turkeys, geese, or any other fowls to run at large within the
corporate limits, except in enclosed places on private property.



(Neb. RS 17-547) ('72 Code, § 6-202)



DOGS



§ 96.15  OWNER DEFINED.



   Any person who shall harbor or permit any dog to be for ten days or
more in or about his or her house, store, or enclosure, or to remain to be
fed, shall be deemed the owner and possessor of such dog and shall be deemed
to be liable for all penalties herein prescribed.



(Neb. RS 54-606, 71-4401) ('72 Code, § 6-104)



§ 96.16  ANIMAL SHELTER.



   The City Animal Shelter shall be safe, suitable, and conveniently
located for the impounding, keeping, and destruction of dogs.  The said
shelter shall be sanitary, ventilated, and lighted.



(Neb. RS. 17-548) ('72 Code, § 6-110)



§ 96.17  LICENSE.



   (A)   Any person who shall own, keep, or harbor a dog over the age
of six months within the city shall within 30 days after acquisition of the
dog acquire a license for each such dog annually by or before May 1 of each
year.  The tax shall be delinquent from and after May 31, and an additional
delinquency fee of $20 shall thereafter be assessed in addition to the annual
license fee; provided, the possessor of any dog brought into or harbored
within the corporate limits subsequent to May 1 of any year shall be liable
for the payment of the dog tax levied herein.  Licenses shall be issued by
the City Clerk upon the payment of a license fee of $5 for dog. The license
shall not be transferable, and no refund will be allowed in case of death,
sale, or other disposition of the licensed dog.



   (B)   The owner shall state at the time the application is made and
upon printed forms provided for such purpose his or her name and address and
the name, breed, color, and sex of each dog owned and kept by the owner.  A
certificate that the dog has had a rabies shot, effective for the ensuing
year of the license, shall be presented when the license is applied for, and
no license or tag shall be issued until the certificate is shown.



('72 Code, § 6-101) (Am. Ord. 1242, passed 7-25-85; Am. Ord. 1346, passed
7-5-90) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 17-526 and 54-603



§ 96.18  LICENSE TAGS.



   (A)   Upon the payment of the license fee, the person designated by
the licensing authority shall issue to the owner of a dog a license
certificate and a metallic tag for each dog so licensed.  The metallic tags
shall be properly attached to the collar or harness of all dogs so licensed
and shall entitle the owner to keep or harbor the said dog until April 30
following such licensing.



   (B)   Dogs must wear identification tags or collars at all times
when off the premises of the owner.  In the absence of a tag, a dog shall be
regarded as a stray whenever off its owner's property.



   (C)   In the event that a license tag is lost and upon satisfactory
evidence that the original plate or tag was issued in accordance with the
provisions herein, the person designated by the licensing authority shall
issue a duplicate or new tag for the balance of the year for which the
license tax has been paid and shall charge and collect a fee set by
resolution of the City Council for each duplicate or new tag so issued.  All
license fees and collections shall be immediately credited to the General
Fund.  It shall be the duty of the person designated by the licensing
authority to issue tags of a suitable design that are different in appearance
each year.



('72 Code, § 6-102)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 17-526 and 54-603



§ 96.19  WRONGFUL LICENSING.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper, or harborer of any dog to
permit or allow such dog to wear any license, metallic tag, or other city
identification than that issued by the City Clerk for dogs.



(Neb. RS 17-526, 54-603) ('72 Code, § 6-103) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.20  RUNNING AT LARGE.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to allow such dog to run
at large at any time within the corporate limits of the city.  It shall be
the duty of the city police to cause any dog found to be running at large
within the city to be taken up and impounded.  RUNNING AT LARGE shall mean
any dog found off the premises of the owner, and not under control of the
owner or a responsible person, either by leash, cord, chain, wire, rope,
cage, or other suitable means of physical restraint.



('72 Code, § 6-105) (Am. Ord. 1066, passed 3-11-76)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 17-526



   Dog collars required, see Neb. RS 54-605



Cross-reference:



   Other animals, see § 96.01



§ 96.21  CAPTURE IMPOSSIBLE.



   The city police shall have the authority to kill any animals showing
vicious tendencies, or characteristics of rabies which make capture
impossible because of the danger involved.



(Neb. RS 54-605) ('72 Code, § 6-106)



§ 96.22  LIABILITY OF OWNER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow a dog owned, kept, or
harbored by the owner, or under his or her charge or control, to injure or
destroy any real or personal property of any description belonging to another
person.  The owner or possessor of any such dog, in addition to the usual
judgment upon conviction, may be made to be liable to the persons so injured
in an amount equal to the value of the damage so sustained.



('72 Code, § 6-108) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Statutory liability, see Neb. RS 54-601



   Joint liability, see Neb. RS 54-602



§ 96.23  IMPOUNDING.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the person designated by the licensing
authority to capture, secure, and remove in a humane manner to any animal
shelter or veterinarian any dog violating any of the provisions of this
subchapter.  Stray dogs that are roaming at large, remaining on private
property without consent of the owner or tenant, or remaining on or
frequenting public property, are deemed to be the property of the city.  If
the stray dog cannot be captured by conventional means, every police or
humane officer is authorized to use any means necessary to remove the dog. 
The dogs so impounded shall be treated in a humane manner and shall be
provided with a sufficient supply of food and fresh water each day.  Each
impounded dog shall be kept and maintained at the pound for a period of not
less than five days unless reclaimed earlier by the owner.  The day on which
the animal was impounded shall count as one day and any part of any day
during which the animal is impounded shall also count as a full day.  Before
a dog is released from impoundment, the items listed in division (B) below
shall be met.  Any unclaimed impounded dog, after being kept for no more
than five days, will become the property of the city or of the Humane Society
and shall be placed for adoption in a suitable home or humanely destroyed.



   (B)   Before releasing a dog from impoundment, except an impoundment
due to rabies or suspect of rabies, the following items must be met:



      (1)   The dog must be current regarding its rabies
vaccination.  If the dog is not current regarding said vaccination, it shall
be given a rabies shot, at the owner's expense.



      (2)   The dog shall have a current license of the city as
stated in §§ 96.17 and 96.18.



      (3)   The owner shall pay the animal shelter's or
veterinarian's daily boarding fee.



      (4)   The owner shall pay to the city a general impoundment
fee as set forth by resolution.



      (5)   The owner shall pay to the city a restitution fee as set
forth by resolution to reimburse the cost of employing a humane officer, if
so employed, at the time of impoundment.



('72 Code, § 6-109)  (Am. Ord. 1804, passed 5-23-02)



Statutory reference:



   Pounds authorized, see Neb. RS 17-548



   Pounds created by rabies control authorities, see Neb. RS 71-4408



§ 96.24  RABIES SUSPECTED; IMPOUNDMENT.



   Any dog suspected of being afflicted with rabies, or any dog not
vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter which has bitten
any person and caused an abrasion of the skin, shall be seized and impounded
under the supervision of the Board of Health for a period of not less than
ten days.  If upon examination by a veterinarian, the dog has no clinical
signs of rabies at the end of such impoundment, it may be released to the
owner, or, in the case of an unlicensed dog, it shall be disposed of in
accordance with the provisions herein.  If the owner of the said dog has
proof of vaccination, it shall be confined by the owner or some other
responsible person for a period of at least ten days, at which time the dog
shall be examined by a licensed veterinarian.  If no signs of rabies are
observed, the dog may be released from confinement.



(Neb. RS 71-4406) ('72 Code, § 6-111)



§ 96.25  KENNEL LICENSE.



   (A)   Definition of terms.  For the purpose of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      DOG.  Shall be intended to mean both male and female.



      OWNER.  Person or persons, firms, association, or corporation
owning, possessing, keeping, or harboring a dog, or permitting same to be or
remain upon or about his or her premises.



      KENNEL.  The ownership, possession, keeping, or harboring of
three or more dogs, over the age of six months, or permitting three or more
dogs over the age of six months to be or remain upon his or her premises.



   (B)   Licensing required.  Any person or persons maintaining a dog
kennel, as defined above, shall be required to obtain a kennel license from
the City Clerk. A kennel license shall be issued by the City Clerk upon
payment of a kennel license fee of $25 dollars per year. At the time of
application for such kennel license, the owner shall state, upon printed
forms provided for such purpose, the owner's name and address. The person
maintaining such kennel shall license the same by the first of May of each
year. The license shall be delinquent from and after May 31st. Thereafter a
delinquency penalty of $20 shall thereafter be assessed in addition to the
annual license fee; provided, any dog kennel created within the corporate
limits subsequent to May 1st of any year shall be liable for the payment of
the dog kennel license fee levied herein.



   (C)   Exceptions.  It is specifically provided that any person or
persons maintaining a kennel, as defined above, shall not have to comply with
§ 96.17 requiring the licensing of each dog in said kennel but it is
specifically provided that each dog in said kennel, over the age of six
months, shall have a certificate or other substantial proof evidencing that
each dog in said kennel is currently vaccinated for rabies, said certificate
or other substantial proof to be available for inspection to officers of the
City Police Department upon request.



(Neb. RS 17-526) ('72 Code, § 6-113) (Ord. 1187, passed 9-9-82; Am. Ord.
1346, passed 7-5-90)



§ 96.26  BARKING AND OFFENSIVE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor any dog
which by loud, continued, or frequent barking, howling, or yelping shall
annoy or disturb any neighborhood, or person, or which habitually barks at or
chases pedestrians, drivers, or vehicles while they are on any public
sidewalks, streets, or alleys in the city.  Upon the written complaint or
telephone complaint of any affected person that any dog owned by the person
named in the complaint is an annoyance or disturbance, or otherwise violates
the provisions of this section, the city police shall investigate the
complaint and, if in their opinion the situation warrants, shall notify the
owner to silence and restrain such dog.  Upon a second violation, within any
30-day period, the city police shall issue a citation to the owner of the dog
for violation of this section.  The provisions of this section shall not be
construed to apply to the City Animal Shelter.



(Am. Ord. 1804, passed 5-23-02) 



§ 96.27  GUIDE DOGS, HEARING AID DOGS, AND SERVICE DOGS.



   (A)   Exempt from license tax. Every service animal shall be
licensed as required by the city code, but no license tax shall be charged.
Upon the retirement or discontinuance of the animal as a service animal, the
owner of the animal shall be liable for the payment of the required license
tax.



   (B)   Misdemeanor; violence on a service dog; interference with a
service dog. 



      (1)   A person commits the offense of violence on a service
dog when he or she intentionally injures, harasses, or threatens to injure or
harass or attempts to intentionally injure, harass, or threaten a dog that he
or she knows or has reason to believe is a dog guide for a blind or
visually-impaired person, a hearing aid dog for a deaf or hearing-impaired
person, or a service dog for a physically limited person.



      (2)   A person commits the offense of interference with a
service dog when he or she intentionally impedes, interferes, or threatens to
impede or interfere or attempts to intentionally impede, interfere, or
threaten to impede or interfere with a dog that he or she knows or has reason
to believe is a dog guide for a blind or visually-impaired person, a hearing
aid dog for a deaf or hearing-impaired person, or a service dog for a
physically limited person.



      (3)   Evidence that the defendant initiated or continued
conduct toward a dog as described in subsections (1) or (2) of this section
after being requested to avoid or discontinue such conduct by the blind,
visually-impaired, deaf, hearing-impaired, or physically limited person being
served or assisted by the dog shall create a rebuttable presumption that the
conduct of the defendant was initiated or continued intentionally.



      (4)   For purposes of this section:



         (a)   BLIND PERSON means a person with totally impaired
vision or with vision, with or without correction, which is so severely
impaired that the primary means of receiving information is through other
sensory input, including, but not limited to braille, mechanical
reproduction, synthesized speech, or readers;



         (b)   DEAF PERSON means a person with totally impaired
hearing or with hearing, with or without amplification, which is so severely
impaired that the primary means of receiving spoken language is through other
sensory input, including, but not limited to lip reading, sign language,
finger spelling, or reading;



         (c)   HEARING-IMPAIRED PERSON means a person who is
unable to hear air conduction thresholds at an average of 40 decibels or
greater in the person's better ear;



         (d)   PHYSICALLY LIMITED PERSON means a person having
limited ambulatory abilities, including, but not limited to having a
permanent impairment or condition that requires the person to use a
wheelchair or to walk with difficulty or insecurity to the extent that the
person is insecure or exposed to danger; and



         (e)   VISUALLY-IMPAIRED PERSON means a person having a
visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the person's better eye with correction or
having a limitation to the person's field of vision so that the widest
diameter of the visual field subtends an angular distance not greater than
twenty degrees.



(Neb. RS 28-1009.01) (Ord. 1654, passed 7-23-98; Ord. 1655, passed 7-23-98)
Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Statutory fee exemption, see Neb. RS 54-603



DANGEROUS DOGS



§ 96.40  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY.  An entity authorized to enforce the animal
control laws of the city and includes any local law enforcement agency or
other agency designated by the city to enforce the animal control laws of the
city. The animal control authority for the city shall be the Mayor and City
Council.



   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.  Any individual employed, appointed, or
authorized by an animal control authority for the purpose of aiding in the
enforcement of this chapter or any other law or ordinance relating to the
licensing of animals, control of animals, or seizure and impoundment of
animals and shall include any state or local law enforcement or other
employee whose duties in whole or in part include assignments that involve
the seizure and impoundment of any animal. The animal control officer of the
city shall be the Chief of Police of the city, and his or her officers.



   DANGEROUS DOG.



      (1)   Any dog that, according to the records of the animal
control authority:



         (a)   Has killed a human being;



         (b)   Has inflicted injury on a human being that
requires medical treatment;



         (c)   Has killed a domestic animal without provocation;
or



         (d)   Has been previously determined to be a potentially
dangerous dog by an animal control authority, the owner has received notice
of such determination from an animal control authority or an animal control
officer, and the dog inflicts an injury on a human being that does not
require medical treatment, injures a domestic animal, or threatens the safety
of humans or domestic animals.



      (2)   A dog shall not be defined as a DANGEROUS DOG if the
individual was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog at the time of the
injury or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have tormented,
abused, or assaulted the dog.



      (3)   A dog shall not be defined as a DANGEROUS DOG if the
injury, damage, or threat was sustained by an individual who, at the time,
was committing a willful trespass as defined in Neb. RS 20-203, 28-520, or
28-521, was committing any other tort upon the property of the owner of the
dog, was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog, or has, in the past,
been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog, or
was committing or attempting to commit a crime.



      (4)   A dog shall not be defined as a DANGEROUS DOG if the dog
is a police animal as defined in Neb. RS 28-1008.



   DOMESTIC ANIMAL.  A cat, a dog, or livestock.  Livestock includes
buffalo, deer, antelope, fowl, and any other animal in any zoo, wildlife
park, refuge, wildlife area, or nature center intended to be on exhibit.



   MEDICAL TREATMENT.  Treatment administered by a physician or other
licensed health care professional that results in sutures or surgery or
treatment for one or more broken bones.



   OWNER.  Any person, firm, corporation, organization, political
subdivision, or department possessing, harboring, keeping, or having control
or custody of a dog.



   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG.



      (1)   Any dog that when unprovoked:



         (a)    Inflicts an injury on a human being that does not
require medical treatment; or



         (b)   Injures a domestic animal; or



         (c)   Chases or approaches a person upon streets,
sidewalks, or any public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude
of attack.



      (2)   Any specific dog with a known propensity, tendency, or
disposition to attack when unprovoked, to cause injury, or to threaten the
safety of humans or domestic animals.



(Neb. RS 54-617) ('72 Code, § 6-114)  (Am. Ord. 1804, passed 5-23-02)



§ 96.41  RESTRAINED.



   (A)   A dangerous dog that has been declared as such shall be spayed
or neutered and implanted with a microchip identification number by a
licensed veterinarian within 30 days after such declaration. The cost of both
procedures is the responsibility of the owner of the dangerous dog. Written
proof of both procedures and the microchip identification number shall be
provided to the animal control authority after the procedures are completed.



   (B)   No owner of a dangerous dog shall permit the dog to go beyond
the property of the owner unless the dog is restrained securely by a chain or
leash.



   (C)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section or for a
reasonable veterinary purpose, no owner of a dangerous dog shall transport
such dog or permit such dog to be transported to another county, city, or
village in this state.



   (D)   An owner of a dangerous dog may transport such dog or permit
such dog to be transported to another county, city, or village in this state
for the purpose of permanent relocation of the owner if the owner has
obtained written permission prior to such relocation from the animal control
authority of the county, city, or village in which the owner resides and from
the county, city, or village in which the owner will reside. Each animal
control authority may grant such permission based upon a reasonable
evaluation of both the owner and the dog, including if the owner has complied
with the laws of this state and of the county, city, or village in which he
or she resides with regard to dangerous dogs after the dog was declared
dangerous. An animal control authority shall not grant permission under this
section if the county, city, or village has an ordinance or resolution
prohibiting the relocation of dangerous dogs. After the permanent relocation,
the animal control authority of the county, city, or village in which the
owner resides shall monitor the owner and such dog for a period of at least
30 days but not to exceed 90 days to ensure the owner's compliance with the
laws of this state and of such county, city, or village with regard to
dangerous dogs. Nothing in this division shall permit the rescindment of the
declaration of dangerous dog.



(Neb. RS 54-618) ('72 Code, § 6-115)



§ 96.42  CONFINEMENT.



   (A)   No person, firm, partnership, limited liability company, or
corporation shall own, keep, or harbor or allow to be in or on any premises
occupied by him, her, or it or under his, her, or its charge or control any
dangerous dog without such dog being confined so as to protect the public
from injury.



   (B)   While unattended on the owner's property, a dangerous dog
shall be securely confined, in a humane manner, indoors or in a securely
enclosed and locked pen or structure suitably designed to prevent the entry
of young children and to prevent the dog from escaping.  The pen or
structure shall have secure sides and a secure top.  If the pen or structure
has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides shall be embedded into the
ground at least one foot.  The pen or structure shall also protect the dog
from the elements.  The pen or structure shall be at least ten feet from any
property line of the owner. The owner of a dangerous dog shall post warning
signs on the property where the dog is kept that are clearly visible from all
areas of public access and that inform persons that a dangerous dog is on the
property. Each warning sign shall be no less than ten inches by twelve inches
and shall contain the words warning and dangerous animal in high-contrast
lettering at least three inches high on a black background.



(Neb. RS 54-619) ('72 Code, § 6-116)



§ 96.43  FAILURE TO COMPLY.



   (A)   Any dangerous dog may be immediately confiscated by an animal
control officer if the owner is in violation of this chapter.  The owner
shall be responsible for the reasonable costs incurred by the animal control
authority for the care of a dangerous dog confiscated by an animal control
officer or for the destruction of any dangerous dog if the action by the
animal control authority is pursuant to law and if the owner violated this
chapter.



(Neb. RS 54-620)



   (B)   In addition to any other penalty, a court may order the animal
control authority to dispose of a dangerous dog in an expeditious and humane
manner.



(Neb. RS 54-621) (’72 Code, § 6-118)



   (C)   (1)   Any owner whose dangerous dog inflicts on a human
being a serious bodily injury as defined in Neb. RS 28-109 is guilty of a
Class I misdemeanor for the first offense, whether or not the same dangerous
dog is involved.



      (2)   It is a defense to a violation of division (C)(1) of
this section that the dangerous dog was, at the time of the infliction of the
serious bodily injury, in the custody of or under the direct control of a
person other than the owner or the owner’s immediate family.



(Neb. RS 54-622.01)



   (D)   Effect of prior conviction.  If a dangerous dog of an owner
with a prior conviction under this section attacks or bites a human being or
domestic animal, in addition to any other penalty, the dangerous dog shall be
immediately confiscated by an animal control authority, placed in quarantine
for the proper length of time, and thereafter destroyed in an expeditious and
humane manner.



(Neb. RS 54-623)



§ 96.44  PROOF OF INSURANCE.



   Any dog that has been determined to be a dangerous dog by the animal
control authority shall not be licensed at the next annual license renewal
period unless the owner thereof shall first present written proof of
liability insurance of not less than $300,000 to the animal control authority.



('72 Code, §§ 6-117 and 6-119) (Ord. 1344, passed 5-24-90; Am. Ord. 1345,
passed 6-28-90)



CHAPTER 97: NOISE CONTROL



Section



   97.01   Findings



   97.02   Title



   97.03   Purpose



   97.04   Scope



   97.05   Definitions



   97.06   Administration of noise control program



   97.07   Duties of Health Officer



   97.08   Noise disturbances prohibited



   97.09   Motorized vehicles and motorcycles on public right-of-way



   97.10   Motorized vehicles and motorcycles off public right-of-way



   97.11   Racing events



   97.12   Rail carrier operation



   97.13   Emergency exception



   97.14   Variances



   97.15   Abatement orders



   97.16   Additional remedy; injunction



 



   97.99   Penalty



§ 97.01  FINDINGS.



   The findings made in Ordinance 1766 are hereby made a part of this
chapter as fully as if set out at length herein.



(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)



§ 97.02  TITLE.



   This chapter may be cited and known as the Noise Control Ordinance of
the City of Wahoo, Nebraska.



(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)



§ 97.03  PURPOSE.



   It is found and declared that:



   (A)   The making and creation of excessive, unnecessary, or
unusually loud noises within the limits of the city and within one mile of
the city is a condition which has existed for some time, and the extent and
volume of such noises are increasing;



   (B)   The making, creation or maintenance of such excessive,
unnecessary, unnatural, or unusually loud noises which are prolonged,
unusual, and unnatural in their time, place and use affect and are a
detriment to public health, comfort, convenience, safety and welfare and
prosperity of the residents of the city; and



   (C)   The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and
prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted is declared as a matter of
legislative determination and public policy; and it is further declared that
the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in
pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health,
comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity and the peace and quiet
of the inhabitants of the city and the area within its zoning jurisdiction.



(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)



§ 97.04  SCOPE.



   This chapter shall apply to the control of all sound originating within
the limits of the city and the area within one mile of the city.  No local
regulation shall exceed the applicable state or federal standards.



(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)



§ 97.05 DEFINITIONS.



   All terminology used in this chapter, not defined below, shall be in
conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) or its successor body.  A copy of the applicable ANSI
standards shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be available during
normal working hours.  For the purpose of this chapter the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   AGRICULTURAL AREA.  Any area and LLR zoning districts as designated
pursuant to the city's zoning ordinance, as adopted in § 151.35.



   AMBIENT NOISE.  All encompassing noise associated with a given
environment, being usually a composite of sounds from many sources, near and
far.



   A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL.  The sound pressure level in decibels as
measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network.  The level so
read is designated db(A) or dbA.



   COMMERCIAL AREA.  Any area in the C-1 and C-2 zoning districts as
designated pursuant to the city's zoning ordinance, as adopted in § 151.35



   CONSTRUCTION.  Any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial
repair, alteration, or similar action on public or private property.



   DECIBEL (dB).  A logarithmic and dimensionless unit for measuring the
volume of a sound, equal  to 20 times the logarithm to the base tea of the
ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which
is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter).



   EMERGENCY.  Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage that demands immediate action.



   EMERGENCY WORK.  Any work performed for the purpose of preventing or
alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an
emergency.



   EQUIVALENT A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL (Leq).  The constant sound level
that, in a given situation and time period, conveys the same sound energy as
the actual time-varying A-weighted sound.



   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING (GVWR).  The value specified by the
manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of a single motor
vehicle. In cases where trailers and tractors are separable, the gross
combination weight rating (GCWR), which is the value specified by the
manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of the combination
vehicle, shall be used.



   HEALTH OFFICER.  The Chief of Police of the city, or said individual's
deputies.



   IMPULSIVE SOUND.  Sound of short duration, usually less than one
second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of
impulsive sound include explosions, drop forge impacts, and the discharge of
firearms.



   INDUSTRIAL AREA.  Any area in the I-1 and I-2 zoning districts as
designated pursuant to the city's zoning ordinance, as adopted in § 151.35.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any vehicle which is propelled or drawn on land by a
motor, such as, but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, truck-trailers,
semi-trailers, campers, go-carts, snowmobiles, amphibious craft on land, dune
buggies, or racing vehicles, but not including motorcycles.



   MOTORBOAT.  Any vessel which operates on water that is propelled by a
motor, including, but not limited to, boats, barges, amphibious craft, water
ski towing devices, and hovercraft.



   MOTORCYCLE.  An unenclosed motor vehicle having a saddle for the use
of the operator and two or three wheels in contact with the ground,
including, but not limited to, motor scooters, mini bikes, and motor driven
cycles.



   MUFFLER.  A device for diminishing the sound of projected noise from
an internal combustion engine.



   NOISE.  Any sound not occurring in the natural environment that causes
or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.



   NOISE DISTURBANCE.  Any sound not occurring in the natural environment
that would tend to annoy or disturb humans with reasonable sensitivities, or
which injures or endangers the comfort, health, welfare, hearing, peace, or
safety of other persons.



   POWERED MODEL VEHICLE.  Any self-propelled airborne, waterborne, or
landborne plane, vessel, or vehicle which is not designed to carry persons,
including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car, or rocket.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway,
sidewalk, or alley or similar place that is owned or controlled by a
governmental entity.



   PUBLIC SPACE.  Real property or structures thereon which are owned or
controlled by a governmental entity.



   PURE TONE.  Any sound that can be distinctly heard as a single pitch
or a set of single pitches.



   REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY.  An imaginary line along the ground surface,
and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one
person from that owned by another person, but not including intrabuilding
real property divisions.



   RESIDENTIAL AREA.  Any area in the NRC, R-1, R-2 and R-3 zoning
districts as designated pursuant to the city's zoning ordinance, as adopted
in § 151.35.



   RMS SOUND PRESSURE.  The square root of the time-averaged square of
the sound pressure, denoted Prms.



   SOUND.  An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle
velocity, or other physical parameter in a medium with internal forces that
causes compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound
may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity,
and frequency.



   SOUND LEVEL.  The weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of
a sound level meter and frequency weighting network, such as A, B, C, flat,
or linear as specified in American National Standards Institute
specifications for sound level meters (ANSI § 1A1971, or the latest approved
revision thereof). If the frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the
A-weighting shall apply.



   SOUND LEVEL METER.  An instrument which includes a microphone,
amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter, and
weighting networks used to measure sound pressure levels.



   SOUND PRESSURE.  The instantaneous difference between the actual
pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as
produced by sound energy.



   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL.  Twenty times the logarithm to the base ten of
the ratio of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure of twenty
micropascals (20 x 10-6 N/m2).  SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL is denoted Lp or SPL
and is expressed in decibels.



   VIBRATION.  An oscillatory motion of solid bodies of deterministic or
random nature described by displacement, velocity, or acceleration with
respect to a given reference.



   WEEKDAY.  Any day Monday through Friday.



(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)



§ 97.06  ADMINISTRATION OF NOISE CONTROL PROGRAM.



   The noise control program established by this chapter shall be
administered by the Health Officer. In order to implement and enforce this
chapter and for the general purpose of sound and vibration abatement and
control, the Health Officer shall have, in addition to any other authority
vested in said office, the power to:



   (A)   Conduct, or cause to be conducted, research, monitoring and
other studies related to sonogram vibration;



   (B)   Conduct programs of public education regarding the causes,
effects and general methods of abatement and control of noise and vibration,
or regarding the actions prohibited by this chapter or by any applicable
state or federal regulations;



   (C)   Work to coordinate the noise and vibration control activities
of all municipal departments, and cooperate with all appropriate local, state
or federal agencies, or private persons or organizations to promote
compliance with this chapter and to promote uniform noise and vibration
standards;



   (D)   Consult with any other department or agency responsible for
any proposed or final standard, regulation or similar action on the
advisability of revising such action if the Health Officer has reason to
believe that such action is not consistent with this chapter;



   (E)   Review public projects which are subject to mandatory review
or approval by other departments for compliance with this chapter, if such
projects are likely to cause sound or vibration in violation of this chapter;



   (F)   Conduct inspections, surveys and examinations of properties
for the purpose of determining compliance with or violation of this
chapter.  All such inspections, surveys and examinations conducted pursuant
to this chapter shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the
Uniform Inspection Code;



   (G)   Delegate functions, where appropriate under this chapter, to
personnel within the Police Department and to other agencies or departments
of the city.



(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)



§ 97.07  DUTIES OF HEALTH OFFICER.



   In order to implement and enforce this chapter effectively, the Health
Officer shall within a reasonable time after the effective date of this
chapter:



   (A)   Investigate and pursue possible violations of this chapter,
and take any legal and proper action necessary to abate such violations; and



   (B)   Administer noise program grants and other funds and gifts from
public and private sources, including the state and federal governments.



(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)



§ 97.08  NOISE DISTURBANCES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or
continued, any noise disturbance.  For sources of noise other than those
specifically listed in this subsection, determinations of noise disturbances
may be made through application of sound level limits listed at Table 1. 
The sound level limits listed at Table 1 may be applied to noise sources
specifically listed in this subsection for the purpose of determining noise
disturbances where the receiving land uses are other than residential. 
Without limiting the foregoing, the following acts, and the causing thereof,
are declared to be in violation of this prohibition:



      (1)   Radios, television sets, musical instruments and similar
devices:



         (a)   Operating, playing, or permitting the operation or
playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound
amplifier, or similar device which produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound
in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real
property boundary, except for activities open to the public and for which any
required permit has been issued. For those activities requiring a permit, a
property line noise limit and/or time limit will be established that is
agreeable to the permit grantor, the Health Officer, and the grantee.



         (b)   In all other cases, property line noise standards
for the residential receiving land use may be applied to determine the
existence of noise disturbance. The standards are:



            1.   Sixty dBA, maximum three minute Leq, for the
time period 7 a.m. to 10 p.m.;



            2.   Fifty dBA, maximum three minute Leq, for the
time period 10 p.m. to 7 a.m..



      (2)   Loudspeakers/public address systems:  Using or
operating for any purpose any loudspeaker, public address system, or similar
device in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential
real property boundary. The following property line noise standards may be
applied to the residential receiving land use to determine the existence of a
noise disturbance:



         (a)   Sixty dBA, maximum one minute Leq, for the time
period 7 a.m. to 10 p.m.;



         (b)   Fifty dBA, maximum one minute Leq, for the time
period 10 p.m., to 7 a.m.



      (3)   Animals and birds:



         (a)   Owning, possessing, or harboring any animal or
bird which makes sounds which create a noise disturbance across a residential
real property boundary. The following property line noise standards may be
applied to the residential receiving land use or noise sensitive zone to
determine the existence of a noise disturbance:



            1.   Sixty-five dBA, maximum one minute Leq, for
the time period 7 a.m. to 10 p.m.;



            2.   Fifty-five dBA, maximum one minute Leq, for
the time period 10 p.m. to 7 a.m.



         (b)   This provision shall not apply to licensed
veterinarians.



      (4)   Loading and unloading:  Loading, unloading, opening,
closing, or other handling of boxes, carts, containers, building materials,
or similar objects in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a
residential real property boundary. The following property line noise
standards may be applied to the residential receiving land use or
noise-sensitive zone to determine the existence of a noise disturbance,
except as noted in subsection (C):



         (a)   Sixty-five dBA, maximum five minute Leq, for the
time period 7 a.m. to 10 p.m.;



         (b)   Fifty-five dBA, maximum five minute Leq, for the
time period 10 p.m. to 7 a.m.



      (5)   Construction:  Operating or permitting the operation of
any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling, or demolition work:



         (a)   Between the hours of 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. the
following day on any day in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance
across a residential real property boundary, except for emergency work of
public service utilities or by variance issued pursuant to this chapter;



         (b)   This section shall not apply to the use of
domestic power tools of a type normally found in the home.



      (6)   Vehicle or motorboat repairs and testing:  Repairing,
rebuilding, modifying, or testing any motor vehicle, motorcycle, or motorboat
in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real
property boundary. The following property line noise standards may be applied
to the residential receiving land use to determine the existence of a noise
disturbance, except as noted in subsection (C):



         (a)   Sixty-five dBA, maximum five minute Leq, for the
time period 7 a.m. to 10 p.m.;



         (b)   Fifty-five dBA, maximum five minute Leq, for the
time period 10 p.m. to 7 a.m.



      (7)   Powered model vehicles:  Operating or permitting the
operation of powered model vehicles so as to create a noise disturbance
across a residential real property boundary or in a public space. Maximum
sound levels in a public space, as measured at a distance of 50 feet (15
meters) from the source, or within residential property shall be as follows:



         (a)   Sixty-five dBA, maximum three minute Leq, for the
time period 7 a.m. to 10 p.m.;



         (b)    Fifty-five dBA, maximum three minute Leq, for the
time period 10 p.m. to 7 a.m.



      (8)   Stationary nonemergency signaling devices: 



         (a)   Sounding or permitting the sounding of any signal
from any stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle, or similar device intended
primarily for nonemergency purposes, from any place, in such a manner as to
create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary. The
following property line noise standards may be applied to the residential
receiving land use to determine the existence of a disturbance:



            1.   Sixty-five dBA, maximum one minute Leq, for
the time period 7 a.m. to 10 p.m.;



            2.   Fifty-five dBA, maximum one minute Leq, for
the time period 10 p.m. to 7 a.m.



         (b)   Devices used in conjunction with a religious
worship service, public and private educational, and railroad grade crossing
warning shall be exempt from the operation of this provision. Additionally,
any device used solely for the purpose of signaling a specific clock time at
a place of religious worship shall be exempt from the operation of this
provision.



      (9)   Tampering: Removing, impairing, or rendering inoperative
by any person other than for purposes of maintenance, repair, or replacement
of any muffler, or noise-control device, or noise label of any product or use
of a product which has had a muffler or noise-control device or noise label
removed or rendered inoperative, with knowledge that such action has occurred.



      (10)   Horns, signaling devices, etc.:  The sounding of any
horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on
any street or public place of the city so as to create a noise disturbance
across a residential real property except as a danger warning.



      (11)   Portable air compressors:  No person shall operate a
portable air compressor manufactured after January 1, 1978, with maximum
rated capacity of less than or equal to 250 cubic feet per minute (cfm) which
produces an average sound level in excess of 76 dBA. No person shall operate
a portable air compressor manufactured after July 1, 1978, with maximum rated
capacity greater than 250 cfm that produces an average sound level in excess
of 76 dBA. All measurements shall be taken at 23 feet (7  meters) and shall
follow test procedures outlined in 41 Federal Register 2175 published January
14, 1976.



      (12)   Tampering with sound monitoring equipment:  The
removing or rendering inaccurate or inoperative of any sound monitoring
instrument or device positioned by or for the Health Officer; provided, such
device or the immediate area is clearly labeled to warn of the potential
illegality.



      (13)   Adequate exhaust system:  No person shall operate a
motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with an exhaust system that emits
excessive or unusual noise. A motor vehicle or motorcycle owner/operator may
request from the Health Officer that a stationary noise level test be made to
determine whether the exhaust system emits excessive or unusual noise. Said
request must be made within ten days from the date the operator is cited for
operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with an exhaust system that
emits excessive or unusual noise. The exhaust system will be considered
adequate if the sound level limits set forth in Table 3 are not exceeded.



      (14)   Refuse collection vehicles:



         (a)   No person shall operate or permit the operation of
the compacting mechanism of any motor vehicle which compacts refuse between
the hours of 7 p.m. and 6 a.m. the following day in a residential area; or



         (b)   Collect refuse with a refuse collection vehicle
between the hours of 7 p.m. and 6 a.m. the following day in a residential
area; or



         (c)   Collect refuse with a refuse collection vehicle or
operate or permit the operation of a refuse compacting mechanism between the
hours of 7 p.m. and 6a.m. the following day in a commercial or industrial
land area where the point of collection or compaction is within 100 feet
(30.5 meters) of a residential area.



      (15)   Standing motor vehicles:



         (a)    No person shall operate or permit the operation
of any motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) in excess of
10,000 pounds or any auxiliary equipment attached to such a vehicle, for a
period longer than five minutes in any hour while the vehicle is stationary,
for reasons other than traffic congestion, within 150 feet (46 meters) of a
residential area in such manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a
residential real property boundary except as noted in subsection (C).  For
periods exceeding five minutes, the property line noise standards listed at
Table 1 shall be used to determine the existence of a noise disturbance.
Emergency vehicles in the performance of their duty shall be exempt from this
section.



         (b)   No person shall operate or permit the operation of
any motorcycle or any motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR)
of less than 10,000 pounds, while the vehicle is stationary, in such a manner
as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary,
provided, however, that no measurements shall be made less than 25 feet from
the property line of the property on which the vehicle is located.  The
following property line noise standards may be applied to determine the
existence of a noise disturbance:



            1.   Sixty-five dBA, maximum fifteen second Leq,
for the time period 7 a.m. to 10 p.m.;



            2.   Fifty-five dBA, maximum fifteen second Leq,
for the time period 10 p.m. to 7 a.m.



      (16)   Impulsive sound:  No person shall cause or allow the
emission of impulsive sound from any noise source which exceeds the peak
level limits specified in Table 2 provided, however, that no measurements
shall be made less than 25 feet from the property line of the source from
which the noise emanates.



   (B)   Measurements to determine whether a noise disturbance exists
shall be made at or within the property boundary of the receiving land use.
The measurements shall be made with a sound level meter meeting the standards
of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), or its successor body,
for a minimum of a Type II meter.



   (C)   All activities within a commercial or industrial land area
shall be exempt from any of the general or specific provisions in subsections
(A)(4), (A)(6) and (A)(15)(a) between the hours of 6 a.m. and l0 p.m. of the
same day on any day.



   (D)   If a noise level limit has been established by another city
department for a specific noise source or activity, that limit shall be used
to determine the existence of noise disturbance if different from a level in
subsection (A) or Table 1 that may be applicable.



   (E)   Farms or farming operations in excess of ten acres in area
that were in existence prior to changes in surrounding land use, or prior to
occupancy of land in and about the locality of such farms or farming
operations, shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter; provided,
however, that the farms or farming operations were not creating noise
disturbances to surrounding land before the change in land use or occupancy
of land.



 


TABLE 1
SOUND LEVELS BY RECEIVING LAND USE



Receiving Land Use Category
 
Time
 
Sound Level Limit, in dBA Maximum Ten-Minute* Leq Level**




Residential
 
7 a.m. to 10 p.m.
 
65


 
10 p.m. to 7 a.m.
 
55


Commercial
 
At all times
 
70


Industrial
 
At all times
 
75


Agricultural
 
6 a.m. to 10 p.m.
 
75


 
10 p.m. to 6 a.m.
 
50


Notes:


* Unless a different time period has been specified for the specific types of
noise disturbances listed under § 97.08(A).


**Slow meter response or use meter with Leq function




 



 


TABLE 2
PEAK SOUND LEVEL LIMITS BY RECEIVING LAND USE FOR IMPULSIVE SOUND



Receiving Land Use Category
 
Time
 
No. of Peaks/Hr.
 
Maximum Peak Level Limit* in dBa




Residential
 
7 a.m. to 10 p.m.
 
1
 
85


Commercial
 
At all times
 
1
 
90


 
 
2
 
84


 
 
4
 
78


 
 
8
 
72


 
 
16+
 
66


Industrial
 
At all times
 
1
 
95


Agricultural
 
6 a.m. to 10 p.m.
 
2
 
89


 
10 p.m. to 6 a.m.**
 
4
 
83


 
 
8
 
77


 
 
16+
 
71


Notes:


*  Fast-hold meter function only.


**Reduce limits listed by twenty dBA for this period.




 



 


TABLE 3
MOTOR VEHICLE AND MOTORCYCLE NOISE EMISSION STANDARDS FOR DETERMINING
STANDARDS FOR DETERMINING ADEQUACY OF EXHAUST SYSTEM, STATIONARY LIMITS*



Vehicle Type
 
Maximum Level




Automobiles, Vans, Light Trucks (GVWR < 10,000 lbs.)


Front Engine
 
95 (93 + 2) dBA


Rear and Mid-Engine
 
99 (97 + 2) dBA


Motorcycles
 
102 (100 + 2) dBA


Heavy Trucks **


(GVWR < 10,000 lbs.)
 
90 (88 + 2) dBA


Notes:


* Measurement at 20 inches (05 meters) and at 45° angle from exhaust outlet
with engine rpm at 3,000 for automobiles, vans and light trucks; and at
one-half indicated engine red line for motorcycles.  Slow meter response
will be used.  For vehicles equipped with dual exhausts, compliance will be
determined from the highest side measurement.  For exhaust outlets located
beneath the vehicle, measurements will be taken 8 inches (0.2 meters) from
the side of the vehicle, These limits apply only to those vehicles licensed
to operate on public right-of-way.


** Measurement at 50 feet (15 meters) with transmission in neutral and engine
revved from idle to wide-open throttle (applies to vehicles with engine
governor only).  Fast meter response will be used.




 



(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)



§ 97.09  MOTORIZED VEHICLES AND MOTORCYCLES ON PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated a
public or private motor vehicle or motorcycle on a public right-of-way at any
time in such a manner that the sound level emitted by the motor vehicle or
motorcycle exceeds the level set forth in Table 4.  All measurements shall
be taken with a sound level meter meeting the standards of ANSI, or its
successor body, for a Type El instrument as a minimum and shall be taken with
a fast meter response.



      (2)   This section shall apply to the total noise from a
vehicle or combination of attached vehicles and shall not be construed as
limiting or precluding the enforcement of any other provision of this code
relating to motor vehicle mufflers.



 


TABLE 4
MOTOR VEHICLE AND MOTORCYCLE SOUND LIMITS



Sound Level Limit, in dBA, in Relation to Posted Speed Limit Measured at 50
Feet or 15 Meters


Type of Motor Vehicle
 
35 mph or less
 
 
Over 35 mph




Any motor vehicle carrier of GVWR or GCWR or 10,000 lbs or more
 
86
 
 
90




 
25 mph or less
 
Greater than 25 mph to 40 mph
 
Over 40 mph


Any motorcycle
 
76
 
80
 
84


Any other motor vehicle or any combination of vehicles towed by any motor
vehicle
 
70
 
76
 
79




 



   (B)   For the purpose of enforcing the above levels, the standard
measurement distance may be shortened to no less than 21 feet or increased to
no more than 100 feet, applying the following correction factors, to be added
or subtracted from the permitted sound level:



 

Measurement Distance (Feet)
 
Correction to Limit Sound Level, in dBA




21 or more but less than 29
 
+7


29 or more but not less than 32
 
+6


32 or more but less than 35
 
+5


35 or more but less than 39
 
+3


39 or more but less than 43
 
+2


43 or more but less than 48
 
+1


48 or more but less than 58
 
0


58 or more but less than 70
 
-1


70 or more but less than 83
 
-2


83 or more but less than 99
 
-3


99 or more but less than 118
 
-4




 



(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)



§ 97.10 MOTORIZED VEHICLES AND MOTORCYCLES OPERATING OFF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle or
motorcycle off a public right- of-way in such a manner that the sound level
emitted therefrom exceeds the limits set forth in Table 5 at a distance of 50
feet (15 meters) or more from the path of the vehicle when operated on a
public space, or at or across the real property boundary when operated on
private property. This section shall apply to all motor vehicles and
motorcycles, whether or not duly licensed and registered.



 


TABLE 5
RECREATIONAL MOTORIZED VEHICLE SOUND LIMITS



Vehicle Type
 
Sound Level Limit, in dBA




Snowmobile
 
78


Motorcycle
 
78


All Other Vehicles
 
78




 



(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)



§ 97.11  RACING EVENTS.



   (A)   No person shall conduct, or permit the conducting of, any part
of an organized racing event which involves a contest between or among motor
vehicles or motorcycles on public or private property after 10 p.m. or before
10 a.m. When an emergency condition occurs as a result of an accident or
absence of an emergency vehicle during a racing event that results in a delay
in finishing by 10 p.m., the time period for ending the event may be extended
by one-half hour. The Health Officer shall be notified as to the specific
reason for the extension within 12 hours after the conclusion of the event.



   (B)   For periods other than those associated with scheduled racing
events, no person shall permit the operation of motor vehicles or motorcycles
used in organized racing events which involves tuning of motor vehicles or
motorcycles, practice sessions, or other related activities on the property
of a public or private racing facility after 9:30 p.m. or before 10 a.m.



   (C)   As directed by the Health Officer, the owner or operator of a
racing facility for motor vehicles or motorcycles shall implement a plan
approved by the Health Officer for the reduction of noise levels from the
facility.



   (D)   The provisions of (A), (B), and (C) above shall not apply to
any racing event held at a racetrack lawfully operated under a special permit
granted pursuant to this code and/or the city's zoning ordinance, as adopted
in § 151.35.  Said subsections shall apply, however, to any racing event
held at a racetrack which constitutes a nonconforming use outside of the I-2,
I-2, or A zoning districts of the city's zoning ordinance, as adopted in §
151.35.



(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)



§ 97.12  RAIL CARRIER OPERATION.



   (A)   No rail carrier shall operate any locomotive, when connected
to a load and in a stationary position, in such a manner that the sound level
emitted by the locomotive exceeds the level set forth in Table 6 below. All
readings shall be taken at 100 feet (30 meters).



 


TABLE 6
RAIL CARRIER SOUND LIMITS AND STATIONARY CONDITIONS



 
Sound Level, in dBA


 
Throttle Setting at Idle
 
Throttle Setting at Any Other Setting




Manufactured on or before December 31, 1979
 
73 dBA
 
93 dBA


Manufactured after December 31, 1979
 
70 dBA
 
87 dBA




 



   (B)   (1)   No rail carrier shall operate any locomotive or
combination of locomotives when moving at any time under any condition of
grade, load, acceleration, or deceleration in such a manner that the sound
level emitted by the locomotive exceeds the level set forth in Table 7. All
readings shall be taken at 100 feet (30 meters) from the centerline of any
section of track which exhibits less than a two-degree curve or a radius of
curvature greater than 2,865 feet (873 meters).



 


TABLE 7
RAIL CARRIER OPERATIONS UNDER MOVING CONDITIONS



 
Sound Level Limit, in dBA




Manufactured on or before December 31, 1979
 
96 dBA


Manufactured after December 31, 1979
 
90 dBA




 



      (2)   No rail carrier shall operate any rail car or
combination of rail cars which while in motion produce sound levels in excess
of:



         (a)   Eighty-eight dBA at rail car speeds up to and
including 45 mph (72 km/hr); or



         (b)   Ninety-three dBA at rail car speeds greater than
45 mph (72 km/hr)



   All measurements shall be taken in accordance with procedures outlined
in this section and on any section of track which is free of special track
work or bridge or trestles.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit,
restrict, penalize, enjoin, or in any other manner regulate the movement of
rail carriers which are in all respects conducted in accordance with, or
pursuant to, applicable federal laws or regulations.



(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)



§ 97.13  EMERGENCY EXCEPTION.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:



      (1)   The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting
persons to the existence of an emergency, or



      (2)   The emission of sound in the performance of emergency
work, or



      (3)   The emission of sound in the performance of governmental
services.



   (B)   Nothing in this section, however, shall be construed to permit
law enforcement, ambulance, fire, or other emergency personnel, or persons
performing governmental services to make excessive noise in the performance
of their duties when such noise is clearly unnecessary.



(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)



§ 97.14  VARIANCES.



   (A)   The Health Officer shall have the authority to grant an
initial variance to the strict application of this chapter for a period of
not to exceed 15 calendar days.  Any person seeking such a variance shall
file an application with the Health Officer. The application shall contain
the information which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound or
activity for which the variance is sought into compliance with this chapter
would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community,
or on other persons.



   (B)   The Health Officer shall have the authority to grant an
extension to any variance. Any person seeking such an extension shall file an
application with the Health Officer. Notice of an application for an
extension shall be posted by a sign placed in a conspicuous place on or near
the property upon which action is pending.  No extension shall be granted
for a period of two days from and after posting of the property.



   (C)   (1)   Any individual who claims to be adversely affected by
allowance of any requested extension of a variance may, prior to the end of
the two day period after posting of the property, file a statement with the
Health Officer containing any information to support the claim  If the
Health Officer finds that a sufficient controversy exists regarding an
application, a public hearing shall be held.  All such hearings shall be
held within five days after the period for filing claims under this
subsection has ended



      (2)   In determining whether to grant or deny any application,
the Health Officer shall balance the hardship to the applicant, the
community, and other persons of not granting the variance or extension
against the adverse impact to the health, safety, and well being of those
affected, the adverse impact on property affected, and any other adverse
impacts of granting the variance or extension. Applicants for variances or
extensions and persons contesting extensions may be required to submit any
information the Health Officer may reasonably require.  In granting or
denying an application, Health Officer shall place on public file a copy of
decision and the reasons for denying or granting the variance or extension
and the criteria to be considered in deciding whether to grant variances and
extensions.



      (3)   Variances or extensions shall be granted by notice to
the applicant containing all necessary conditions, including a time limit on
the permitted activity. The variance or extension shall not become effective
until all conditions are agreed to by the applicant. Noncompliance with any
condition of the variance or extension shall terminate such variance or
extension and subject the applicant to those provisions of this chapter
regulating the source of sound or activity for which the variance or
extension was granted.



      (4)   The Health Officer may issue guidelines defining the
procedures to be followed in applying for a variance or extension and the
criteria to be considered in deciding whether to grant variances and
extensions.



   (D)   (1)   Any person who is aggrieved by a decision or order of
the Health Officer under this chapter may appeal such decision or order to
the Planning Commission by filing a notice of appeal with the Board Secretary
within 15 days from the date of the issuance of such decision or order by the
Health Officer.



      (2)   The Secretary of the Planning Commissions, having
received a properly submitted notice of appeal, shall notify the chairman of
the Planning Commission and establish a date for the appeals hearing. The
Secretary shall then notify the person making the appeal, and any person who
appeared before or filed a statement with the Health Officer, in writing of
the time and place of the hearing, which shall, in no event, be more than 15
days from the date of the filing of the notice of appeal with the Board
Secretary. The Planning Commission shall, within seven days of the concluding
date of the appeals hearing, file with the Health Officer a written final
decision, either affirming the decision of the Health Officer, or modifying
or reversing same. A copy of said decision shall be forwarded to the
appellant.



(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)



§ 97.15  ABATEMENT ORDERS.



   (A)   The Health Officer or other agency responsible for enforcement
of any provision of this chapter may issue an order requiring abatement of
any source of sound alleged to be in violation of this chapter within a
reasonable time period and according to the guidelines which the Health
Officer may prescribe. Such abatement orders may be issued in lieu of
prosecution for violation, and failure to comply with any abatement order
shall be a violation of this chapter.



   (B)   The Health Officer shall order an immediate halt to any sound
which exposes any person to continuous sound levels in excess of those shown
in Table 8 below or to impulsive sound levels in excess of those shown in
Table 9 below; provided, that no such order shall be issued if the only
persons exposed to sound levels in excess of those listed in Tables 8 and 9
are exposed as a result of:



      (1)   Trespass,



      (2)   Invitation upon private property by the person causing
or permitting the sound, or



      (3)   Employment by the person or contractor of the person
causing or permitting the sound.



   (C)   Any person who violates an order issued pursuant to this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
fined not less than $500 for each offense. A new violation shall be deemed
to. have been committed every 24 hours of such failure to comply.



 


TABLE 8
CONTINUOUS SOUND LEVELS WHICH POSE AN IMMEDIATE THREAT TO HEALTH AND WELFARE*



Sound Level Limit, in dBA
 
Duration




90
 
24 hours


93
 
12 hours


96
 
6 hours


99
 
3 hours


102
 
1.5 hours


105
 
4.5 minutes


108
 
22 minutes


* Use equal energy time-intensity trade-off if level varies, find energy
equivalent over 24 hours




 



 


TABLE 9
IMPULSIVE SOUND LEVELS WHICH POSE AN IMMEDIATE THREAT TO HEALTH AND SAFETY



Sound Level Limit, in dBA
 
Number of Repetitions per 24-Hour Period




145
 
1


135
 
10


125
 
100




 



(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)



§ 97.16  ADDITIONAL REMEDY; INJUNCTION.



   The Health Officer shall take such action as necessary and legal to
enforce the provisions of this chapter. As an additional remedy, the
operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle, or machinery in
violation of any provisions hereof and which causes discomfort or annoyance
to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort,
repose, health, or peace of residents in the area shall be deemed, and is
declared to be, a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily
by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent
jurisdiction. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to impair any
common law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any
person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or
from other law.



(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with the enforcement
of any of the provisions of this chapter, set forth at length herein, or
incorporated by reference, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense.  A
new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every 24 hours of such
failure to comply.



(Ord. 1766, passed 6-14-01)



CHAPTER 98:  TREES AND SHRUBS



Section



General Provisions



   98.01   Definitions



   98.02   Injuring prohibited



   98.03   Street trees and park trees plantings; permit



   98.04   Street trees and park trees plantings; rules and regulations



   98.05   Street trees; species to be planted; permit



   98.06   Street trees; distances and clearances for planting



   98.07   Street trees; ownership and maintenance



   98.08   Street trees; city's rights and city's aid



   98.09   Tree topping



Nuisances



   98.15   Declared nuisances



   98.16   Enforcement



   98.17   Abatement of nuisance



Tree Board



   98.20   Creation and establishment



   98.21   Term of office



   98.22   Compensation



   98.23   Duties and responsibilities



   98.24   Operation



   98.25   Interference with Tree Board



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 98.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT OF GOD.  A manifestation of nature so unusual and extraordinary
that it could not under normal conditions have been reasonably anticipated or
expected.



   PARK TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in
public parks and all other areas owned by the city, or to which the public
has free access as a park, except for the sidewalk space areas as defined in
§ 95.030(B) of this code.



   STREET TREES.  Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on
sidewalk space as defined in § 95.030(B) of this code.



(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)



§ 98.02  INJURING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously, or
wantonly cut down, destroy, by girdling or tapping, or otherwise injure any
tree within the city that is not owned by such person, unless permission to
do so has been granted by the owner of such tree.



(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)



§ 98.03  STREET TREES AND PARK TREES PLANTINGS; PERMIT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant or cause to be planted,
any tree or shrubbery in or upon any sidewalk space, park, or other
city-owned property within the city, without first having obtained a permit
in writing from the Parks and Recreation Director to do so. The terms of the
permit shall be strictly followed by the person to whom it is issued. No tree
or shrubbery of another or different kind shall be planted and no tree or
shrubbery shall be planted in another or different location than designated
in the permit. The requirement to obtain a permit shall not apply to
employees of the city when planting trees on behalf of the city.



(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)



§ 98.04  STREET TREES AND PARK TREES PLANTINGS; RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Parks and Recreation Director, in cooperation with the Mayor and
City Council, shall formulate rules and regulations for the planting of trees
on city-owned real estate. Said rules and regulations, and any amendments
thereto, shall be approved by the Mayor and City Council.



(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)



§ 98.05 STREET TREES; SPECIES TO BE PLANTED; PERMIT.



   The city shall maintain a list of recommended trees for planting in the
sidewalk space in size classes based on mature height: small (15 feet to 30
feet); medium and large (over 30 feet). The purpose of this list will be to
maintain diversity in the total tree population of city. This list shall be
available to residents of the city upon request to aid in the selection of
trees for private and public properties. The list of recommended trees shall
be updated periodically to reflect new developments or species that will
affect the population of the community forest of city.



(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)



§ 98.06  STREET TREES; DISTANCES AND CLEARANCES FOR PLANTING.



   (A)   The spacing of street trees shall be in accordance with the
size classes listed in § 98.05.  No trees may be planted closer together
than the following: small trees, l5 feet; medium trees and large trees, 35
feet; except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape
architect and the Parks and Recreation Director.



   (B)   Trees may be planted in the sidewalk space where there is more
than six feet between the edge of the sidewalk and the curb of the street.
Street trees shall be planted no closer than three feet from a sidewalk,
driveway, or street.



   (C)   No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet from any
street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb
lines. No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet of any fireplug.



   (D)   No street trees other than those species listed as small trees
in § 98.05 may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead
utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water
line, sewer line, transmission line, or other utility.



   (E)   The city reserves unto itself the right to plant trees,
plants, and/or shrubs in the sidewalk space of all streets in the city.



(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)



§ 98.07  STREET TREES; OWNERSHIP AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   The abutting property owner or owners shall be the owner of 
all street trees located in the sidewalk space adjacent to the abutting
property.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the abutting property owner of all
street trees to maintain said trees, to include, but not be limited to,
trimming, pruning, and maintaining so that said street trees will not be
declared to be a nuisance pursuant to the provisions of § 98.15, except as
provided in divisions (C) and (D) hereof.



   (C)   The City reserves unto itself, pursuant to § 51.26 of this
code, the right to cut and remove any overhanging branches or limbs of trees
so that the electrical lines of the city will be free and safe and to protect
said lines or property of the electrical system of the city. Said cutting and
removing shall be at  the expense of the city.



   (D)   The city reserves unto itself the right to cut and remove any
overhanging branches or limbs of trees on the sidewalk space that  extend
over streets less than 14 feet above the surface of the street. Said cutting
and removing shall be at the expense of the city.



(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)



§ 98.08  STREET TREES; CITY'S RIGHTS AND CITY'S AID.



   (A)   The city shall have the right to prune, maintain, and remove
street trees within the sidewalk space of all streets as may be necessary to
insure the public safety, which are in an unsafe condition, which are
injurious to or affects the safe operation and maintenance of sewer lines,
electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements,
are seriously affected with any fatal disease, or which interfere with street
lighting from city street lights, with the convenience of the public using
the adjacent street or sidewalk, or public safety on the adjacent street and
sidewalks, at the expense of the abutting property owner, except as provided
in § 98.07(C) and (D), and provided the city has followed the procedures as
set forth in § 98.15.



   (B)   In the case of an act of God resulting in a community
disaster, or in the event of an emergency, both as declared by the Mayor and
Council of the city, or as ordered by the Mayor in the event of a lesser
occurrence, the city may aid the property owner in the removal, trimming,
and/or clean-up of street trees.



(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)



§ 98.09  TREE TOPPING.



   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city
department to top any street tree or park tree.  Topping, rounding off, or
pollarding is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger
than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as
to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by
storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other
obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted
from this chapter at the determination of the Tree Board. Said authorization
may be delegated by the Tree Board to the Parks and Recreation Director.



(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)



NUISANCES



§ 98.15  DECLARED NUISANCES.



   (A)   It is hereby declared a nuisance, pursuant to § 94.20 of this
code, for a property owner to permit, allow, or maintain any dead or diseased
trees within the sidewalk space of the city.



   (B)   It is hereby declared a nuisance, pursuant to § 94.20 of this
code, for a property owner to permit, allow, or maintain any dead or diseased
trees on private property within the city.



   (C)   It is hereby declared a nuisance, pursuant to § 94.20 of this
code, for a property owner to permit the limbs or branches of any tree or
trees, on the property owner's property as well as street trees and limbs on
the sidewalk space that abuts the property owner's property, to extend over
sidewalks less than eight feet above the surface of the sidewalk.



(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)



§ 98.16  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of § 98.15, the
Mayor of the City, or the Chief of Police of the city, or the Chief of
Police's deputy, or the Director of Parks and Recreation, are charged with
enforcement of this chapter, and to that end shall have the authority to
enter upon private property at all reasonable hours for purposes of
inspecting trees thereon, and may remove such specimens as are required for
purposes of analysis to determine whether or not the same are infected. It
shall be unlawful for any person to prevent them from entering on private
property for purposes of carrying out their duties under this chapter, or to
interfere with them in the lawful performance of their duties under the
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Pursuant to Neb. RS 17-555, any property owner receiving a
notice pursuant to § 94.24 shall be given 30 days to  abate and remove such
nuisance.



(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)



§ 98.17  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.



   The Mayor, or the Chief of Police of the city, or the Chief of Police's
deputy, or the Director of Parks and Recreation, shall be responsible for the
enforcement of this chapter pursuant to the abatement procedures set forth
for nuisances in Chapter 94 of this code, except as hereinbefore set forth.



(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)



TREE BOARD



§ 98.20  CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby created and established a Tree Board for the city,
which shall consist of the five members of the Wahoo Parks and Recreation
Commission.



(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)



§ 98.21  TERM OF OFFICE.



   The terms of the five individuals comprising the Tree Board shall
coincide with their respective terms on the Parks and Recreation Commission.



(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)



§ 98.22  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the Tree Board shall serve without compensation.



(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)



§ 98.23  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The duties and responsibilities of the Tree Board shall be as follows:



   (A)   To beautify the appearance of the city by promoting and
encouraging the responsible planting, care, replacement, and maintenance of
trees in the city.



   (B)   To plan and sponsor activities in celebration of Arbor Day.



   (C)   To provide educational materials and programs to the public
concerning the planting and care of trees.



   (D)   To make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council
concerning landscape plans for any new or existing public facilities
constructed by the city.



   (E)   When requested by the Mayor and City Council, to consider,
investigate, make findings, reports, and recommendations upon any special
matter or question relating to trees.



(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)



§ 98.24  OPERATION.



   The Tree Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and
regulations, and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members
shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. Copies of its minutes
shall periodically be presented to the Mayor and City Council. Copies of its
rules and regulations shall be on file with the City Clerk.



(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)



§ 98.25  INTERFERENCE WITH TREE BOARD.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere
with the Tree Board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the
planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street
trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized by this chapter.



(Ord. 1988, passed 12-27-07)



TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      Chapter



         110.   BUSINESS LICENSING



         111.   PROFESSIONAL LICENSES



         112.   OCCUPATION TAXES



         113.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



         114.   AMUSEMENTS



         115.   LOTTERY



CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS LICENSING



Section



General Provisions



   110.01   Tobacco; license for sale



Fireworks



   110.10   Definitions



   110.11   License required



   110.12   Application for license



   110.13   Requirements for license



   110.14   Fire extinguisher



   110.15   Requirements of State of Nebraska



   110.16   Display of license



Peddlers, Itinerant Merchants, And Solicitors



   110.20   Definitions



   110.21   License requirement



   110.22   Application procedure



   110.23   Standards for issuance



   110.24   Revocation procedure



   110.25   Standards for revocation



   110.26   Appeal procedure



   110.27   Exhibition of identification



   110.28   City policy on soliciting



   110.29   Notice regulating soliciting



   110.30   Duty of solicitors to ascertain notice



   110.31   Prohibited solicitation



 



   110.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 110.01  TOBACCO; LICENSE FOR SALE.



   Every person, partnership, limited liability company, or corporation
desiring a license to sell tobacco at retail shall file with the City Clerk a
written application, on forms provided by the city, stating the name of the
person, partnership, limited liability company, or corporation for whom the
license is desired and the exact location of the place of business and shall
deposit with the application a license fee in the amount of $10. If the
applicant is an individual, the application shall include the applicant's
social security number.



(Neb. RS 28-1422, 28-1423) (Ord. 1662, passed 7-23-98)



FIREWORKS



§ 110.10  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter words phrases and terms shall be
construed as defined in Neb. RS Chapter 28 as it now exists or may hereafter
be amended, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



(Ord. 1780, passed 10-25-01)



§ 110.11  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, hold for sale, or
offer for sale at retail any permissible fireworks in the city unless such
person has first obtained a license from the city as a retailer.



   (B)   No person or organization may receive more than one license
during any one calendar year. Each license shall be granted for one specific
location identified by an address or suitable area description on the
application. Licenses shall be considered personal to the applicant and may
not be assigned in any manner.



('72 Code, § 7-401) (Ord. 1577, passed 6-12-97; Am. Ord. 1780, passed
10-25-01)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.12 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Application for a license required under the provisions of
this subchapter shall be made in the office of the City Clerk only between
January 1 and April 1 of each year on an application form prescribed and
furnished by the City Clerk. The application form shall require of the
applicant the following information:



      (1)   Name, address, and telephone number of applicant, and if
applicant is a corporation, or a similar type organization, then in addition
to the aforenoted information, the name, address, and telephone number of a
contact person who shall be responsible for the fireworks license;



      (2)   A plot plan showing the location of the stand, address,
legal description, setback from street right-of-way, distance to nearest
building or structure, and occupancy of nearest structure or structures, said
plot plan also to include the area 100 feet on either side of said area to be
utilized and the nature of the structures within said area;



      (3)   The zoning district in which the area to be utilized by
the applicant for the sale of permissible fireworks at retail is located;



      (4)   A list of persons, over the age of  l9 years, who will
be employed by the applicant and who, at any given time, will be in charge of
the place of sale of permissible fireworks;



      (5)   Such other information as may be required for the
enforcement of this subchapter.



      (6)   Agree to be bound by all ordinances of the city and to
comply with all laws, regulations and rules of the State of Nebraska;



      (7)   To be signed and acknowledged by the applicant.



   (B)   If the application is for a license for the sale of
permissible fireworks at retail at a location within the NRC Neighborhood
Residential Commercial, C-1 Central Business and C-2 Highway Commercial
Districts of the city, the City Clerk shall issue a written permit or denial
thereof, with reasons in writing, if denied, within 15 days from the date of
the filing of the application.



   (C)   If the application for a license for the sale of permissible
fireworks at retail is located within any other zoning district of the city
for which a Permitted Special Use is required, the City Clerk shall submit
said application to the Mayor and City Council at their next regular or
special meeting for discussion and action. Only the provisions of Article 6,
Sections 6.1 and 6.2 of the zoning ordinance shall be applicable and all
other provisions of Article 6 shall not be applicable to the permitted
special use application for the sale of permissible fireworks at retail. The
Mayor and City Council shall issue a written permit or denial thereof, with
reasons in writing, if denied, within 15 days from the date of the meeting of
the Mayor and City Council regarding said application.



   (D)   Applicant shall pay to the City Clerk a nonrefundable
application processing fee as follows:



      (1)   $50 if the site of the fireworks location is in either
the NRC, C-1 or C-2 Zoning Districts;



      (2)   $100 if the site for the fireworks location is other
than in the NRC, C-1 or C-2 Zoning Districts.



(Ord. 1780, passed 10-25-01)



§ 110.13  REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   All fireworks stands, booths, or other places of sale of
fireworks shall be located and setback at least 25 feet from the nearest
right-of-way line of any public right-of-way and be separated from any
permanent building structure by a minimum of 15 feet. Fireworks shall be sold
within either:



      (1)   A temporary building structure utilizing a booth or
stand allowing for walkup sales;



      (2)   A temporary building structure which allows patrons to
enter the structure; or



      (3)   A tent;



   Provided, however, no structure or tent used for the sale of fireworks
shall exceed a maximum floor space of 1,250 square feet. In addition,
structures or tents used for the sale of fireworks must have a minimum of
three entryways which shall be a minimum of three feet across and be as
remote from the other entryways as is practicable giving the size and design
of the structure or tent. Tents used for the sale of fireworks shall be flame
retardant and a licensee using such shall keep proof at the sales location
that the tent is flame retardant.



   (B)   Stands and areas where fireworks are to be sold shall be
located at least 75 feet from any gasoline service station or automotive
repair shop using flammable materials. Such distances shall be measured from
the closest point where fireworks are sold or stored to the closest point
where gasoline or combustible material is dispensed or stored above ground.



   (C)   If the application is approved, the license may be obtained at
the office of the City Clerk only after the following:



      (1)   An inspection by personnel of the city of the fireworks
stand or place of sale to determine if such stand or place of sale conforms
to all city laws, standards, building codes, and land use regulations. The
applicant for a license required by the provisions of thissubchapter shall
request the city to make such inspection not later than June 23 of each
calendar year, and such inspection shall be made by the city within 24 hours
after the request;



      (2)   Payment of the city  occupation tax as set forth in
Chapter 112 of this code;



      (3)   Execution of a consent form agreeing to abide by all
regulations imposed by the city pertaining to the sale of fireworks;



      (4)   Payment to the city of a cash bond in the amount of
$500, conditioned that the licensee shall abide by any and all regulations of
by the city pertaining to the sale of fireworks and that the licensee shall
clean the area in and around any stand where fireworks are sold and remove
any portable stand from its temporary location, such work to be done by July
7 of each year. In the event any portable stand is not removed from its
temporary location within the allotted time, or the sale area is not cleaned
and the debris and trash not removed therefrom, then the cash bond shall be
forfeited and the proceeds used by the city to clean the area and remove the
stand;



      (5)   Furnishing proof to the City Clerk that licensee has
obtained a valid License for Sale of Fireworks from the State of Nebraska for
the sale of permissible fireworks at retail for the fireworks site in the
city.



   (D)   Cash bonds, as provided in division (C) above shall be
returned to the licensee when personnel of the city have certified that the
conditions of the bond have been satisfied.



   (E)   Licenses issued under the provisions of §§ 110.10 through
110.16 shall be valid only for the calendar year in which issued.



(Ord. 1780, passed 10-25-01)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.14  FIRE EXTINGUISHER.



   A minimum of a ten pound Class A fire extinguisher must be kept in each
fireworks stand at all times.



(Ord. 1780, passed 10-25-01)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.15  REQUIREMENTS OF STATE OF NEBRASKA.



   In addition to all other requirements and regulations of the city, all
sellers of fireworks shall comply with all laws regulations and rules of the
State of Nebraska dealing with the sale and distribution of fireworks.



(Ord. 1780, passed 10-25-01)



§ 110.16  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   Licenses issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall be
displayed at all times at the place of business of the licensee.



(Ord. 1780, passed 10-25-01)  Penalty, see § 110.99



PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS, AND SOLICITORS



§ 110.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS.  The business carried on by any person who is an itinerant
merchant, peddler, or solicitor as defined in this section.



   GOODS.  Merchandise of any description whatsoever, and includes, but
is not restricted to, wares and foodstuffs.



   ITINERANT MERCHANT.  Any person, whether as owner, agent, or
consignee, who engages in a temporary business of selling goods within the
city and who, in the furtherance of such business, uses any building,
structure, vehicle, or any place within the city.



   PEDDLER.  Any person, not an itinerant merchant, who:



      (1)   Travels from place to place by any means carrying goods
for sale, or making sales, or making deliveries; or



      (2)   Without traveling from place to place, sells or offers
goods for sale from any public place within the city.



   SOLICITOR.  Any person who travels by any means from place to place,
taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods to be delivered in the
future or for services to be performed in the future.  A person who is a
solicitor is not a peddler.



§ 110.21  LICENSE REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   Any person who is an itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor
shall obtain a license before engaging in such activity within the city.



   (B)   The fee for the license required by this chapter shall be as
set from time to time by the City Council.



   (C)   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable.



   (D)   All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire 90 days
after the date of issuance thereof.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.22  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall
file an application with the Clerk.  This application shall be signed by the
applicant if an individual, or by all partners if a partnership, or by the
president if a corporation.  The applicant may be requested to provide
information concerning the following items:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;



      (2)   (a)   The name of the individual having management
authority or supervision of the applicant's business during the time that it
is proposed to be carried on in the city;



         (b)   The local address of such individual;



         (c)   The permanent address of such individual;



         (d)   The capacity in which such individual will act;



      (3)   The name and address of the person, if any, for whose
purpose the business will be carried on, and, if a corporation, the state of
incorporation;



      (4)   The time period or periods during which it is proposed
to carry on applicant's business;



      (5)   (a)   The nature, character, and quality of the goods
or services to be offered for sale or delivered;



         (b)   If goods, their invoice value and whether they are
to be sold by sample as well as from stock;



         (c)   If goods, where and by whom such goods are
manufactured or grown, and where such goods are at the time of application;



      (6)   The nature of the advertising proposed to be done for
the business;



      (7)   Whether or not the applicant, or the individual
identified in division (A)(2)(a) above, or the person identified in division
(A)(3) has been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor and, if so, the nature
of each offense and the penalty assessed for each offense.



   (B)   Applicants for peddler or solicitor licenses may be required
to provide further information concerning the following items, in addition to
that requested under division (A) above:



      (1)   A description of the applicant;



      (2)   A description of any vehicle proposed to be used in the
business, including its registration number, if any.



   (C)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall
attach to their application, if required by the city, credentials from the
person, if any, for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing
the applicant to act as such representative.



   (D)   Applicants who propose to handle foodstuffs shall also attach
to their application, in addition to any attachments required under division
(C), a statement from a licensed physician, dated not more than ten days
prior to the date of application, certifying the applicant to be free of
contagious or communicable disease.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.23  STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the
applicant's business reputation and moral character shall be made.



   (B)   The application shall be approved unless such investigation
discloses tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant's business
would pose a substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals, or
general welfare.  In particular, tangible evidence that the applicant has
done the following will constitute valid reasons for disapproval of an
application:



      (1)   Has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude; or



      (2)   Has made willful misstatements in the application; or



      (3)   Has committed prior violations of ordinances pertaining
to itinerant merchants, peddlers, solicitors, and the like; or



      (4)   Has committed prior fraudulent acts; or



      (5)   Has a record of continual breaches of solicited
contracts.



§ 110.24  REVOCATION PROCEDURE.



   Any license or permit granted under this chapter may be revoked by the
Clerk after notice and hearing, pursuant to the standards in § 110.25. 
Notice of hearing for revocation shall be given in writing, setting forth
specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
hearing.  Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his last known
address, at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing.



§ 110.25  STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION.



   A license granted under this chapter may be revoked for any of the
following reasons:



   (A)   Any fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license
application; or



   (B)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in
connection with the business being conducted under the license; or



   (C)   Any violation of this chapter; or



   (D)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony, or conviction of the
licensee of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or



   (E)   Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in
such a way as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, or
general welfare of the public.



§ 110.26  APPEAL PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision under §§ 110.23 or 110.25
shall have the right to appeal to the City Council.  The appeal shall be
taken by filing with the City Council, within 14 days after notice of the
decision has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written
statement setting forth the grounds for appeal.  The City Council shall set
the time and place for a hearing, and notice for such hearing shall be given
to such person in the same manner as provided in § 110.24.



   (B)   The order of the City Council after the hearing shall be final.



§ 110.27  EXHIBITION OF IDENTIFICATION.



   (A)   Any license issued to an itinerant merchant under this chapter
shall be posted conspicuously in or at the place named therein.  In the
event more than one place within the city shall be used to conduct the
business licensed, separate licenses shall be issued for each place.



   (B)   The Clerk shall issue a license to each peddler or solicitor
licensed under this chapter.  The license shall contain the words "Licensed
Peddler" or "Licensed Solicitor," the expiration date of the license, and the
number of the license.  The license shall be kept with the licensee during
such time as he is engaged in the business licensed.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.28  CITY POLICY ON SOLICITING.



   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that the occupants
of the residences in the city shall make the determination of whether
solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited to their respective residences.



§ 110.29  NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.



   (A)   Notice of the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any
residence, shall be given on a weatherproof card, approximately three inches
by four inches in size, exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the
residence, indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the
applicable words, as follows:



   "NO SOLICITORS INVITED"



   (B)   The letters shall be at least 1/3-inch in height. For the
purpose of uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the Chief of Police to
persons requesting, at the cost thereof.



   (C)   The card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to
any solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.



§ 110.30  DUTY OF SOLICITORS TO ASCERTAIN NOTICE.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any
premises in the city upon which a residence is located to first examine the
notice provided for in § 110.29 if any is attached, and be governed by the
statement contained on the notice. If the notice states "NO SOLICITORS
INVITED," then the solicitor, whether registered or not, shall immediately
and peacefully depart from the premises.



   (B)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence,
whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises when requested to do so by the occupant.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.31  PROHIBITED SOLICITATION.



   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance
for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any
door, or create any sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention
of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience
with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting in defiance of the notice
exhibited at the residence in accordance with the provisions of § 110.29
above.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   Any person or any licensee who violates any of the provisions of §§
110.10 through 110.16 shall be deemed guilty of an offense and subject to a
penalty as provided in § 10.99 and in addition thereto, any person who is
licensed shall be subject to the revocation of such license. Upon a complaint
being filed with the City Clerk, the City Clerk shall notify the licensee in
writing and shall order a hearing before the City Council to show cause why
said license should not be revoked and the licensee's bond forfeited to city.
The hearing shall not be more than three days after the filing of the
complaint. The City Council shall conduct a special hearing for the purpose
of determining whether such license shall be revoked and the licensee's bond
forfeited to the city. The licensee shall appear in person or by his/her/its
attorney, and if the City Council revokes said license, no refund of any
portion of the application fee or occupation tax shall be made to the
licensee and the licensee shall immediately close all businesses at all
places under such license and the bond of the licensee shall be forfeited to
city.



(Ord. 1780, passed 10-25-01)



CHAPTER 111:  PROFESSIONAL LICENSES



Section



Plumbers



   111.01   License required; exceptions



   111.02   Licensing requirements; examination; exceptions



   111.03   Bond



   111.04   Licensing of the firm



   111.05   Expiration and renewal of licensing



   111.06   Revocation of license



   111.07   Unlawful use or transfer of license



   111.08   Permit required



   111.09   Permit application



   111.10   Inspections



Electricians



   111.25   License required; exceptions



   111.26   Licensing requirements



   111.27   Bond



   111.28   Licensing of the firm



   111.29   Expiration and renewal of licensing



   111.30   Revocation of license



   111.31   Unlawful use or transfer of license



   111.32   Permit required



   111.33   Inspections



HVAC Contractors



   111.50   License required; exceptions



   111.51   Licensing requirements; examinations



   111.52   Bond



   111.53   Licensing of the firm



   111.54   Expiration and renewal of licensing



   111.55   Revocation of license



   111.56   Unlawful use or transfer of license



   111.57   Permit required



   111.58   Permit application



   111.59   Inspections



PLUMBERS



§ 111.01  LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall hereafter engage in or work at the business of
a master plumber in the city until he or she shall have been licensed as a
master plumber.  Application for licensing shall be made in writing to the
Building Inspector, showing the name of the applicant, the business location
of the applicant, and such other information as may be required.



(Neb. RS 18-1911) ('72 Code, § 10-401)



   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter relating to plumbers shall
not apply to any public utility company or companies serving the city and its
inhabitants under a franchise agreement with the city, or its agents and
employees, and shall not be construed as a limitation or restriction upon any
franchises heretofore granted by the city.



(Neb. RS 18-1910) ('72 Code, § 10-408) (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03)



§ 111.02  LICENSING REQUIREMENTS; EXAMINATION; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Before the applicant shall be licensed as a master plumber he
or she shall submit to an examination to determine his or her fitness and
competency to engage in the business of a master plumber which examination
shall be given by the Building Inspector as hereinafter provided.  Upon the
payment of the required licensing fee, as set by resolution of the City
Council, such applicant, after having by said examination shown himself or
herself to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector to be fit, competent,
and qualified to engage in the business of a master plumber and having gained
final approval from the City Council, shall be licensed and given a
certificate of licensing signed by the City Clerk.



   (B)   The examination shall consist of two parts:



      (1)   Written examination which shall count as 50% percent;



      (2)   Personal interview and past experience, which shall
count as 50% percent.



   (C)   The examination shall be passed to the satisfaction of the
Building Inspector.  A grade of 70%  shall be considered as passing.  A
licensing fee, as set by resolution of the City Council, shall be paid to the
City Clerk upon application for a license, prior to the issuance of said
examination.



   (D)   The Building Inspector may, at his or her discretion, waive
the written examination requirement.  This may only be done where an
applicant is requesting a limited license, as for outdoor lawn sprinkler
installations, water softener installations or sewer and septic system
installations.  The Building Inspector may, through a personal interview and
review of the applicant's past experience, determine the applicant to be fit,
competent, and qualified to engage in the limited business as stated in the
application for licensing.  After gaining approval by the Building Inspector
and final approval from the City Council, said applicant shall be licensed
and given a certificate of limited licensing signed by the City Clerk.  Said
certificate shall clearly state the limit of the license as stated on the
application.



(Neb. RS 18-1907, 18-1910) ('72 Code, § 10-402)  (Am. Ord. 1829, passed
1-23-03)



§ 111.03  BOND.



   Before a license is issued by the Building Inspector, the applicant
shall file with the City Clerk a bond, in an amount set by resolution of the
City Council signed by one or more sufficient sureties to be approved by the
City Council or a surety bond of the same amount issued by an approved
corporate surety company.  Said bond shall contain the condition that the
applicant shall defend, save, keep harmless, and indemnify the city from all
liabilities, claims, damages, judgments, costs, and expenses of every nature
and description caused by the willful or negligent conduct of the plumber
while engaged in the business of plumbing.  The provisions of this section
may be satisfied by the applicant depositing with the Clerk an insurance
policy providing public liability and property damage insurance to the city
and the general public in the same amount as the bond, executed by an
insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska;
provided, an endorsement, approved as to form by the City Attorney, shall be
attached to and become part of each and every such liability insurance policy
deposited with the city.  Said endorsement shall contain each and every
condition of said bond required by the City Council.  The obligee of said
bond or the beneficiary of said insurance policy shall be the city, and
action may be maintained thereon by anyone injured by a breach of the
conditions of said bond or of the covenants contained in the required
endorsement on said policy of insurance for a period of one year after the
completion of any plumbing work.



(Neb. RS 17-207, 17-505) ('72 Code, § 10-403)  (Am. Ord. 1829, passed
1-23-03)



§ 111.04  LICENSING OF THE FIRM.



   Any firm may be licensed hereunder as a master plumber in the name of
such firm provided that such firm shall have a master plumber who is duly
licensed as provided in this subchapter.  Such master plumber must be a bona
fide officer of the firm or an employee who is regularly employed by the firm
and is actually engaged in the planning, superintending, and practical
installation of plumbing and drainage.  Said master plumber listed and
licensed by such firm shall be in actual charge of and responsible for the
installation, removal, or repair of any plumbing or drainage work done by
such firm.  Before the firm shall be licensed as a master plumber, there
shall be filed with the City Clerk a certificate from the Building Inspector
showing the fitness and competency of the individual or individuals who are
qualified as master plumbers and who shall be in charge of the firm's
plumbing and drainage laying activities.  One individual must qualify as
master plumber to enable said firm to  hold a master plumber's license.  In
the event said individual withdraws from or ceases to be connected with the
firm, the Building Inspector shall forthwith revoke the license of the firm.



(Neb. RS 18-1907) ('72 Code, § 10-404)  (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03)



§ 111.05  EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSING.



   (A)   All licenses shall expire one year after their issuance and
shall not be assignable.  At the time of expiration, a license may be
renewed upon the recommendation of the Building Inspector, without an
examination.



   (B)   Licensees shall have 30 days after the date of expiration of a
license to renew.  In order to renew the license, licensee must file a
current bond or insurance policy as stated in § 111.03 with the City Clerk.
Licensee must also pay the renewal fee, as set by resolution of Council.  If
said conditions are not met, the license will be considered expired.  If a
license is allowed to expire, the initial licensing requirements must be met
and fees paid.



(Neb. RS 18-1908) ('72 Code, § 10-405)  (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03)



§ 111.06  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   The City Council, by a majority vote, shall have power to revoke any
master plumber's license, upon the recommendation of the Building Inspector,
if the same was obtained through error or fraud, or if the recipient thereof
is shown to be grossly incompetent, or has a second time willfully violated
any of the provisions of the City Plumbing Code.  If a license is revoked,
the holder of the same shall not apply for license for one year after such
revocation.



(Neb. RS 18-1909) ('72 Code, § 10-406)  (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03)



§ 111.07  UNLAWFUL USE OR TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   No licensed plumber shall allow his or her name to be used by another
person, directly or indirectly, to obtain a permit for the installation of
any work, and if any licensed plumber violates this provision, the City
Council shall forthwith revoke the license issued to such plumber.  In
addition to having his or her license revoked, such master plumber may be
prosecuted under the violation section of this code.



(Neb. RS 17-207, 17-505) ('72 Code, § 10-407)  (Am. Ord. 1829, passed
1-23-03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.08  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Before commencing the construction, modification, or repair of any
water service, sewer, drain, or other plumbing work, the plumber shall first
obtain a written permit from the Building Inspector. Such permit shall be
upon the premises at all times during the progress of work and must be shown
to any officer in authority on demand



('72 Code, § 10-409)  (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03)



§ 111.09  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   Applications for a permit shall be made in writing to the Building
Inspector on blanks furnished by the city.  Permit fees shall be charged in
such amount as may be set by resolution of the City Council and shall include
the cost of inspection.  Applications shall show the exact location of the
proposed work and, when required, the plumber shall submit plans and
specifications of the proposed work to the Building Inspector for his or her
approval. Applications for permits shall be filed with the Building Inspector
24 hours before their issuance.



('72 Code, § 10-410)  (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03)



§ 111.10  INSPECTIONS.



   At the time of the issuance of the permit, the Building Inspector shall
make the applicant aware of the inspections required by the City Plumbing
Code.  Any testing required shall be conducted in the presence of the
Building Inspector or his or her agent. No plumbing shall be covered or
concealed until the same has been inspected and approved in writing by the
Building Inspector or his or her agent.  If a proper inspection cannot be
made because plumbing has been covered or concealed, expenses for the removal
and replacement of property and materials to allow for a proper inspection
shall be the responsibility or the master plumber of firm.



('72 Code, § 10-411)  (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03)



ELECTRICIANS



§ 111.25  LICENSE  REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall hereafter engage in or work at the business of
a master electrician in the city until he or she shall have been licensed as
a master electrician.  Application for licensing shall be made in writing to
the Building Inspector showing the name of the applicant, the business
location of the applicant, and such other information as may be required.



('72 Code, § 10-412)



   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter relating to electricians
shall not apply to any public utility company or companies serving the city
and its inhabitants under a franchise agreement with the city, or its agents
and employees, and shall not be construed as a limitation or restriction upon
any franchises heretofore granted by the city.



(Neb. RS 81-2121) ('72 Code, § 10-419)  (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03)



§ 111.26  LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.



   Before the applicant shall be licensed as a master electrician he or
she shall submit to the Building Inspector a copy of his or her current
electrician's license issued by the State of Nebraska.  Upon the payment of
the required licensing fee, as set by resolution of the City Council, such
applicant having by said presentation of state electrician's license, shown
himself or herself to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector to be fit,
competent, and qualified to engage in the business of a master electrician
and having gained final approval from the City Council, shall be licensed and
given a certificate of licensing signed by the City Clerk.



(Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03)



§ 111.27  BOND.



   Before a license is issued by the Building Inspector, the applicant
shall file with the City Clerk a bond,  in an amount set by resolution of
the City Council, signed by one or more sufficient sureties to be approved by
the City Council or a surety bond of the same amount issued by an approved
corporate surety company.  Said bond shall contain the condition that the
applicant shall defend, save, keep harmless, and indemnify the city from all
liabilities, claims, damages, judgements, costs and expenses of every nature
and description, caused by the wilful or negligent conduct of the electrician
arising from his or her electrical work or violation of the City Electrical
Code.  The provisions of this section may be satisfied by the applicant
depositing with the Clerk an insurance policy providing public liability and
property damage insurance to the city and the general public in the same
amount as the bond, executed by an insurance company authorized to do
business in the State of Nebraska; provided, an endorsement, approved as to
form by the City Attorney, shall be attached to and become part of each and
every such liability insurance policy deposited with the city.  Said
endorsement shall contain each and every condition of said bond or of the
covenants contained in the required endorsement on said policy of insurance
for a period of one year after the completion of any electrical work.



(Neb. RS 17-207, 17-505) ('72 Code, § 10-414)  (Am. Ord. 1829, passed
1-23-03)



§ 111.28  LICENSING OF THE FIRM.



   All firms may be licensed hereunder as a master electrician in the name
of the firm provided that such firm shall have a master electrician who is
duly licensed as provided in this subchapter.  Such electrician must be a
bona fide officer of the firm or an employee who is regularly employed by the
firm and is actually engaged in the planning, superintending, and practical
installation of electrical work.  Such master electrician listed and
licensed by such firm shall be in actual charge of and responsible for
installation, removal, or repair of any electrical work done by such firm.
Before the firm shall be licensed as a master electrician, there shall be
filed with the City Clerk a certificate from the Building Inspector showing
the fitness and competency of the individual or individuals who are qualified
as master electricians and who shall be in charge of the firm's electrical
work.  One individual must qualify as master electrician to enable said firm
to hold a master's electrician's license.  In the event said individual
withdraws from or ceases to be connected with the firm, the Building
Inspector shall forthwith revoke the license of the firm.



(Neb. RS 17-207, 17-505) ('72 Code, § 10-415)  (Am. Ord. 1829, passed
1-23-03)



§ 111.29  EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSING.



   (A)   All licenses shall expire one year after their issuance and
shall not be assignable.  At the time of expiration, a license may be
renewed upon the recommendation of the Building Inspector.



   (B)   Licensees shall have 30 days after the date of expiration of a
license to renew.  In order to renew the license, licensee must file a
current bond or insurance policy as stated in § 111.27 and a copy of their
current electrician's license issued by the State of Nebraska, with the City
Clerk.  Licensee must also pay the renewal fee, as set by resolution of the
Council.  If said conditions are not met, the license will be considered
expired.  If a license is allowed to expire, the initial licensing
requirements must be met and fees paid.



(Neb. RS 81-2115) ('72 Code, § 10-416)  (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03)



§ 111.30  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   The City Council, by a majority vote, shall have power to revoke any
master electrician's license, upon the recommendation of the Building
Inspector, if the same was obtained through error or fraud, or if the
recipient thereof is shown to be grossly incompetent, or has a second time
willfully violated any of the provisions of the City Electrical Code.  If a
license is revoked, the holder of the same shall not apply for license for
one year after such revocation.



(Neb. RS 81-2104) ('72 Code, § 10-417) (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03)



§ 111.31  UNLAWFUL USE OR TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   No licensed electrician shall allow his or her name to be used by
another person, directly or indirectly, to obtain a permit for the
installation of any work, and if any licensed electrician violates this
provision, the City Council shall forthwith revoke the license issued to such
electrician.  In addition to having his or her license revoked, such master
electrician may be prosecuted under the penalty section of this code.



(Neb. RS 17-207, 17-505) ('72 Code, § 10-418) (Am. Ord. 1829, passed
1-23-03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.32  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Before commencing the installation of wiring or other electrical work,
the electrician shall first obtain a written permit from the State of
Nebraska, as required, or if a state permit is not required, from the
Building Inspector. Such permit shall be upon the premises at all times
during the progress of work and must be shown any officer in authority on
demand.



('72 Code, § 10-420)  (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03)



§ 111.33  INSPECTIONS.



   It shall be the duty of all electricians to call for the necessary
inspections of all electrical work done, whether from the State Electrical
Inspector or from the Building Inspector.  No electrical work shall be
covered or concealed until proper inspection can be made and approved in
writing by the State Electrical Inspector or Building Inspector or his or her
agent.  If a proper inspection cannot be made because electrical work has
been covered or concealed, expenses for the removal and replacement of
property and materials to allow for a proper inspection shall be the
responsibility of the master electrician or firm.



('72 Code, § 10-421)  (Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03)



HVAC CONTRACTORS



§ 111.50  LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall hereafter engage in or work at the business of
HVAC installation and repair in the city until he or she shall have been
licensed as an HVAC contractor. Application for licensing shall be made in
writing to the Building Inspector, showing the name of the applicant, the
business location of the applicant, and such other information as may be
required.



   (B)   The provision of this subchapter relating to HVAC contractors
shall not apply to any public utility company or companies serving the city
and its inhabitants under a franchise agreement with the city, or its agents
and employees and shall not be construed as a limitation or restriction upon
any franchises heretofore granted by the city.



(Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03)



§ 111.51  LICENSING REQUIREMENTS; EXAMINATIONS.



   (A)   Before the applicant shall be licensed as an HVAC contractor
he or she shall submit to an examination to determine his or her fitness and
competency to engage in the business of HVAC installation and repair, which
examination shall be given by the Building Inspector as hereinafter provided.
Upon the payment of the required licensing fee, as set by resolution of the
City Council, such applicant, after having by said examination shown himself
or herself to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector to be fit competent
and qualified to engage in the business of HVAC installation and repair and
having gained final approval from the City Council, shall be licensed and
given a certificate of licensing signed by the City Clerk.



   (B)   The examination shall consist of two parts:



      (1)   Written examination which shall count as 50%;



      (2)   Personal interview and past experience, which shall
count as 50%.



   (C)   The examination shall be passed to the satisfaction of the
Building Inspector. A grade of 70% shall be considered passing.  A licensing
fee, as set by resolution of the City Council, shall be paid to the City
Clerk upon application for a license prior to the issuance of said
examination.



(Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03)



§ 111.52  BOND.



   Before a license is issued by the Building Inspector, the applicant
shall file with the City Clerk a bond, in an amount set by resolution of the
City Council, signed by one or more sufficient sureties to be approved by the
City Council or a surety band of the same amount issued by an approved
corporate surety company.  Said bond shall contain the condition that the
applicant shall defend, save, keep harmless, and indemnify the city from all
liabilities, claims, damages, judgments, costs and expenses of the business
of HVAC installation and repair.  The provisions of this section may be
satisfied by the applicant depositing with the Clerk an insurance policy
providing public liability and property damage insurance to the city and the
general public in the same amount as the bond, executed by an insurance
company authorized to do business with the State of Nebraska;  provided, an
endorsement, approved as to form by the City Attorney, shall be attached to
and become part of each and every such liability insurance policy deposited
with the city.  Said endorsement shall contain each and every condition of
said bond or of the covenants in the required endorsement on said policy of
insurance for a period of one year after the completion of any HVAC work.



(Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03)



§ 111.53  LICENSING OF THE FIRM.



   Any firm may be licensed hereunder as an HVAC contractor in the name of
such firm provided that such firm shall have an HVAC contractor who is duly
licensed as provided in this subchapter.  Such HVAC contractor must be a
bona fide officer of the firm or an employee who is regularly employed by the
firm and is actually engaged in the planning, superintending, and practical
installation of HVAC installation and repair.  Said HVAC contractor listed
and licensed by such firm shall be in actual charge of and responsible for
the installation, removal, or repair of any HVAC system done by such firm.
Before the firm shall be licensed as an HVAC contractor, there shall be filed
with the City Clerk a certificate from the Building Inspector showing the
fitness and competency of the individual or individuals who are qualified as
HVAC contractors and who shall be in charge of the firm's HVAC system
activities.  One individual must qualify as an HVAC contractor to enable
said firm to hold an HVAC contractor's license.  In the event said
individual withdraws from or ceases to be connected with the firm the
Building Inspector shall forthwith revoke the license of the firm.



(Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03)



§ 111.54  EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSING.



   (A)   All licenses shall expire one year after their issuance and
shall not be assignable. At the time of expiration, a license may be renewed
upon the recommendation of the Building Inspector, without an examination.



   (B)   Licensees shall have 30 days after the date of the expiration
of a license to renew.  In order to renew the license, licensee must file a
current bond or insurance policy as stated in § 111.52 with the City
Clerk.  Licensee must also pay the renewal fee, as set by resolution of the
Council. If said conditions are not met, the license will be considered
expired.  If a license is allowed to expire, the initial licensing
requirements must be met.



(Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03)



§ 111.55  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   The City Council, by a majority vote, shall have power to revoke an
HVAC contractor's license upon the recommendation of the Building Inspector,
if the same was obtained through error or fraud, or if the recipient thereof
is shown to be grossly incompetent, or has a second time willfully violated
any of the provisions of the City Mechanical Code. If a license is revoked,
the holder of the same shall not apply for license for one year after such
revocation.



(Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03)



§ 111.56  UNLAWFUL USE OR TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   No licensed HVAC contractor shall allow his or her name to be used by
another person, directly or indirectly, to obtain a permit for the
installation of any work, and if any licensed HVAC contractor violates this
provision, the City Council shall forthwith revoke the license issued to such
HVAC contractor.  In addition to having his or her license revoked, such
HVAC contractor may be prosecuted under the violation section of this code.



(Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.57  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Before commencing the construction, modification, or repair of any
mechanical system, the HVAC contractor shall first obtain a written permit
from the Building Inspector.  Such permit shall be upon the premises at all
times during the progress of work and must be shown to any officer in
authority on demand.



(Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03)



§ 111.58  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   Applications for a permit shall be made in writing to the Building
Inspector on blanks furnished by the city.  Permit fees shall be charged in
such amount as may be set by resolution of the City Council and shall include
the cost of inspection.  Applications shall show the exact location of the
proposed work and when required, the HVAC contractor shall submit plans and
specifications of the proposed work to the Building Inspector for his or her
approval.  Applications for permits shall be filed with the Building
Inspector 24 hours before their issuance.



(Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03)



§ 111.59  INSPECTIONS.



   At the time of the issuance of the permit , the Building Inspector
shall make the applicant aware of the inspections required by the City
Mechanical Code.  Any testing required shall be conducted in the presence of
the Building Inspector or his or her agent.  If a proper inspection cannot
be made because HVAC work done has been covered or concealed, expenses for
the removal and replacement of property and materials to allow for a proper
inspection shall be the responsibility of the HVAC contractor or firm.



(Ord. 1829, passed 1-23-03)



CHAPTER 112: OCCUPATION TAXES



Section



General Provisions



   112.01   Amounts



   112.02   Mechanical amusement devices



   112.03   Electric utilities



   112.04   Lodging



   112.05   Fire insurance companies



   112.06   Natural gas utilities



   112.07   Collection



   112.08   Certificates



   112.09   Failure to pay



Telecommunication Services



   112.25   Definitions



   112.26   Amount



   112.27   Gross receipts; exceptions



   112.28   Payment



   112.29   Statement of gross receipts



   112.30   Use of funds



   112.31   Economic Development Budget



Cross-reference:



   Gas division; occupation tax, see § 52.12



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 112.01  AMOUNTS.



   (A)   For the purpose of raising revenue, an occupation tax is
hereby levied on the following businesses:



 



   Alcoholic Beverages (Based on license class, except non-profits):
 
 


      Class A, Beer Only, on premise consumption
 
$100


      Class B, Beer Only, off premise consumption
 
$100


      Class C (not available in the city)
 
 


      Class D, Alcoholic Liquor, off premise consumption
 
$200


      Class I, Alcoholic Liquor, on premise consumption
 
$250


      Non-profits
 
$ 50


   Bowling Alley:
 
 


      First two alleys or less, per year
 
$25


      For each additional alley, per year
 
$10


   Buses, per year
 
$10


   Electricians, original license, per year
 
$40


      Renewal License, per year
 
$25


   Fire Insurance Companies, per year
 
$5


   Fireworks
 
 


      Selling Permissable Fireworks at Retail, per day
 
$40


   Hawkers and Peddlers, per day
 
$10


      Per year
 
$100


   HVAC Contractor (mechanical), original license, per year
 
$40


      Renewal License, per year
 
$25


   Plumbers, original license, per year
 
$40


      Renewal License, per year
 
$25


   Railroad Companies, per year
 
$25


   Trailer Camps, first 2 lots, per year
 
$10


      Each additional lot, per year
 
$5




 



   (B)   (1)   Garbage and refuse collectors. All garbage and refuse
collection haulers with whom the city has approved as permitted haulers
within the city, and who collect, remove, and dispose of garbage and refuse
for residential units, group dwellings, and commercial establishments within
the city shall pay an occupation tax in the amount of 5% of the charge for
said service provided; said occupation tax shall be payable to the city
monthly, on or before the 20th day of the subsequent month of the service
provided. All monies received by the city from the aforenoted occupation tax
shall be utilized by the city for solid waste management activities, at the
discretion of the Mayor and Council of the city.



(’72 Code, § 10-601) (Am. Ord. 1442, passed 10-14-93; Am. Ord. 1562,
passed 11-14-96; Am. Ord. 1577, passed 6-12-97; Am. Ord. 1790, passed
2-13-02; Am. Ord. 1927, passed 4-27-06; Am. Ord. 2002, passed 9-11-08; Am.
Ord. 2012, passed 2-19-09; Am. Ord. 2033, passed 2-11-10)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Neb. RS 17-525



§ 112.02  MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES.



   Every person who owns or who operates, maintains for use, or permits
the use of, on any premises or place occupied by him or her, any mechanical
amusement device shall pay an annual occupation tax in the following amounts:



 



   Pool Tables
 
 


      First Table
 
$25


      Second Table
 
$15


      Third Table
 
$10


      Each additional table
 
$5


   Shuffleboards, per table
 
$25


   All other mechanical amusement devices, per machine
 
$10




 



('72 Code, § 10-601.01) (Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83)



§ 112.03  ELECTRIC UTILITIES.



   (A)   There is imposed an occupation tax upon any electric utility
utilizing the public right-of-way of the city for the distribution of
electricity of two mills per kilowatt hour.



   (B)   The City Electric Division, a part of the City Utilities
Department, any other electric utility which utilizes the City Electrical
Division distribution system, or installs its own electric distribution
system in the public right-of-way of the city, shall install and maintain, at
their expense, electric meter or meters at the site or sites where said
electricity enters the City Electrical Division distribution system or first
enters the public right-of-way of the city.



   (C)   Said meter or meters shall be accessible to employees of the
city for reading, inspection, and testing.



   (D)   Said meter or meters shall be read by employees of the city at
least on a monthly basis. The city  shall, within ten days of the reading of
said meter or meters, cause to be sent to the electric utilities which are
utilizing the Electric Utility Distribution System or public right-of-way a
statement for the occupation tax due. Said statement shall be paid by said
electric utility within 15 days thereafter. Failure to pay in full said
statement within the time period shall be grounds for the city to proceed
against the electric utility pursuant to § 112.08.



('72 Code, § 10-601.02) (Ord. 1535, passed 5-9-96)



§ 112.04  LODGING.



   (A)   There is hereby levied an occupation tax of 4% upon the total
consideration charged for occupancy of any space furnished by any hotel in
the city.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CONSIDERATION.  The monetary charge for the use of space in a
hotel only if the space is one ordinarily used for accommodations and shall
not include the charge for any food or beverage served or personal services
rendered to the occupant of such space.



      HOTEL.  Any facility in which the public may, for a
consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall include, but
not be limited to hotels, motels, tourist homes, campgrounds, courts, lodging
houses, inns, state operated hotels, and nonprofit hotels, but HOTEL shall
not be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes,
chronic care centers, or dormitories or facilities operated by an educational
institution and regularly used to house students.



      OCCUPANCY.  The use or possession, or the right to the use or
possession, of any space in a hotel if the space is one ordinarily used for
accommodations and if the occupant's use, possession, or right to the use or
possession does not exceed a period of 30 days.



      OCCUPANT.  Anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or
has a right to use or possess any space in a hotel if the space is one
ordinarily used for accommodations.



   (C)   The imposition of said occupation tax shall commence on
December 1, 1996.



   (D)   All hotels affected by this section shall compute and pay the
occupation tax to the city on a monthly basis. The occupation tax for each
month shall be due and owing within 30 days after the last day of the month
for which the occupation tax is due.



   (E)   All hotels shall, at the time they make their monthly payment
of the occupation tax levied pursuant to this section, file with the City
Clerk a full, complete, and detailed statement of the gross receipts subject
to such occupation tax, which statement shall be duly verified and sworn to
by the manager in charge of the hotel or by a higher managerial employee of
said hotel. The city shall have the right, at any time, to inspect, through
its officers, agents or representatives, the books and records of any hotel
for the purpose of verifying the reports submitted pursuant to the
requirements of this section.



   (F)   That all funds received by the city from the aforenoted
occupation tax upon hotels shall be given to the Wahoo Area Economic
Development office for economic development within the corporate limits of
the city and/or its zoning jurisdiction.



('72 Code, § 10-601.03) (Ord. 1551, passed 7-25-96; Am. Ord. 1849, passed
10-9-03)



§ 112.05  FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES.



   For the use, support, and maintenance of the City Fire Department all
revenue realized from the occupation tax on fire insurance companies shall be
appropriated to the Fire Department Fund.



('72 Code, § 10-602)



§ 112.06  NATURAL GAS UTILITIES.



   (A)   There is imposed an occupation tax upon any natural gas
utility utilizing the public right-of-way of the city for the distribution of
natural gas, based on the following schedule:



      (1)   Residential, Commercial and Industrial Customers:



         (a)   $.025 per CCF from October 1 to March 31.



         (b)   $.060 per CCF from April 1 to September 30.



      (2)   City Power Plant Generation:



         (a)   $.03 per CCF all year.



   (B)   The City Natural Gas Division, a part of the Board of Public
Works or any other natural gas utility which utilizes the City Natural Gas
Division distribution system or installs its own natural gas distribution
system in the public right-of-way of the city, shall install and maintain, at
their expense, a gas metering system so as to accurately record usage of
customers.



   (C)   Monthly reports, which document usage of customers, shall be
accessible to employees of the city for reviewing, inspection and testing.



   (D)   Said occupation tax shall be submitted to the City
Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer within 15 days after the end of the month.



(Ord. 1908, passed 11-10-05)



§ 112.07  COLLECTION.



   All occupation taxes shall be due and payable on the first day of May
of each year, except in the event that the said tax is levied daily or
monthly, and upon the payment thereof by any person or persons to the City
Clerk, the said Clerk shall give a receipt, properly dated, and specifying
the person paying the said tax, and the amount paid; provided, occupation
taxes collected from Class C liquor licensees shall be due and payable on the
first day of November. The revenue collected shall then be immediately
deposited into the General Fund by the City Treasurer. The City Treasurer
shall keep an accurate account of all revenue turned over to him or her. All
forms and receipts herein mentioned shall be issued in duplicate. One copy
shall then be kept by each party in the transaction.



('72 Code, § 10-603) (Am. Ord. 1090, passed 2-24-77; Am. Ord. 1908, passed
11-10-05)



§ 112.08  CERTIFICATES.



    The receipt issued after the payment of any occupation tax shall be
the occupation tax certificate. The said certificate shall specify the amount
of the tax and the name of the person, and business that paid the said tax.
The occupation tax certificate shall then be displayed in a prominent place,
or carried in such a way as to be easily accessible, while business is being
conducted.



('72 Code, § 10-604)  (Am. Ord. 1908, passed 11-10-05)



§ 112.09  FAILURE TO PAY.



   If any person, company, or corporation fails or neglects to pay the
occupation taxes as provided herein on the day it becomes due and payable,
the city shall then proceed by civil suit to collect the amount due. All
delinquent taxes shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per month until paid.



('72 Code, § 10-605)  (Am. Ord. 1908, passed 11-10-05)



TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES



§ 112.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BASIC LOCAL EXCHANGE SERVICES.  The access and transmission of two-way
switched communications within the city, including local telephone and
telecommunication services.



   INTER-EXCHANGE SERVICES.  The access and transmission of
communications between two or more local exchange areas, provided that such
inter-exchange service either originates from an end user within the city or
terminates with an end user within the city and is charged to a service
address within the city regardless of where the charges are actually paid.



('72 Code, § 10-601.04) (Ord. 1562, passed 11-14-96; Am. Ord. 1569, passed
4-10-97)



§ 112.26  AMOUNT.



   There is hereby levied upon every person, firm, partnership,
corporation, or association engaged in the business of offering or providing
telecommunication services to the public for hire in the city, an occupation
tax of 3% of the gross receipts resulting from any toll services and charges
on basic local exchange services and inter-exchange services.



('72 Code, § 10-601.05) (Ord. 1562, passed 11-14-96; Am. Ord. 1569, passed
4-10-97)



§ 112.27  GROSS RECEIPTS; EXCEPTIONS.



   Gross receipts shall include all receipts of every person, firm,
partnership, corporation, or association engaged in the business of offering
or providing telecommunication services to the public for hire in the city,
except for the following:



   (A)   Interstate telecommunications between persons in the city and
persons outside of the state;



   (B)   Local carrier access charges, transmission facilities, and
switching services provided to telecommunication companies;



   (C)   Account of:



      (1)   City of Wahoo, Nebraska, or any of its agencies or
departments.



      (2)   All public, private, denominational, and parochial
schools which have met state of Nebraska accreditation or approval
requirements.



      (3)   Saunders County, Nebraska, or any of its agencies or
departments.



      (4)   State of Nebraska, or any of its agencies, subdivisions,
or departments.



      (5)   United States Government, or any of its agencies or
departments.



   (D)   Sales of equipment, repairs, and installation charges,
advertising revenues, and rental fees from customers' premises equipment.



('72 Code, § 10-601.07) (Ord. 1562, passed 11-14-96; Am. Ord. 1569, passed
4-10-97)



§ 112.28  PAYMENT.



   All telecommunication companies engaged in the business of offering or
providing telecommunication services to the public for hire in the city shall
compute and pay the occupation tax to the city on a monthly basis. The
occupation tax for each month shall become due and owing within 30 days after
the last day of the month in which service is billed by the
telecommunications company.



('72 Code, § 10-601.09) (Ord. 1562, passed 11-14-96)



§ 112.29  STATEMENT OF GROSS RECEIPTS.



   All telecommunication companies shall, at the time they make their
monthly payment of the occupation tax levied pursuant to §§ 112.25 et seq.,
file with the City Clerk a full, complete, detailed statement of the gross
receipts subject to such occupation tax, which statement shall be duly
verified and sworn to by the manager in charge of the business of the
particular company in the city or by a higher managerial employee of such
company. The city shall have the right at any time to inspect, through its
officers, agents, or representatives, the books and records of any
telecommunications company for the purpose of verifying any reports submitted
pursuant to the requirements of this section.



('72 Code, § 10-601.10) (Ord. 1562, passed 11-14-96)



§ 112.30  USE OF FUNDS.



   All funds received by the city from the aforementioned occupation tax
upon telecommunication companies shall be utilized by the city for economic
development within the corporate limits of the city and its zoning
jurisdiction.



('72 Code, § 10-601.11) (Ord. 1562, passed 11-14-96)



§ 112.31  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT BUDGET.



   Sixty days before the beginning of each fiscal year of the city, the
Greater Wahoo Development Foundation, a Nebraska nonprofit corporation, shall
submit to the Mayor and Council of the city a proposed budget for the office
of Economic Development Director, including, but not limited to salaries,
benefits, administrative expenses, and other related expenses.



('72 Code, § 10-601.12) (Ord. 1562, passed 11-14-96)



CHAPTER 113: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



   113.01   Liquor license application; city examination



   113.02   Hours of sale



§ 113.01  LIQUOR LICENSE APPLICATION; CITY EXAMINATION.



   Any person or persons desiring to obtain a license to sell alcoholic
liquors at retail shall file with the Liquor Control Commission.  The
Commission shall then notify by registered or certified mail the City
Clerk.  The City Council shall then meet and determine the desirability of
the application and report in writing or in person to the Commission within
30 days.  The City Council may examine, or cause to be examined, under oath,
any applicant; examine, or cause to be examined, the books and records of any
such applicant; to hear testimony, and to take proof for its information in
the performance of its duties.  For the purpose of obtaining any of the
information desired, the City Council may authorize its agent, or the City
Attorney, to act on their behalf.  The City Council may hold the said
examination and hearing upon the receipt from the Commission of the notice
and copy of the application.  The City Council shall fix a time and place at
which a hearing will be held, and at which time the City Council may receive
competent evidence under oath, either orally, or by affidavit, from the
applicant or any other person concerning the propriety of the issuance of
such license.  Notice shall be published in a legal newspaper in, or of
general circulation in the city one time not less than seven nor more than 14
days before the time of the hearing.  Such notice shall include, but not be
limited to a statement that all persons desiring to give evidence before the
local City Council in support of or protest against the issuance of such
license may do so at the time of the hearing.  Such hearing shall be held
not more than 21 days after the receipt of the Commission's letter of notice,
and after such hearing, the City Council shall cause to be spread at large in
the minute record of their proceedings a resolution recommending either
issuance or refusal of said applicant.  The City Clerk shall thereupon mail
to the Commission a copy of the resolution which shall state the cost of the
published notice, except that failure to hold a hearing and to examine the
said applicant shall not render void any license issued by the Commission. 
In the event the Commission refuses to issue a license, the cost of the
publication of notice as herein required shall be paid by the Commission.



(Neb. RS 53-131, 53-134) ('72 Code, § 10-307) (Am. Ord. 1255, passed 5-8-86;
Am. Ord. 1328, passed 12-28-89; Am. Ord. 1386, passed 2-27-92)



§ 113.02  HOURS OF SALE.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      OFF SALE.  Alcoholic beverages sold at retail in the original
container for consumption off the premises of the licensed establishment.



      ON SALE.  Alcoholic beverages sold at retail by the drink for
consumption on the premises of the licensed establishment.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any licensed person or persons or
their agents to sell any alcoholic beverages within the city except during
the hours provided herein, provided that such limitations shall not apply
after 12:00 p.m. noon on Sunday to a licensee which is a nonprofit
corporation holding a license pursuant to Neb. RS 53-124(5)(C) and (H):



 



   HOURS OF SALE
 


   Alcoholic Liquors (except beer and wine)
 


      Secular Days
 


         Off Sale
 
6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.


         On Sale
 
6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.


      Sundays
 


         Off Sale
 
12:00 noon to 1:00 a.m.


         On Sale
 
12:00 noon to 1:00 a.m.


   Beer and Wine
 


      Secular Days
 


         Off Sale
 
6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.


         On Sale
 
6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.


      Sundays
 


         Off Sale
 
6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.


         On Sale
 
6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.




 



   (C)   No person or persons shall consume any alcoholic beverages on
licensed premises for a period of time longer than 15 minutes after the time
fixed herein for stopping the sale of alcoholic beverages on the said
premises.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit
licensed premises from being open for business on days and hours during which
the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by this section.



('72 Code, § 10-318) (Am. Ord. 1178, passed 10-8-81; Am. Ord. 1208, passed
9-22-83; Am. Ord. 1369, passed 9-12-91) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to alter statutory hours, see Neb. RS 53-179



CHAPTER 114: AMUSEMENTS



Section



Bingo



   114.01   Regulation



   114.02   Incorporated regulations



Mechanical Amusement Devices



   114.50   Definitions



   114.51   Permit required



   114.52   Application for permit; contents



   114.53   Permit fee



   114.54   Information on permit



   114.55   Permit to be posted



   114.56   Substitute machines



   114.57   Permit not transferable



   114.58   Revocation of permit



   114.59   Location; designation in permit



   114.60   Expiration of permit



   114.61   Prohibited practices



   114.62   Seizure and impounding of equipment; procedure; fee



BINGO



§ 114.01  REGULATION.



   Games of bingo shall be conducted within the city in accordance with
all laws of the city and the state of Nebraska if the game of bingo is played
for or involves profit or gain.  Any association duly licensed by the state
of Nebraska to conduct the game of bingo shall obtain a written permit from
the City Council before commencing operation of the game.  Application shall
be made to the City Clerk for such permit.  The application form shall
contain such information and documents or copies thereof as the City Council
deems necessary to determine whether to grant or reject the application. 
Upon the determination that granting the application would be proper, the
City Council shall immediately direct the City Clerk to issue the license to
the applicant upon the payment of an annual permit fee of $10.



   The license shall be subject to revocation at any time for good
cause.  Any person or persons so licensed shall be subject to any other
fees, rules, and regulations which the City Council may designate.  All
permits so issued will automatically expire on September 30 following their
issuance or renewal.  The fee for each renewal unless otherwise prescribed
shall be in the sum of $10.  The fee shall be credited to the General
Fund.  The permit shall be on display at any place where a game of bingo is
conducted.



('72 Code, § 10-211) (Am. Ord. 1249, passed 10-10-85) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Permit required, see Neb. RS 9-236



§ 114.02  INCORPORATED REGULATIONS.



   All applicable state statutes as they now exist or may hereafter be
amended shall be and will constitute a part of this subchapter as if repeated
verbatim herein, and violation of any state statute will be a distinct and
separate offense against the city as well as against the state.  Violators
thereof shall be separately prosecuted by the city for each of such offenses
and, if convicted, shall be deemed to be guilty of an offense.



(Neb. RS 9-201 through 9-266) ('72 Code, § 10-214) Penalty, see § 10.99



MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES



§ 114.50  DEFINITIONS.



   The term "mechanical amusement device" hereinafter referred to as
"machine," shall mean any machine, table, device, or contrivance which, upon
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc, or by any other method of
payment of money or other consideration, may be operated, played upon, or
used by a person for amusement and entertainment only, and which does not
dispense any form of merchandise, ticket, card, prize, award, or payoff. Such
term shall include by way of example, but not by way of limitation, pinball,
fooseball, pool tables, electronic arcade games, juke box machines, and
shuffleboards and shall apply to both operational and nonoperational
machines. Such term shall not include any machine, device, or contrivance now
or hereafter made unlawful by the ordinances of the city or laws of the state
of Nebraska, nor any gambling device or contrivance, and shall not include
mechanical kiddie amusement rides. The term "person" shall include persons,
firms, partnerships, corporations, and associations.



(Neb. RS 17-120) ('72 Code, § 10-215) (Am. Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83)



§ 114.51  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall display for the use or permit to be used any machine as
defined in § 114.50 hereof without first securing a permit therefore and
paying an occupation tax thereon as provided in Ch. 112.



(Neb. RS 17-120) ('72 Code, § 10-216) (Am. Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83)



§ 114.52  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; CONTENTS.



   (A)   Application for such permit shall be made to the City Clerk
upon a form to be furnished by the city, which application shall set forth
the following:



      (1)   Full name, age, and address of the applicant;



      (2)   Name of business and address where such machines are to
be located and operated;



      (3)   Description of any other business to be conducted on the
premises referred to in subsection (2);



      (4)   Description of each machine and the number of machines
at the location for which a permit is desired;



      (5)   Name and address of owner(s) of such machines.



   (B)   Such application shall include such other information as the
City Council may require by resolution.



(Neb. RS 17-120) ('72 Code, § 10-217) (Am. Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83)



§ 114.53  PERMIT FEE.



   The City Clerk shall issue a permit to the application upon payment by
the applicant of a permit fee of $25 dollars and upon payment of the
occupation tax provided in Ch. 112; provided, that no such permit shall be
issued upon any application made by a person under 19 years of age.



(Neb. RS 17-120) ('72 Code, § 10-218) (Am. Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83)



§ 114.54  INFORMATION ON PERMIT.



   Such permit shall set forth the name of the permittee, the premises for
which issued, the date of issuance and expiration of such permit, and the
number of machines for which it is used.



(Neb. RS 17-120) ('72 Code, § 10-219) (Am. Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83)



§ 114.55  PERMIT TO BE POSTED.



   Such permit shall be conspicuously posted at all times in that part of
the premises wherein such machines are located.



(Neb. RS 17-120) ('72 Code, § 10-220) (Am. Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83)



§ 114.56  SUBSTITUTE MACHINES.



   The permittee may substitute machines under such permit, provided the
occupation tax required by Ch. 112 is paid on such machines. The number of
machines in any premises shall at no time exceed the number set forth on the
permit for the premises.



(Neb. RS 17-120) ('72 Code, § 10-221) (Am. Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83)



§ 114.57  PERMIT NOT TRANSFERABLE.



   Such permit shall not be transferable from one person to another or
from one location to another.



(Neb. RS 17-120) ('72 Code, § 10-222) (Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83)



§ 114.58  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   Any permit so granted shall be subject to revocation by the City
Council for good cause after notice has been served and the permittee has
been allowed a hearing.



(Neb. RS 17-120) ('72 Code, § 10-223) (Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83)



§ 114.59  LOCATION; DESIGNATION IN PERMIT.



   No machine shall be displayed or operated on or in any premises except
the premises described in a permit issued under this chapter.



(Neb. RS 17-120) ('72 Code, § 10-225) (Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83)



§ 114.60  EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.



   Each permit shall expire on and shall be renewed by the first day of
May of each year.



(Neb. RS 17-120) ('72 Code, § 10-226) (Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83)



§ 114.61  PROHIBITED PRACTICES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person:



   (A)   To use slugs, tokens, plates, discs, or any objects other than
United States coins to operate such machines, except for slugs, tokens,
plates, discs, or any other object furnished by the owner of such machines at
the location of the owner's machines for use in the owner's machines only and
having no redemption in cash value other than play or amusement;



   (B)   To give or furnish or permit the giving or furnishing of any
merchandise, ticket, card, prize, reward, money, or payoff to any person
playing or operating any such machines;



   (C)   To permit the free operation of any such machines unless such
machine is so constructed that it automatically provides for or permits free
games upon the securing of a certain score thereon; or



   (D)   To use or permit the use of any such machines as a gambling
device or for or in connection with gambling.



(Neb. RS 17-120) ('72 Code, § 10-224) (Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83) Penalty,
see § 10.99



§ 114.62  SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDING OF EQUIPMENT; PROCEDURE; FEE.



   If any such machine is found being operated, kept, displayed, or
maintained in violation of this subchapter, it may be seized by the police
together with the money in such machine, which machine and money shall be
conveyed to the headquarters of the Police Department and there be kept in
the custody of the Chief of Police who shall be responsible therefore, until
the owner has paid all necessary fees and has otherwise fully complied with
this chapter. An additional fee of $10 to cover the cost of removing and
caring for said machines shall be charged by the Police Department for each
such machine taken to the Police Department Headquarters. Upon proof of
payment of all of said fees and a full compliance with provisions of this
subchapter, such machines shall be returned to the owner; otherwise such
machines, together with the money therein, shall be disposed of as provided
by state law for the disposal of other property held by the Police Department.



(Neb. RS 17-120) ('72 Code, § 10-227) (Ord. 1191, passed 4-14-83)



CHAPTER 115: LOTTERY



Section



   115.01   Participation; restrictions



   115.02   Sales outlet locations; approval required; qualification
standards



§ 115.01  PARTICIPATION; RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   No person under 19 years of age shall play or participate in
any way in the lottery established and conducted by the city.



(Neb. RS 9-646(1))



   (B)   No owner or officer of a lottery operator with whom the city
contracts to conduct its lottery shall play the lottery conducted by the
city.  No employee or agent of the city, lottery operator, or authorized
sales outlet location shall play the lottery of the city for which he or she
performs work during such time as he or she is actually working at such
lottery or while on duty.



(Neb. RS 9-646(3))



   (C)   No person or employee or agent of any person or the city shall
knowingly permit an individual under 19 years of age to play or participate
in any way in the lottery conducted by the city.



(Neb. RS 9-646(4))



   (D)   Nothing shall prohibit:



      (1)   Any member of the City Council, a city official, or the
immediate family of such member or official; or



      (2)   An owner or officer of an authorized sales outlet
location for the city from playing the lottery conducted by the city as long
as such person is 19 years of age or older.



   (E)   For purposes of this section, IMMEDIATE FAMILY OF A MEMBER OF
THE GOVERNING BODY OR A MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL shall mean:



      (1)   A person who is related to the member or official by
blood, marriage, or adoption and resides in the same household; or



      (2)   A person who is claimed by the member or official, or
the spouse of the member or official, as a dependent for federal income tax
purposes.



('72 Code, § 10-443) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-13-92; Am. Ord. 1661, passed
7-23-98)



Statutory reference:



   Authority not to restrict municipal employees and officers or relatives
thereof, see Neb. RS 9-646



§ 115.02  SALES OUTLET LOCATIONS; APPROVAL REQUIRED; QUALIFICATION
STANDARDS.



   (A)   The lottery operator with whom the City Council contracts to
conduct its lottery shall not operate the lottery at a sales outlet location
other than the location of the lottery operator without prior approval of the
sales outlet location by the City Council.  The City Council shall approve
or disapprove each sales outlet location and individual, sole proprietorship,
partnership, limited liability company, or corporation which desires to
conduct the lottery at its sales outlet location solely on the basis of the
qualification standards prescribed in division (B) of this section.



   (B)   Any individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, limited
liability company, or corporation which seeks to have its location approved
as an authorized sales outlet location shall:



      (1)   First obtain a retail liquor license for consumption on
the premises pursuant to Neb. RS Chapter 53, Article 1;



      (2)   Not have been convicted of, forfeited bond upon a charge
of, or pleaded guilty to forgery, larceny, extortion, conspiracy to defraud,
willful failure to make required payments or reports to a governmental agency
at any level, filing false reports with any such agency, or any similar
offense or offenses or any crime, whether felony or misdemeanor, involving
gambling activity or moral turpitude;



      (3)   Not have had a gaming license revoked or canceled under
the Nebraska Bingo Act, the Nebraska Pickle Card Lottery Act, the Nebraska
Lottery and Raffle Act, or the Nebraska County and City Lottery Act; and



      (4)   Be fit, willing, and able to provide properly the
service proposed in conformance with all provisions and requirements of the
Nebraska County and City Lottery Act and the rules and regulations adopted
and promulgated pursuant to the act.



   (C)   If the person seeking to have its location approved as an
authorized sales outlet location is a partnership, limited liability company,
or corporation, the qualification standards shall apply to every partner of
such partnership, every member of such limited liability company, every
officer of such corporation, and stockholder owning more than 10% of the
stock of such corporation.



   (D)   The City Council shall notify the Department of Revenue of all
approved lottery locations within 30 days of approval.



('72 Code, § 10-444) (Ord. 1382, passed 2-13-92) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Location regulated, see Neb. RS 9-642.01



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



      Chapter



         130.   GENERAL OFFENSES



         131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY



CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



   130.01   Curfew



   130.02   Disorderly conduct



   130.03   Weapons; discharge



   130.04   Public nudity



   130.05   Aiding and abetting public nudity



   130.06   Public nudity; definitions



§ 130.01  CURFEW.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years
to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, or play in or upon any of the streets,
roads, alleys, or parks of the city, or other places of public amusement or
recreation therein after the hour of 11:00 p.m. and until the hour of 5:00
a.m. of the following day on Sunday through Thursday, and after the hour of
12:30 a.m. and until the hour of 5:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, or any adult
person having the legal care, custody, or control of any minor under the age
of 18 years to allow or permit such minor to loiter, wander, stroll, idle, or
play in or about any of the places designated in division (A) of this section
after the hour of 11:00 p.m. and until the hour of 5:00 a.m. of the following
day on Sunday through Thursday, and after the hour of 12:30 a.m. and until
the hour of 5:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday.



   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under divisions (A) and (B)
that the minor was:



      (1)   Accompanied by a parent, guardian, or other adult person
having the legal care, custody, or control of such minor;



      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent,
guardian, or other adult person having the legal care, custody, or control of
such minor and was using a direct route;



      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;



      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, including but not
limited to newspaper delivery, and was using a direct route;



      (5)   Involved in an emergency;



      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or
abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not
complain to the police officer about the minor's presence;



      (7)   Attending an official school or religious activity or
returning home by a direct route from an official school or religious
activity;



      (8)   Exercising first amendment rights protected by the
United States constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly; or



      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of
minority removed in accordance with the laws of the state of Nebraska.



('72 Code, § 6-343) (Ord. 1478, passed 3-2-95) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   General ordinance making authority, see Neb. RS 17-505



§ 130.02  DISORDERLY CONDUCT; UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   TUMULTUOUS CONDUCT.  Conduct that results in or is likely to result in
serious bodily injury to a person or substantial damage to property.



   UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.  An assembly of five or more persons whose common
object is to commit an unlawful act, or a lawful act by unlawful means. 
Prior concert is not necessary to form an unlawful assembly.



   (B)   Prohibitions.  No person shall recklessly, knowingly, or
intentionally:



      (1)   Engage in fighting or in tumultuous conduct;



      (2)   Make unreasonable noise and continue to do so after
being asked to stop;



      (3)   Disrupt a lawful assembly of persons;



      (4)   Obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or



      (5)   Participate in unlawful assembly.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.03  WEAPONS; DISCHARGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a crossbow, bow and
arrow, slingshot, air gun, BB gun, or the like loaded with rock or other
dangerous missiles at any time or under any circumstances within the city.



(Neb. RS 17-556) ('72 Code, § 6-322) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.04  PUBLIC NUDITY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally
appear in a state of nudity in a public place, in any place open to the
public, or while employed in any providing service, product or entertainment
in any business or commercial establishment, except that the above shall not
apply to:



   (A)   Any theater, concert hall, art center, museum or similar
establishment which is primarily devoted to the arts or theatrical
performances and which receives less than 50% of its gross annual revenue
from the sale of alcoholic liquors, beer, wine, and/or similar alcoholic
spirits, and in which any of the circumstances contained in this section were
lawfully permitted or allowed as part of such art exhibit or performance; or



   (B)   Any dressing/changing room or restroom facility open to the
public; or



   (C)   Any person under 12 years of age; or



   (D)   Any individual exposing a breast in the process of breast
feeding an infant.



(Ord. 1753, passed 3-22-01; Am. Ord. 1870, passed 3-25-04)



§ 130.05  AIDING AND ABETTING PUBLIC NUDITY.



   It shall be unlawful for anyone to aid, abet, assist or direct another
person to knowingly or intentionally appear in a state of nudity in a public
place, in any place open to the public, or while employed in providing any
service, product or entertainment in any business or commercial establishment.



(Ord. 1753, passed 3-22-01; Am. Ord. 1870, passed 3-25-04)



§ 130.06  PUBLIC NUDITY; DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   NUDITY.  The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic
area, with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female
breast with less than a full opaque covering of any portion thereof below the
top of the nipple; the exposure of any device, costume, or covering which
gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft,
perineum anal region, or pubic hair region, or the exposure of any device
worn as a cover over the nipples and/or areola of the female breast, which
device simulates and gives the realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Includes all outdoor places owned by or open to the
general public and all buildings and enclosed places owned by or open to the
general public, including such places of entertainment, taverns, restaurants,
clubs, theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party rooms, or halls limited to
specific members, restricted to adults or to patrons invited to attend,
whether or not an admission charge is levied.



(Ord. 1870, passed 3-25-04)



CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY



Section



General Provisions



   131.01   (Reserved)



   131.02   (Reserved)



   131.03   Removing dirt



   131.04   (Reserved)



   131.05   Toxic inhalants prohibited



Automobiles



   131.20   Abandoned automobiles



Tobacco



   131.50   Possession by minors



   131.51   Sale to minors



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 131.01  (RESERVED).



§ 131.02  (RESERVED).



§ 131.03  REMOVING DIRT.



   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to remove, disturb, or
take away from any street, alley, or public grounds any dirt, earth, stones,
or other materials forming a part of such street, alley, or public grounds
without first having obtained written permission to do so from the City
Council.



('72 Code, § 6-332) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.04  (RESERVED).



§ 131.05  TOXIC INHALANTS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall induce or entice any person to breathe, inhale
or drink any compound, liquid or chemical containing acetate, acetone,
benzene, butyl alcohol, cyclphexanone, ethyl acetate, ethyl alcohol, ethylene
dichloride, ethylene trichloride, hexane, isopropanol, isopropyl alcohol,
methyl alcohol, methyl cellosolve acetate, methyl ethyl ketone, methyl
isobutyl ketone, pentachlorophenal, petroleum ether, toulene, toluol,
trichlorathane, trichloroethylene, or any other substance for the purpose of
inducing a condition of intoxication, stupefaction, depression, giddiness,
paralysis, inebriation, excitement or irrational behavior, or in any manner
changing, distorting or disturbing the auditory, visual, mental or nervous
processes. For purposes of this section, any such condition so induced shall
be deemed an intoxicated condition.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly sell or offer for sale, deliver or
give to any person any compound, liquid or chemical or any other substance
which will induce an intoxicated condition as defined in division (A) above,
when the seller, offerer or deliverer knows or has reason to know that such
compound is intended for use to induce such condition.



(Neb. RS 28-419, 28-420) ('72 Code, § 6-338) Penalty, see § 10.99



AUTOMOBILES



§ 131.20  ABANDONED AUTOMOBILES.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall cause any vehicle to be an abandoned
vehicle as described in division (B) of this section.



(Neb. RS 60-1907)



      (2)   No person other than one authorized by the municipality
or appropriate state agency shall destroy, deface, or remove any part of a
vehicle which is left unattended on a highway or other public place without
license plates affixed or which is abandoned.



(Neb. RS 60-1908)



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ABANDONED VEHICLE.



         (a)   A motor vehicle is an ABANDONED VEHICLE:



            1.   If left unattended, with no license plates or
valid "in transit" stickers issued pursuant to the Motor Vehicle Registration
Act affixed thereto, for more than six hours on any public property;



            2.   If left unattended for more than 24 hours on
any public property, except a portion thereof on which parking is legally
permitted;



            3.   If left unattended for more than 48 hours
after the parking of the vehicle has become illegal, if left on a portion of
any public property on which parking is legally permitted;



            4.   If left unattended for more than seven days
on private property if left initially without permission of the owner, or
after permission of the owner is terminated; or



            5.   If left for more than 30 days in the custody
of a law enforcement agency after the agency has sent a letter to the last
registered owner under division (E) of this section. 



            6.   If removed from private property by the city
pursuant to a city ordinance or this code.



         (b)   An all-terrain vehicle or minibike is an ABANDONED
VEHICLE:



            1.   If left unattended for more than 24 hours on
any public property, except a portion thereof on which parking is legally
permitted;



            2.   If left unattended for more than 48 hours,
after the parking of such vehicle has become illegal, if left on a portion of
any public property on which parking is legally permitted;



            3.   If left unattended for more than seven days
on private property if left initially without permission of the owner, or
after permission of the owner is terminated;



            4.   If left for more than 30 days in the custody
of a city law enforcement agency after the agency has sent a letter to the
last-registered owner under division (D) of this section; or



            5.   If removed from private property by the city
pursuant to a city ordinance or this code.



         (c)   No motor vehicle subject to forfeiture under Neb.
RS 28-431 shall be an ABANDONED VEHICLE under this division (B).



      PRIVATE PROPERTY.  Any privately owned property which is not
included within the definition of public property.



      PUBLIC PROPERTY.  Any public right-of-way, street, highway,
alley, or park or other state, county, or city-owned property.



(Neb. RS 60-1901)



   (C)   If an abandoned vehicle, at the time of abandonment, has no
license plates of the current year or valid "in transit" stickers issued
pursuant to Neb. RS 60-376 affixed and is of a wholesale value, taking into
consideration the condition of the vehicle, of $250 or less, title shall
immediately vest in the municipality.



(Neb. RS 60-1902)



   (D)   (1)   Except for vehicles governed by division (C) of this
section, the municipality shall make an inquiry concerning the last
registered owner of an abandoned vehicle as follows:



         (a)   Abandoned vehicle with license plates affixed, to
the jurisdiction which issued the license plates; or



         (b)   Abandoned vehicle with no license plates affixed,
to the Department of Motor Vehicles.



      (2)   The municipality shall notify the last registered owner,
if any, that the vehicle in question has been determined to be an abandoned
vehicle and that, if unclaimed, either:



         (a)   It will be sold or will be offered at public
auction after five days from the date the notice was mailed; or



         (b)   Title will vest in the municipality 30 days after
the date the notice was mailed.



      (3)   If the municipality is notified that a lien or mortgage
exists, the notice described in division (D)(2) of this section shall also be
sent to the lienholder or mortgagee.  Any person claiming the vehicle shall
be required to pay the cost of removal and storage of the vehicle.



      (4)   Title to an abandoned vehicle, if unclaimed, shall vest
in the municipality:



         (a)   Five days after the date the notice is mailed if
the vehicle will be sold or offered at public auction under division
(D)(2)(a) of this section;



         (b)   Thirty days after the date the notice is mailed if
the municipality will retain the vehicle; or



         (c)   If the last registered owner cannot be
ascertained, when notice of that fact is received.



      (5)   After title to the abandoned vehicle vests pursuant to
division (D)(4) of this section, the municipality may retain for use, sell,
or auction the abandoned vehicle.  If the municipality has determined that
the vehicle should be retained for use, the municipality shall, at the same
time that the notice, if any, is mailed, publish in a newspaper of general
circulation in the jurisdiction an announcement that the municipality intends
to retain the abandoned vehicle for its use and that title will vest in the
municipality 30 days after publication.



(Neb. RS 60-1903)



   (E)   (1)   If the municipal law enforcement agency has custody
of a motor vehicle for investigatory purposes and has no further need to keep
it in custody, it shall send a certified letter to each of the last
registered owners stating that the vehicle is in the custody of the agency,
that the vehicle is no longer needed for law enforcement purposes, and that
after 30 days the agency will dispose of the vehicle. 



      (2)   This division shall not apply to motor vehicles subject
to forfeiture under Neb. RS 28-431.



      (3)   No storage fees shall be assessed against the registered
owner of a motor vehicle held in custody for investigatory purposes under
this division unless the registered owner or the person in possession of the
vehicle when it is taken into custody is charged with a felony or misdemeanor
related to the offense for which the law enforcement agency took the vehicle
into custody.  If a registered owner or the person in possession of the
vehicle when it is taken into custody is charged with a felony or misdemeanor
but is not convicted, the registered owner shall be entitled to a refund of
the storage fees.



(Neb. RS 60-1903.01)



   (F)   Any proceeds from the sale of an abandoned vehicle, less any
expenses incurred by the municipality, shall be held by the municipality
without interest, for the benefit of the owner or lienholders of the vehicle,
for a period of two years.  If not claimed within that two-year period, the
proceeds shall be paid into the general fund of the municipality.



(Neb. RS 60-1905)



   (G)   Neither the owner, lessee, nor occupant of the premises from
which any abandoned vehicle is removed, nor the municipality, shall be liable
for any loss or damage to the vehicle which occurs during its removal or
while in the possession of the municipality or its contractual agent or as a
result of any subsequent disposition.



(Neb. RS 60-1906)



   (H)   The last registered owner of an abandoned vehicle shall be
liable to the municipality for the costs of removal and storage of the
vehicle.



(Neb. RS 60-1909)



   (I)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      PRIVATE PROPERTY.  Any privately owned property which is not
included within the definition of public property.



      PUBLIC PROPERTY.  Any public right-of-way, street, highway,
alley, or park, or other state, county, or municipally owned property.



(Neb. RS 60-1901)



   (J)   Any person who violates the provisions of this section is
guilty of an offense.



('72 Code, § 6-337) (Am. Ord. 1089, passed 2-24-77) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Additional regulations, see Neb. RS 60-1901 through 60-1911



TOBACCO



§ 131.50  POSSESSION BY MINORS.



   It shall be unlawful for any minor, as defined by Neb. RS 53-103, to
transport, possess knowingly, or have under his or her control, in any motor
vehicle, tobacco products on any public street, alley, roadway, or property
owned by the state of Nebraska or any subdivision thereof or any other place
within the city limits.



('72 Code, § 6-344) (Ord. 1586, passed 8-14-97) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Tobacco use by minors prohibited, see Neb. RS 28-1418



§ 131.51  SALE TO MINORS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give, or furnish in any
way any tobacco in any form whatever, or any cigarettes or cigarette paper,
to any minor under 18 years of age.



(Neb. RS 28-1419) ('72 Code, § 10-442) Penalty, see § 10.99



TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



      Chapter



         150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS



         151.   SUBDIVISION AND ZONING REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   150.001   Swimming pools; enclosure



   150.002   Egress windows, required



Adoption of Codes



   150.015   Building Code adopted by reference; conflicts



   150.016   Housing Code adopted by reference; conflicts



   150.017   Plumbing Code adopted by reference; prohibition of lead
pipes, solder, and flux; conflicts



   150.018   Electrical Code adopted by reference; conflicts



   150.019   Fire Prevention Code adopted by reference



   150.020   Mechanical Code adopted by reference; conflicts



   150.021   Energy Code adopted by reference; conflicts



Moving of Buildings



   150.030   Regulation



   150.031   Deposit



Building Regulations Enforcement



   150.045   Building Inspector; powers



   150.046   Unsafe buildings



   150.047   Permits required



   150.048   Plans and specifications



   150.049   Fees



   150.050   Inspection



   150.051   Permits to repair within fire limits



   150.052   Violations



   150.053   Building permits; duplicate to County Assessor



Building Inspector



   150.080   Power and authority



   150.081   Right of entry



   150.082   Permit fees



   150.083   Liability



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.001  SWIMMING POOLS; ENCLOSURE.



   (A)   Every outdoor private, residential, or family pool shall be
completely surrounded by a fence or wall, or combination thereof, not less
than five feet in height above ground level which shall be so constructed as
not to have any openings, holes, or gaps larger than four inches in any
dimensions except for doors and gates, and if a picket fence is erected or
maintained, the horizontal dimensions shall not exceed four inches. A
dwelling or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure.



   (B)   All fences enclosing private, residential, or family pools
shall be constructed to conform to the requirements of the City Building Code
regulations.



   (C)   All gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be
equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device for keeping the gate or
door securely closed at all times, except that the door of the dwelling which
forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped.



   (D)   This section shall be applicable to all existing outdoor
private, residential, or family pools, and to all new outdoor private,
residential, or family pools hereinafter constructed, other than indoor
pools, and shall apply to all pools which have a minimum depth of 24 inches
of water. No person in possession of land within the city or the jurisdiction
of its zoning ordinance, either as owner, purchaser, lessee, tenant, or
licensee, upon which is situated an outdoor private, residential, or family
pool, having a depth of 24 inches or more, shall fail to provide and maintain
such fence or wall as herein provided.



   (E)   Drainage of said swimming pool must not be onto any adjoining
property. There shall be no drainage of said swimming pool into the sanitary
sewer of the city. Drainage may be permitted into the storm sewer provided
the chemicals contained in said swimming pool are first diluted. All
chemicals for said swimming pool must be stored in a secure area.



   (F)   All newly constructed swimming pools must be inspected by the
City Building Inspector prior to being filled with water for the first time.



('72 Code, § 9-106) (Ord. 1307, passed 5-11-89; Am. Ord. 1874, passed
7-8-04) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.002  EGRESS WINDOWS, REQUIRED.



   All new basements and additions that include new basement areas must
also have an escape/rescue window included in the scope of work whether
finished or not.  Refer to Section R310 of the International Residential
Code, latest edition for further information.



(Ord. 1890, passed 2-10-05)



Cross reference:



   International Residential Code, see § 150.016



ADOPTION OF CODES



§ 150.015  BUILDING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; CONFLICTS.



   (A)   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions, and
requirements for safe and stable design, methods of construction, and uses of
materials in buildings hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged, altered,
repaired, relocated, and converted, the latest current edition, as amended,
of the International Building Code (IBC) 2000 Edition issued by the
International Code Council and printed in book or pamphlet form, is hereby
incorporated by reference in addition to all amended editions as though
printed in full herein insofar as said code does not conflict with the
statutes of the State of Nebraska.  One copy of the International Building
Code is on file at the office of the City Clerk and are available for public
inspection at any reasonable time. The provisions of the International
Building Code shall be controlling throughout the city and throughout its
zoning jurisdiction.



('72 Code, § 9-201)



   (B)   Where provisions of the International Building Code conflict
with the provisions of other portions of this chapter or with the provisions
of Chapter 151 of this code of ordinances, the most restrictive or stringent
provisions shall govern.



('72 Code, § 9-202)



(Am. Ord. 1017, passed 4-25-74; Am. Ord. 1166, passed 4-23-81; Am. Ord. 1855,
passed 11-13-03)



§ 150.016  HOUSING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; CONFLICTS.



   (A)   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions, and
requirements for safe and stable design, methods of construction, and uses of
materials in houses hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged, altered,
repaired, relocated, and converted, the latest current edition, as amended,
of the International Residential Code (IRC) 2000 Edition issued by the
International Code Council and printed in book or pamphlet form, is hereby
incorporated by reference in addition to all amended editions as though
printed in full herein insofar as said code does not conflict with the
statutes of the state of Nebraska. One copy of the International Residential
Code is on file at the office of the City Clerk and is available for public
inspection at any reasonable time.  The provisions of the International
Residential Code shall be controlling throughout the city and throughout its
zoning jurisdiction.



(Neb. RS 17-1001, 18-132, 19-901, 19-922) ('72 Code, § 9-301)



   (B)   The following sections of the International Residential Code
are hereby adding a new section as follows:



SECTION R324
CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTORS



R324.1  Carbon Monoxide Detectors. New Construction. The following
subsections shall govern the requirements on carbon monoxide detectors in new
construction.



R324.1.1 Location. Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed on every
floor level of new construction dwelling.  If a floor level contains
bedrooms, at least one (1) detector shall be located in the immediate
vicinity but outside of the bedrooms. The alarm shall be clearly audible in
all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed.
Carbon monoxide detectors shall be listed and installed in accordance with
their listing. Combination carbon monoxide/smoke detectors are acceptable as
long as they meet all requirements.



Exceptions:



1.   Carbon monoxide detectors are not required in dwelling units with no
combustion appliances and without an attached garage.



2.   Carbon monoxide detectors are not required in dwelling units with
only direct vent combustion appliances and without an attached garage.



R324.1.2 Interconnection.  In new construction, carbon monoxide detectors
located within a single dwelling unit shall be interconnected in such a
manner that the actuation of one alarm shall activate all of the alarms in
the individual dwelling unit.



R324.1.3 Power Source.  In new construction, carbon monoxide detectors shall
receive their primary power from the building wiring where such wiring is
served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery back-up.
Wiring shall be permanent and without disconnecting switch other than those
required for overcurrent protection.



R324.2 Carbon Monoxide Detectors, in Alterations, Repairs or Additions. The
following subsections shall govern the requirements on carbon monoxide
detectors when existing dwellings are altered, repairs or have additions.



R324.2.1 Location. When interior alterations, repairs, or additions requiring
a permit occur, or when one or more sleeping rooms are added or created in
existing dwellings, the individual unit shall be provided with carbon
monoxide detectors as required in Section R324.1.1.



R324.2.2 Interconnection. When interior alterations, repairs, or additions
requiring a permit occur, carbon monoxide detectors are required to be
interconnected. In the event that alterations or repairs do not result in the
removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes  exposing the structure, unless
there is an attic, crawl space, or basement available which could provide
access for interconnection, interconnection is not required.



R324.2.3 Power Source. When interior alterations, repairs, or additions
requiring a permit occur, carbon monoxide detectors are required to be hard
wired to a primary power source from the building wiring and shall receive
backup power from a battery source. In the event that alterations or repairs
do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing
the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available
which could provide access for hard wiring to a primary power source, hard
wiring is not required.  In this case, carbon monoxide detectors shall be
permitted to be battery operated.



   (C)   Where the provisions of the International Residential Code
conflict with the provisions of other portions of this chapter or with
provisions of Ch. 151 of this code of ordinances, the most restrictive or
stringent provisions shall govern.



('72 Code, § 9-302)



(Am. Ord. 1017, passed 4-25-74; Am. Ord. 1166, passed 4-23-81; Am. Ord. 1855,
passed 11-13-03; Am. Ord. 1921, passed 3-9-06)



§ 150.017  PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; PROHIBITION OF LEAD PIPES,
SOLDER, AND FLUX; CONFLICTS.



   (A)   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions, and
requirements for safe and stable design, methods of construction, and uses of
materials in the installation of plumbing and heating, the latest current
edition, as amended, of the IAPMO "Uniform Plumbing Code," issued by the
International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, printed in
book or pamphlet form, is hereby incorporated by reference in addition to all
amended editions as though printed in full herein, insofar as said code does
not conflict with the statutes of the state of Nebraska.  One copy of the
Plumbing Code is on file at the office of the City Clerk and is available for
public inspection at any reasonable time.  The provisions of the Plumbing
Code shall be controlling throughout the city and throughout its zoning
jurisdiction. 



(Neb. RS 71-5301)  ('72 Code, § 9-401, 9-403) (Am. Ord. 1082, passed
12-9-76; Am. Ord. 1166, passed 4-23-81; Am. Ord. 1292, passed 5-12-88; Am.
Ord. 1508, passed 8-24-95)



   (B)   The following sections of the Plumbing Code are hereby revised:



Section 1209.5.1.1 Materials.  Materials used for piping systems shall
comply with the requirements of this chapter of shall be acceptable to the
Authority. 



Having Jurisdiction.  Specifically, materials used from the point of
delivery to inside the structure shall meet the standards spelled out in
Section 1209.5.2.2 Steel and wrought-iron pipe specifications. 



(Ord. 1911A, passed 11-22-05)



   (C)   Where the provisions of the Plumbing Code conflict with the
provisions of other portions of this chapter or with provisions of Chapter
151 of this code of ordinances, the most restrictive or stringent provisions
shall govern. 



('72 Code, § 9-402)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.018  ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; CONFLICTS.



   (A)   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions, and
requirements for safe and fire proof installation, methods of connection, and
uses of materials in the installation of electrical wiring and appliances,
the current edition of the "National Electrical Safety Code," issued by the
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., printed in book or
pamphlet form, is hereby incorporated by reference in addition to all amended
editions as though printed in full herein, insofar as said code does not
conflict with the statutes of the state of Nebraska.  One copy of the
Electrical Code is on file at the office of the City Clerk and is available
for public inspection at any reasonable time.  The provisions of the
Electrical Code shall be controlling throughout the city and throughout its
zoning jurisdiction.



('72 Code, § 9-501) (Am. Ord. 1166, passed 4-23-81; Am. Ord. 1471, passed
12-12-94)



   (B)   Where provisions of the Electrical Code conflict with the
provisions of other portions of this chapter or with the provisions of
Chapter 151 of this code of ordinances, the most restrictive or stringent
provisions shall govern.



('72 Code, § 9-502)



§ 150.019  FIRE PREVENTION CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for
the safeguarding to a reasonable degree of life and property from the hazards
of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling, and use of
hazardous substances, materials, and devices in the use or occupancy of
buildings or premises, as amended by the latest, current edition existing at
the time of the adoption of this section and all future amendments or
editions of the "Life Safety Code," issued by the National Fire Protection
Association, printed in book or pamphlet form, is hereby incorporated by
reference in addition to all amended editions as though printed in full
herein. A copy of the most current edition will be on file at the office of
the City Clerk and available for public inspection at any reasonable time.
The provisions of the "Life Safety Code" shall be controlling throughout the
city and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.



('72 Code, § 9-601) (Ord. 1193, passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 1417, passed 1-14-93)



Cross reference:



   Fire Prevention Code, see § 91.25



§ 150.020  MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; CONFLICTS.



   (A)   To provide certain minimum standards, provisions and
requirements for safe and stable design, methods of construction, and uses of
materials in the installation of mechanical equipment, the latest current
edition, as amended, of the IAPMO Uniform Mechanical Code, issued by the
International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, printed in
book or pamphlet form, is hereby incorporated by reference in addition to all
amended editions as though printed in full herein, insofar as said code does
not conflict with the statutes of the State of Nebraska.  One copy of the
Mechanical Code is on file at the office of the City Clerk and is available
for public inspection at any reasonable time.  The provisions of the
Mechanical Code shall be controlling through the city and throughout its
zoning jurisdiction.



   (B)   Where the provisions of the Mechanical Code conflict with
provisions of other portions of this chapter or with provisions of Chapter
151 of this code of ordinances, the most restrictive or stringent provisions
shall govern.



(Ord. 1856, passed 11-24-03)



§ 150.021  ENERGY CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; CONFLICTS.



   (A)   The International Energy Conservation Code, 2003 Edition, as
published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the Energy
Code of this municipality for regulating and governing energy efficient
envelopes and installation of energy efficient mechanical, lighting and power
systems as herein provided; providing for issuance of permits and collection
of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Energy Conservation Code on file in the office
of the City Administrator/Clerk/Treasurer are hereby adopted, and made a part
hereof, as if fully set out in this code, insofar as such code does not
conflict with the statues of the State of Nebraska.  One copy of the Energy
Code in on file at the office of the City Administrator/Clerk/ Treasurer and
is available for public inspection at any reasonable time.  The provisions
of the Energy Code shall be controlling through the city and throughout its
zoning jurisdiction.



   (B)   Where the provisions of the Energy Code conflict with
provisions of other portions of this chapter or with provisions of Chapter
151 of this code of ordinances, the most restrictive or stringent provisions
shall govern.



(Ord. 1901, passed 6-9-05)



MOVING OF BUILDINGS



§ 150.030  REGULATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to move any
building or structure within the city without a written permit to do so. 
Application may be made to the City Clerk and shall include the present and
future location of the building to be moved, the proposed route, the
equipment to be used, and such other information as the City Council may
require.  The application shall be accompanied by a certificate issued by
the County Treasurer to the effect that all the provisions regulating the
moving of buildings have been complied with on the part of the owner of the
real estate upon which the building is presently located.  The City Clerk
shall refer the application to the Chief of Police for approval of the
proposed route over which the building is to be moved.  Upon approval of the
City Council, the City Clerk shall then issue the permit, provided that a
good and sufficient corporate surety bond, check, or cash in an amount set by
motion of the City Council and conditioned upon moving the building without
doing damage to any private or city property is filed with the City Clerk
prior to the granting of any permit. In the event it will be necessary for
any licensed building mover to interfere with the telephone or telegraph
poles and wires, or a gas line, the company or companies owning, using, or
operating the poles, wires, or line shall upon proper notice of at least 24
hours, be present and assist by disconnecting the poles, wires, or line
relative to the building moving operation.  All expense of the
disconnection, removal, or related work shall be paid in advance by the
licensee unless such disconnection or work is furnished on different terms as
provided in the company's franchise.  Whenever the moving of any building
necessitates interference with a water main, sewer main, pipes, or wire
belonging to the city, notice in writing of the time and route of the
building moving operation shall be given to the various city officials in
charge of the city utility departments who shall proceed in behalf of the
city and at the expense of the mover to make such disconnections and do such
work as is necessary.



('72 Code, § 10-431) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate moving of buildings, see Neb. RS 17-142



   Vehicle size, weight, and load regulations, see Neb. RS 60-6,288
through 60-6,299



   Taxes, removal or demolition, and liens, see Neb. RS 77-1725.01



§ 150.031  DEPOSIT.



   At such time as the building moving has been completed, the city police
shall inspect the premises and report to the City Clerk as to the extent of
damages, if any, resulting from the relocation and whether any city laws have
been violated during the operation. Upon a satisfactory report from the city
police, the City Clerk shall return the corporate surety bond, cash, or check
deposited by the applicant.  In the event the basement, foundation, or
portion thereof is not properly filled, covered, or in a clean and sanitary
condition, the City Council may apply the money deposited for the purpose of
defraying the expense of correcting the conditions.  If the expense of
correcting the hazardous condition is greater than the amount of the deposit
set by the City Council as required herein, the City Council may recover such
excess expense by civil suit or otherwise as prescribed by law.



('72 Code, § 10-432)



BUILDING REGULATIONS ENFORCEMENT



§ 150.045  BUILDING INSPECTOR; POWERS.



   The Building Inspector shall enforce all provisions of the Building
Code adopted by the Mayor and City Council. For such purpose, he or she shall
have the powers of a police officer. In accordance with the procedure and
with the approval of the City Council, the Building Inspector may appoint
such number of officers, inspectors, assistants, and other employees as shall
be authorized from time to time. He or she may deputize such employees as may
be necessary to carry out the enforcement functions. Upon presentation of
proper credentials, the Building Inspector or his or her duly authorized
representatives may enter at any reasonable time any building, structure, or
premises in the city to perform any duty imposed upon him or her by this
code. Whenever any building work is being done contrary to the laws of this
city, the Building Inspector may order the work stopped by notice in writing
served on any persons engaged in doing or causing such work to be done, and
any such persons shall forthwith stop work until authorized by the Building
Inspector to proceed with the work. Whenever any structure is being used
contrary to the provisions of this code or the Building Code, the Building
Inspector may order such use discontinued and the structure, or portion
thereof, vacated by notice served on any person causing such use to be
continued. Such person shall discontinue the use within ten days after
receipt of such notice to make the structure, or portion thereof, comply with
the requirements of this code except as otherwise hereinafter provided. The
Building Inspector, or any employee acting in good faith and without malice
for the city in the discharge of his or her duties, shall not thereby render
himself or herself liable personally and he or she is hereby relieved from
all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to person or property
as a result of any act required or by reason of any act or omission in the
discharge of his or her duties. Any suit brought against the Building
Inspector or an employee, because of such act or omission performed by him or
her in the enforcement of any provisions of this code or the Building Code,
shall be defended by the legal department until final termination of the
proceedings. The Building Inspector may request, and shall receive so far as
may be necessary in the discharge of his or her duties, the assistance and
cooperation of other officials of the city.



('72 Code, § 3-601)



§ 150.046  UNSAFE BUILDINGS.



   (A)   All buildings or structures or portions thereof, hereafter
called "premises" which are structurally unsafe or not provided with adequate
egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or which are otherwise dangerous
to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to
safety, health, or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, are
hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition, or removal as set forth herein.



   (B)   The Building Inspector shall examine or cause to be examined
every premise reported to be a public nuisance as defined in division (A)
above.



   (C)   If such premise is found to be a public nuisance, the Building
Inspector shall give to the owner of such premises written notice stating the
defects thereof. This notice may require the owner or person in charge of the
premises to commence within a reasonable time either the required repairs of
improvements or demolition and removal of the premises, and all such work
shall be completed within 90 days from the date of the notice unless
otherwise stipulated by the Building Inspector.  If necessary, such notice
shall also require the premises to be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied
until the required repairs and improvements are completed, inspected, and
approved by the Building Inspector.  The  notice shall also set forth a
date, time, and place of a meeting of the City Council at which the City
Council shall hear the testimony of all competent persons desiring to testify
respecting the condition of the premise constituting the public nuisance,
including the owner thereof, which testimony shall include the estimated
costs of abatement and other matters which may be pertinent.



   (D)   Proper service of such notice shall be by personal service
upon the owner of record if he or she shall be found within the corporate
limits. If he or she is not found within the city limits, such service may be
made upon said owner by registered mail or certified mail.  The designated
period within which said owner or person in charge is required to comply with
the order of the Building Inspector shall begin as of the date he or she
receives such notice.



   (E)   The Building Inspector shall cause to be posted at each
entrance to such premises a notice to read:



   "DO NOT ENTER, UNSAFE TO OCCUPY.



   City of Wahoo."



Such notice shall remain posted until the required repair, demolition, or
removal is completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written
permission of the Building Inspector, and no person shall enter the premises
except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the
premises.



   (F)   At the conclusion of the hearing of the City Council as set
forth in division (C) above, the City Council shall, by resolution, declare
its findings.  If the City Council so concludes, it may declare the
condition existing to be a public nuisance and direct the Mayor and/or the
Building Inspector to proceed in accordance with the terms and conditions of
the notice as set forth in division (C) above or as modified by the City
Council and set forth within said resolution.  Further, at the conclusion of
the hearing of the City Council, if the premise poses an immediate danger to
the health, safety, or general welfare of any person or persons, and the City
Council so finds and if the owner fails to remedy the situation in a
reasonable time, the City Council may summarily cause the repair or
demolition or removal of such building or structure.  Such determination
shall be considered a final order of the city.  The city shall thereafter
file a copy of such resolution in the office of the Saunders County Register
of Deeds.  No fee shall be charged for such recording or the release of such
recording.



   (G)   In case the owner shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply
with the notice and/or resolution to repair, rehabilitate, or demolish and
remove said premises, the City Council may order the owner of the premises
prosecuted as a violator of the provisions of this code and may order the
Building Inspector to proceed with the work specified in such notice and/or
resolution.



   (H)   If the city/Building Inspector proceeds to abate the nuisance,
a statement of the cost of such work shall be transmitted to the City
Council. Such costs shall be charged to the owner of the premises by the City
Council, after giving notice to the owner of the premises and the opportunity
of the owner to be heard regarding said costs.  Such costs shall be charged
to the owner of the premises involved as a special assessment on the land on
which the premises is located and shall be collected in the manner provided
for special assessments and/or collected from the owner of the premises and
the city may enforce the collection by civil action in any court of competent
jurisdiction.



(Neb. RS 18-1722) ('72 Code, § 3-602) (Am. Ord. 2007, passed 10-16-08)



§ 150.047  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish any building or structure in the
city, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a separate
building permit for each such building or structure from the Building
Inspector.



   (B)   To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an
application therefor in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every
such application shall:



      (1)   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the
permit for which application is made.



      (2)   Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be
done by lot, block, tract, and house and street address or similar
description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed
building or work.



      (3)   Show the use or occupancy of all parts of the building.



      (4)   Be accompanied by plans and specifications.



      (5)   State the valuation of the proposed work.



      (6)   List of all subcontractors.



      (7)   Be signed by the permittee or his or her authorized
agent, who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority.



      (8)   Give such other information as may be reasonably
required by the Building Inspector.



('72 Code, § 3-604) (Am. Ord. 1857, passed 11-24-03)



§ 150.048  PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Plans shall be drawn to scale upon substantial paper or cloth
and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the
work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of
the Building Code and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
Plans shall include a plot plan showing the location of the proposed building
and of every existing building on the property. In lieu of detailed
specifications, the Building Inspector may approve references on the plans to
a specific section or part of the Building Code or other ordinances or laws.
Computations, stress diagrams, and other data sufficient to show the
correctness of the plans shall be submitted when required by the Building
Inspector.



   (B)   Every permit issued by the Building Inspector shall be for a
twelve month period and shall expire by limitation and become null and void
if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned
any time after the work is commenced for a period of 90 days. Before such
work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and
the fee therefor shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for
such work; provided, no changes have been made or will be made in the
original plans and specifications for such work; and provided further, that
such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. The Building
Inspector may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under provisions
of this code whenever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of
incorrect information supplied, or in violation of any ordinance or
regulation or any of the provisions of this code.



('72 Code, § 3-605)



§ 150.049  FEES.



   For new construction, the fee for a permit is based upon the number of
square feet of floor space, all floors except basements included, which the
new structure occupies, including attached and detached garages. All fees
charged shall be set by the Building Inspector and when approved by the City
Council shall be on file at the office of the Building Inspector and the
office of the City Clerk for inspection at any reasonable time.



('72 Code, § 3-606)



§ 150.050  INSPECTION.



   (A)   All construction or work for which a permit is required shall
be subject to inspection by the Building Inspector, and certain types of
construction shall have continuous inspection by special inspectors. Work
requiring a building permit shall not be commenced until the permit holder or
his or her agent shall have posted an inspection record card in a conspicuous
place on the front of the premises and in such position as to allow the
Building Inspector conveniently to make the required entries thereon
regarding inspection of the work. This card shall be maintained in such
position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy has been
issued.



   (B)   No work shall be done on any part of the building or structure
beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first
obtaining the written approval of the Building Inspector. Such written
approval shall be given only after an inspection shall have been made of each
successive step in the construction. A survey of the lot may be required by
the Building Inspector to verify compliance of the structure with approved
plans. There shall be a final inspection and approval on all buildings when
completed and ready for occupancy.



   (C)   No reinforcing steel or structural framework of any part of
any building or structure shall be covered or concealed in any manner
whatever without first obtaining the approval of the Building Inspector.



   (D)   The Building Inspector upon notification from the permit
holder or his or her agent shall make the following inspections and shall
either approve that portion of the construction as completed or shall notify
the permit holder or his or her agent wherein the same fails to comply with
the Building Code.



      (1)   Footing inspection.  To be made after trenches are
excavated and structural steel is set.



      (2)   Foundation inspection.  To be made after forms and
structural steel are in place and before pouring.



      (3)   Frame inspection.  To be made after the roof, all
framing, fireblocking, and bracing are in place and all pipes, chimneys, and
vents are complete.



      (4)   Insulation inspection.  To be made after all wall
insulation is installed but not yet covered.



      (5)   Occupancy inspection.  To be made after the building is
completed and ready for occupancy.



      (6)   Other inspections.  In addition to the called
inspections specified above, the Building Inspector may make any other
inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the
provisions of the Building Code and other laws which are enforced by the
Building Inspector.



('72 Code, § 3-607) (Am. Ord. 1858, passed 11-24-03)



§ 150.051  PERMITS TO REPAIR WITHIN FIRE LIMITS.



   Permits to repair, alter, improve, or add to existing frame structures
within the fire limits shall be granted where the repairs, alterations, or
improvements to be made would cost not more than 50% of the value of the
original structure, exclusive of the foundation and where such improvements,
alterations, or additions are made of fire-resistant materials; provided,
however, if the application to repair, alter, improve, or add to existing
frame buildings within the fire limits costs more than 50% of the value of
the original structure, exclusive of foundation, such application shall be
denied until the applicant shall request a permit to erect a new building or
structure of noncombustible materials. Repairs, alterations, or improvements
to existing noncombustible buildings or structures in the fire limits shall
be allowed only on condition that fire-resistant materials are used in the
making thereof. Permits for minor repairs such as roof patching may be
permitted regardless of type of materials used.



('72 Code, § 3-608)



§ 150.052  VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge,
alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use,
occupy, or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause the same
to be done, contrary to or in violation of any provisions of this code or the
Building Code. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the said
provisions shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day or portion thereof during which any violation is committed, continued, or
permitted.



('72 Code, § 3-603) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.053  BUILDING PERMITS; DUPLICATE TO COUNTY ASSESSOR.



   Whenever a building permit is issued for the erection, alteration or
repair of any building within the city's jurisdiction and the improvement is
$2,500 or more, a duplicate of such permit shall be issued to the County
Assessor.



(Neb. RS 18-1743) (Ord. 1862, passed 1-8-04)



BUILDING INSPECTOR



§ 150.080  POWER AND AUTHORITY.



   The Building Inspector shall be the city official who shall have the
duty of enforcing all building and housing regulations as herein
prescribed.  He or she shall inspect all buildings repaired, altered, built,
or moved in the city as often as necessary to insure compliance with all city
ordinances.  He or she shall have the power and authority to order, at the
direction of the City Council, all work stopped on any construction,
alteration, or relocation which violates any provisions prescribed herein. 
He or she shall, at the direction of the City Council, issue permission to
continue any construction, alteration, or relocation when the City Council is
satisfied that no provision will be violated.  If the stop order is an oral
one, it shall be followed by a written stop order within one hour.  Such
written order may be served by any city police officer.  In the event that
the City Council fails to appoint a Building Inspector, the Chief of Police
shall be the Building Inspector ex officio.



('72 Code, § 9-101)



§ 150.081  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to allow the Building
Inspector entry into any building or structure where the work of
construction, alteration, repair, or relocation is taking place for the
purpose of making official inspections at any reasonable hour.



('72 Code, § 9-102) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.082  PERMIT FEES.



   No permit required by this chapter shall be issued until the permit fee
shall have been paid. Nor shall any amendment to a permit be approved until
the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the
building or structure, shall have been paid. The fee or fees established by
resolution may be based upon estimated costs, construction costs, costs per
square foot, or any other basis as specified and defined within said
resolution.



('72 Code, § 9-104) (Am. Ord. passed 4-26-73)



§ 150.083  LIABILITY.



   The Building Inspector, or any employee charged with the enforcement of
this chapter, acting in good faith and without malice for the city in the
discharge of his or her duties, shall not thereby render himself or herself
liable personally, and he or she is hereby relieved from all personal
liability for any himself or herself liable personally, and he or she is
hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to
persons or property as a result of any act required or by reason of any act
or omission in the discharge of his or her duties. Any suit brought against
the Building Inspector or employee, because of such act or omission performed
by him or her in the enforcement of any provisions of this chapter, shall be
defended by the legal department of the city until final termination of the
proceedings.



('72 Code, § 9-105)



CHAPTER 151: SUBDIVISION AND ZONING REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   151.01   Comprehensive Development Plan Update adopted by reference



   151.02   Conflicts



Subdivisions



   151.20   Subdivision regulations incorporated by reference



Zoning



   151.35   Zoning regulations adopted by reference



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 151.01  COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN UPDATE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   In order to accommodate anticipated long-range future growth, the
Comprehensive Development Plan 2009 for the city, as prepared by JEO
Consulting Group, Inc., is hereby incorporated by reference in addition to
all amendments which may now or in the future be made as though printed in
full herein. Such plan and study shall consist of maps, graphs, and text.
Three copies of the herein adopted plan and study shall be kept on file with
the City Clerk and available for inspection by any member of the public
during office hours.



(’72 Code, § 11-101) (Am. Ord. 1194, passed 7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1885A,
passed 2-10-05; Am. Ord. 2022, passed 7-23-09)



§ 151.02  CONFLICTS.



   Where the provisions adopted by this chapter conflict with one another
or with the provisions of Chapter 150 of this code of ordinances, the most
restrictive or stringent provisions shall govern.



('72 Code, § 11-401)



SUBDIVISIONS



§ 151.20  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.



   To provide for harmonious development of the city and its environs; for
the integration of new subdivision streets with other existing or planned
streets or with other features of the Comprehensive Plan; for adequate open
spaces for traffic, recreation, light, and air; for the distribution of
population and traffic in a manner which will tend to create conditions
favorable to health, safety, convenience, or prosperity; and insure
conformance of subdivision plans with capital improvements programs of the
city;  and to secure equitable handling of all subdivision plans by
providing uniform procedures and standards for observance by subdividers and
the Planning Commission and City Council, the Subdivision Regulations for the
city, as prepared by the city and adopted by Ordinance 1574, passed May 8,
1997, including any amendments thereto as may be made therein from time to
time, are hereby incorporated by reference herein as if set out in full. One
copy of the Subdivision Regulations shall be kept on file with the City Clerk
and available for public inspection during regular office hours.



(Neb. RS 18-132, 19-922) ('72 Code, § 11-301) (Am. Ord. 1194, passed
7-28-83; Am. Ord. 1574, passed 5-8-97)



ZONING



§ 151.35  ZONING REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   For the purpose of setting minimum standards to promote the public
health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare
of the community, and to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety
from fire, panic, and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to
prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population;
and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage,
schools, parks, and other public requirements, the Zoning Regulations for the
city, as prepared by JEO Consulting Group, Inc. and published in pamphlet
form, is hereby incorporated by reference in addition to all amendments which
may now or in the future be made as though printed in full herein. Three
copies of the adopted Zoning Regulations shall be kept on file with the City
Clerk and available for inspection by any member of the public during office
hours.



('72 Code, §§ 11-201 and 11-202) (Am. Ord. 1194, passed 7-23-83; Am. Ord.
1503, passed 7-13-95; Am. Ord. 1886, passed 2-10-05)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



      Table



         I.   FRANCHISES



TABLE I: FRANCHISES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




- -
 
- -
 
Granting a franchise to the Cengas to construct, maintain, and operate a gas
transmission and distribution system within the city. 


1360
 
2-28-91
 
Charging and collecting a filing fee from Natural Gas Companies for a rate
filing.


- -
 
- -
 
Granting a franchise to the Lincoln Telephone and Telegraph Company, Inc. to
maintain and operate a telephone system within the city.


1468
 
10-27-94
 
Granting a franchise to Harmon Cable Investment, Inc., to own, operate, and
maintain a community antenna television system in the city.


 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Nebraska Statutes





References to 1972 Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO NEBRASKA STATUTES



 

Neb. RS Section
 
Code Section




9-201 - 9-266
 
114.02


9-236
 
114.01


9-642.01
 
115.02


9-646
 
115.01


9-646(1)
 
115.01


9-646(3)
 
115.01


9-646(4)
 
115.01


10-101 - 10-143
 
35.11


10-201 - 10-209
 
35.11


10-301 - 10-305
 
35.11


10-401 - 10-411
 
35.11


10-606 - 10-614
 
35.11


Ch. 11, Art. 1
 
34.30


11-101
 
32.26


11-103 - 11-118
 
32.25


12-401 - 12-403
 
92.01


12-1001 - 12-1004
 
35.11


13-310
 
95.035


13-312
 
95.035


13-314
 
95.035


13-403
 
95.010


13-503(7)
 
35.55


13-504
 
35.52


13-505
 
35.52


13-506
 
35.53


13-507
 
35.53


13-508
 
35.54, 35.73


13-509
 
35.54, 35.73


13-509.01
 
35.51


13-518 - 13-522
 
35.54


13-606
 
35.02


13-609
 
35.14


13-903
 
35.03


13-1802
 
34.31


13-2001 et seq.
 
50.12


13-2020(4)
 
50.05


16-714 - 16-716
 
35.10


17-102
 
36.12


17-103
 
36.14


17-104
 
30.17, 32.13, 36.14


17-105
 
32.13


17-106
 
32.14


17-107
 
30.01, 31.01, 31.19, 31.25, 31.28, 31.29, 34.32, 36.14


17-108.02
 
30.19, 31.02, 32.40, 36.14


17-110 - 17-117
 
30.01


17-118
 
31.20, 34.30


17-119
 
31.25


17-120
 
114.50, 114.51 - 114.62


17-121
 
31.18, 31.19, 33.04, 94.01, 94.03


17-123
 
94.22, 94.26


17-123.01
 
94.22, 94.26


17-124
 
31.20


17-142
 
95.004, 150.030


17-147
 
31.21, 34.01


17-148
 
30.16


17-150
 
31.22, 31.23


17-207
 
111.03, 111.07, 111.26, 111.27, 111.30


17-208
 
31.18


17-213
 
31.20


17-214
 
31.25


17-401 - 17-426
 
33.07


17-405
 
31.22, 31.23


17-501 - 17-560
 
33.07


17-502
 
11.01


17-503
 
95.006


17-503.01
 
95.006


17-503.02
 
95.0061


17-505
 
30.30, 31.21, 111.03, 111.07, 111.26, 111.27, 111.30, 131.01


17-509
 
95.056


17-510
 
95.038, 95.064


17-511
 
95.063


17-522
 
95.034 - 95.036, 95.061


17-523
 
95.036


17-524
 
95.035, 95.063


17-525
 
112.01


17-526
 
96.17 - 96.20, 96.25


17-529.01
 
35.11


17-529.08
 
35.11


17-541
 
31.01


17-547
 
96.01


17-548
 
96.16, 96.23


17-549
 
91.01, 91.27, 91.34, 91.40 - 91.42


17-555
 
95.004, 98.16


17-556
 
91.34, 91.39, 91.40, 130.03


17-557
 
95.004, 95.031, 95.032, 95.058, 95.059


17-557.01
 
95.004


17-558
 
95.002, 95.067


17-559
 
95.002, 95.067


17-563
 
95.005


17-567
 
95.057, 95.080


17-567(1)
 
95.001


17-568
 
31.23


17-568.01
 
31.22, 31.23, 33.07, 35.01


17-568.02
 
35.01


17-602
 
36.11


17-604
 
32.25


17-605
 
31.24


17-606 - 17-609
 
31.24


17-607
 
35.09


17-608
 
35.13


17-609
 
35.13


17-610
 
31.15


17-612
 
32.40


17-613
 
10.15, 30.32, 30.35 - 30.37, 35.01


17-614
 
30.33, 30.34, 30.38


17-615
 
30.36


17-616
 
30.34, 32.07


17-702
 
35.71


17-706
 
35.57


17-708
 
35.04


17-710
 
35.07


17-711
 
35.04


17-714
 
35.03


17-715
 
35.03


17-718
 
34.01


17-720
 
35.10


17-905
 
35.11


17-908
 
35.11


17-911
 
35.11


17-919
 
31.22, 31.23


17-939
 
35.11


17-941
 
92.02


17-948 - 17-952
 
35.16


17-949
 
33.08


17-951
 
33.08


17-952
 
33.08


17-953
 
34.01


17-958
 
35.11


17-968
 
35.11


17-1001
 
94.21, 150.016


18-132
 
91.25, 94.02, 150.016, 151.20


18-305 - 18-312
 
32.41


18-412
 
36.43


18-412.01
 
35.01


18-412.02
 
36.43


18-1001 - 18-1006
 
95.006


18-1201 - 18-1202
 
35.11


18-1214
 
35.12


18-1216
 
35.06


18-1720
 
94.20, 94.21, 94.26, 94.55


18-1722
 
150.046


18-1729
 
70.20


18-1743
 
150.053


18-1748
 
95.066


18-1751
 
95.007


18-1755
 
95.009


18-1756
 
35.01


18-1801 - 18-1805
 
35.11


18-1907
 
111.02, 111.04


18-1908
 
111.05


18-1909
 
111.06


18-1910
 
111.01, 111.02


18-1911
 
111.01


18-2101 - 18-2144
 
33.05


18-2101.01
 
33.05


18-2145 - 18-2154
 
33.05


18-2442 et seq.
 
95.037


18-2501
 
36.30


18-2503 - 18-2511
 
36.30


18-2512
 
36.31


18-2513
 
36.31


18-2514
 
36.32


18-2515
 
36.32


18-2516
 
36.33


18-2517
 
36.34


18-2518
 
36.35, 36.41


18-2519
 
36.36


18-2520
 
36.37


18-2521
 
36.38


18-2522
 
36.39


18-2523
 
36.40


18-2524
 
36.40, 36.41


18-2525
 
36.40


18-2526
 
36.40, 36.41


18-2527
 
36.41


18-2528
 
36.41


18-2529
 
36.41, 36.42


18-2530
 
36.41, 36.42


18-2531
 
36.42


18-2532 - 18-2535
 
36.43


18-2536
 
36.43


18-2537
 
36.43


18-2538
 
36.321


19-901
 
150.016


19-901 - 19-914
 
33.03


19-901 - 19-933
 
91.25


19-902
 
94.02


19-905
 
36.41


19-907 - 19-912
 
33.03


19-908
 
33.02


19-910
 
33.03


19-912.01
 
33.03


19-922
 
150.016, 151.20


19-924 - 19-929
 
33.02


19-929
 
33.02


19-1101
 
31.24


19-1101 et seq.
 
31.24


19-1101 - 19-1103
 
31.24


19-1102
 
31.24


19-1103
 
31.24


19-1104
 
31.24


19-1301 - 19-1304
 
35.08


19-1301
 
30.18


19-1302
 
35.08


19-1309
 
35.70


19-1309 - 19-1312
 
35.70


19-1401 - 19-1404
 
33.07


19-2427
 
95.008


19-2428
 
95.065


19-2428 - 19-2431
 
95.007, 95.063


19-2429
 
95.065


19-2430
 
95.065


19-2431(1)
 
95.065


19-2431(2)
 
95.065


19-2901 - 19-2909
 
35.02


19-3701
 
10.15, 30.37


20-203
 
96.40


20-301 - 20-322
 
90.03


20-301 - 23-344
 
90.01


23-122
 
31.24


23-186
 
35.12


23-3513
 
35.11


25-505.01
 
36.13


25-510.02
 
36.32


25-21,149 - 25-21,164
 
36.321


Ch. 28
 
110.10


28-109
 
96.43


28-401
 
90.02


28-419
 
131.05


28-420
 
131.05


28-431
 
131.20


28-512
 
92.05


28-519
 
91.03


28-520
 
96.40


28-521
 
96.40


28-907
 
91.09


28-908
 
91.02, 91.04, 91.06, 91.10


28-1008
 
96.40


28-1009.01
 
96.27


28-1213
 
91.34


28-1229
 
91.34


28-1233
 
91.34


28-1233(3)
 
91.34


28-1321
 
94.55


28-1418
 
131.50


28-1419
 
131.51


28-1422
 
110.01


28-1423
 
110.01


28-1465
 
34.31


28-1466
 
34.31


28-1472
 
34.31


29-215
 
34.31


Ch. 32
 
36.01


32-109
 
30.19


32-110
 
36.11


32-115
 
36.11


32-401
 
36.01


32-404
 
36.01


32-404(1)
 
36.01


32-405
 
36.07


32-533
 
30.01, 30.15, 36.14


32-554
 
36.14


32-556
 
36.01


32-559
 
36.07


32-560
 
30.18


32-561
 
30.18


32-562
 
36.13


32-568(4)
 
30.18


32-569
 
30.18


32-567 - 32-572
 
30.18


32-603
 
30.19


32-604
 
30.19


32-607
 
36.09


32-608
 
36.06, 36.09


32-615
 
36.09


32-616
 
36.09


32-616 - 32-618
 
36.09


32-617
 
36.09


32.618
 
36.09


32-621
 
36.09


32-625(2)
 
36.09


32-628
 
36.09


32-628 - 32-631
 
35.72


32-629
 
36.09, 36.13


32-630
 
36.09, 36.13


32-801 - 32-822
 
36.01


32-802
 
35.72


32-811
 
36.02


32-952 - 32-959
 
36.07


32-1122
 
36.03


32-1201 - 32-1208
 
36.01


32-1301
 
36.13


32-1301 - 32-1309
 
36.13


32-1302
 
36.13


32-1303
 
36.13


32-1304
 
36.13


32-1305
 
36.13


32-1306
 
36.13


32-1307
 
36.13


32-1308
 
36.13


32-1309
 
36.13


33-139.01
 
34.02


33-141 - 33-143
 
31.24


35-101 - 35-103
 
34.02


35-102
 
31.21


35-108
 
31.21, 34.02


35-520
 
91.09


37-1254.01
 
34.31


37-1254.02
 
34.31


39-835 - 39-842.01
 
35.11


44-4301 - 44-4339
 
32.70


44-4303
 
32.70


45-104.01
 
95.063


46-1212
 
95.011


48-1503
 
35.01


49-801(16)
 
10.05


49-14,102
 
32.41


49-14,103.01
 
32.41


49-14,103.02
 
32.41


49-14,103.03
 
32.41


49-14,103.04
 
32.41


49-14,103.05
 
32.41


49-14,103.06
 
32.41


49-1408
 
32.41


49-1425
 
32.41


49-1499.04
 
32.41


51-201
 
35.72, 93.06


51-201 - 51-219
 
93.01


51-202
 
33.01


51-204
 
33.01


51-205
 
93.02


51-207
 
93.03


51-209
 
93.07


51-211
 
93.04, 93.05


51-212
 
93.06


51-214
 
93.02


51-501
 
35.72


52-601.01 et seq.
 
34.42


Ch. 53, Art. 1
 
115.02


53-103
 
131.50


53-124(5)(C),(H)
 
113.02


53-131
 
113.01


53-134
 
113.01


53-179
 
113.02


54-601
 
96.22


54-602
 
96.22


54-603
 
96.17 - 96.19, 96.27


54-605
 
96.20, 96.21


54-606
 
96.15


54-617
 
96.40


54-618
 
96.41


54-619
 
96.42


54-620
 
96.43


54-621
 
96.43


54-622.01
 
96.43


54-623
 
96.43


60-376
 
131.20


60-4,163
 
34.31


60-4,164
 
34.31


60-4,182
 
70.02


60-6,166
 
91.05


60-6,166(1)(a)(ii)
 
70.04


60-6,183
 
91.08


60-6,184
 
91.07


60-6,250
 
95.060


60-6,196
 
34.31


60-6,197
 
34.31


60-6,211.01
 
34.31


50-6,211.02
 
34.31


60-6,288 - 60-6,299
 
150.030


60-6,288(2)(j)
 
95.060


60-6,294(10)
 
95.060


60-1901
 
131.20


60-1902
 
131.20


60-1903
 
131.20


60-1903.01
 
131.20


60-1905
 
131.20


60-1906
 
131.20


60-1907
 
131.20


60-1908
 
131.20


60-1909
 
131.20


64-118
 
11.01


70-504
 
36.43


70-624.04
 
32.41


70-650.02
 
36.43


71-1637
 
35.72


71-4401
 
96.15


71-4406
 
96.24


71-4408
 
96.23


71-5301
 
150.017


73-101 et seq.
 
35.01


77-1343
 
95.065


77-1601
 
35.73


77-1601.02
 
35.73


77-1606
 
35.72, 35.73


77-1702
 
35.14


77-1725.01
 
150.030


77-2201 - 77-2215
 
31.24


77-2201
 
31.24


77-2202
 
31.24


77-2209
 
31.24


77-2210
 
31.24


77-2304
 
35.10


77-2337
 
35.08


77-2339
 
35.08


77-2341(1)
 
35.13


77-2362
 
35.09


77-2365.01
 
35.09


77-2366
 
35.09, 35.10


77-2386 - 77-23,106
 
35.10


77-3442
 
35.70, 35.71, 35.72


77-3442 - 77-3444
 
35.72


77-3443
 
35.72


77-3444
 
35.72, 36.07


80-202
 
35.72


80-203 - 80-205
 
36.43


81-145 - 81-162
 
35.01


81-502
 
91.25


81-506
 
31.21


81-512
 
31.21, 34.08, 91.28


81-520.01
 
91.40


81-829.65
 
34.31


81-1438
 
31.01


81-1444
 
34.30


81-2104
 
111.30


81-2115
 
111.29


81-2121
 
111.25


81-3401 - 81-3455
 
31.22, 31.23


81-3423
 
95.011


81-3445
 
95.011


81-3449 - 81-3453
 
95.011


81-3449(3)
 
95.011


81-3449(9)
 
95.011


81-3449(11)
 
95.011


81-3449(13)
 
95.011


81-3449(14)
 
95.011


81-3453(3)
 
95.011


81-3453(4)
 
95.011


81-3453(6)
 
95.011


81-3453(7)
 
95.011


81-3453(10)
 
95.011


81-3453(12)
 
95.011


81-3453(13)
 
95.011


81-3453(15)
 
95.011


84-712
 
31.24


84-1201 - 84-1227
 
31.24


84-1408
 
32.02


84-1408 - 84-1414
 
32.031


84-1409
 
32.02, 32.03


84-1409(1)
 
32.01


84-1409(2)
 
32.01


84-1410
 
32.04


84-1411
 
32.02, 32.03


84-1411(3)
 
32.031, 32.08


84-1411(4)
 
32.05


84-1412
 
32.06, 32.09


84-1413
 
32.02


84-1413(1),(4),(5)
 
32.06


84-1413(2)
 
32.07


84-1413(3)
 
32.07


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1972 CODE



 

1972 Code Section
 
2001 Code Section




1-101
 
30.01


1-102
 
30.16


1-103
 
30.15


1-104
 
30.17


1-105
 
30.18


1-106
 
30.02


1-107
 
30.19


1-201
 
31.01


1-202
 
31.02


1-203
 
31.03


1-204
 
31.15


1-205
 
31.24


1-206
 
31.24


1-207
 
31.24


1-208
 
31.24


1-209
 
31.18


1-210
 
31.19


1-211
 
31.20


1-212
 
31.21


1-213
 
31.22


1-214
 
31.23


1-216
 
31.25


1-217
 
31.26


1-218
 
31.27


1-219
 
31.28


1-220
 
31.29


1-301
 
32.25


1-302
 
32.26


1-401
 
11.01


1-501
 
32.01


1-502
 
32.01


1-503
 
32.02


1-504
 
32.04


1-505
 
32.05


1-506
 
32.06


1-507
 
32.07


1-508
 
32.08


1-509
 
32.09


1-510(part)
 
32.13, 32.14


1-511
 
32.10


1-512
 
32.11


1-513
 
32.12


1-515
 
32.03


1-601
 
30.30


1-602
 
30.31


1-603
 
30.34


1-604
 
30.35


1-605
 
30.32


1-606
 
30.33


1-607
 
30.37


1-608
 
30.36


1-609
 
30.38


1-610
 
30.39


1-701
 
36.01


1-703
 
36.02


1-704
 
36.02


1-705
 
36.03


1-706
 
36.04


1-707
 
36.05


1-708
 
36.06


1-709
 
36.07


1-711
 
36.09


1-713
 
36.11


1-714
 
36.12


1-715
 
36.13


1-716
 
36.14


1-801
 
35.50


1-801.01
 
35.55


1-802
 
35.52


1-803
 
35.53


1-804
 
35.54


1-804.01
 
35.51


1-805
 
35.56


1-806
 
35.57


1-807
 
35.71


1-808
 
35.04


1-809
 
35.01


1-810
 
35.02


1-812
 
35.04


1-814
 
35.07


1-815
 
35.08


1-817
 
35.09


1-818
 
35.13


1-819
 
35.11


1-820
 
35.12


1-821
 
35.30


1-822
 
35.31


1-823
 
35.32


1-824
 
35.33


1-825
 
35.06


1-826
 
35.73


1-901
 
32.40


1-902
 
32.41


1-903
 
32.42


1-904
 
32.43


1-1001
 
32.55


1-1002
 
32.56


1-1003
 
32.57


1-1101
 
37.01


1-1102
 
37.02


1-1103
 
37.03


1-1104
 
37.04


1-1201
 
36.30


1-1202
 
36.31


1-1203
 
36.32


1-1204
 
36.33


1-1205
 
36.34


1-1206
 
36.35


1-1207
 
36.36


1-1208
 
36.37


1-1209
 
36.38


1-1210
 
36.39


1-1211
 
36.40


1-1212
 
36.41


1-1213
 
36.42


1-1215
 
36.43


1-1301
 
32.70


2-101
 
30.20


2-102
 
30.20


2-103
 
30.20


2-201
 
33.01


2-202
 
33.02


2-203
 
33.03


2-204
 
33.04


2-206
 
33.05


3-101
 
34.01


3-102
 
34.02


3-103
 
34.03


3-104
 
34.14


3-105
 
34.15


3-106
 
34.08


3-107
 
34.09


3-108
 
34.04


3-109
 
34.05


3-110
 
34.06


3-111
 
34.07


3-112
 
34.10


3-113
 
34.11


3-114
 
34.12


3-115
 
34.13


3-201
 
93.01


3-202
 
93.03


3-203
 
93.02


3-204
 
93.04


3-205
 
93.05


3-206
 
93.06


3-207
 
93.07


3-208
 
93.08


3-209
 
93.09


3-301
 
92.01


3-302
 
92.02


3-304
 
92.03


3-305
 
92.04


3-310
 
92.05


3-401
 
35.16


3-601
 
150.045


3-602
 
150.046


3-603
 
150.052


3-604
 
150.047


3-605
 
150.048


3-606
 
150.049


3-607
 
150.050


3-608
 
150.051


3-1101
 
34.30


3-1102
 
34.31


3-1103
 
34.32


4-101
 
94.01


4-102
 
94.03


4-103
 
94.02


4-104
 
94.04


4-301
 
94.20


4-302
 
94.20


4-303
 
94.21


4-304
 
94.21


4-305
 
94.23


4-306
 
94.24


4-307
 
94.25


4-308
 
94.26


4-309
 
94.27


4-310
 
94.28


4-311
 
94.29


4-312
 
94.30


4-313
 
94.31


4-314
 
94.32


4-315
 
94.33


4-316
 
94.34


4-317
 
94.35


4-319
 
94.36


4-501
 
94.55


4-502
 
94.56


4-503
 
94.57


5-417
 
70.21


5-417.01
 
70.22


5-417.02
 
70.20


5-418
 
70.23


5-419
 
70.24


5-711(part)
 
70.24


5-714.02
 
70.02


5-223(2)
 
70.24


6-101
 
96.17


6-102
 
96.18


6-103
 
96.19


6-104
 
96.15


6-105
 
96.20


6-106
 
96.21


6-108
 
96.22


6-109
 
96.23


6-110
 
96.16


6-111
 
96.24


6-113
 
96.25


6-114
 
96.40


6-115
 
96.41


6-116
 
96.42


6-117
 
96.44


6-118
 
96.43


6-119
 
96.44


6-201
 
96.01


6-202
 
96.01


6-322
 
130.03


6-332
 
131.03


6-337
 
131.20


6-338
 
131.05


6-343
 
131.01


6-344
 
131.50


7-101
 
91.01


7-102
 
91.02


7-103
 
91.03


7-104
 
91.04


7-105
 
91.05


7-106
 
91.06


7-107
 
91.07


7-108
 
91.08


7-109
 
91.09


7-110
 
91.10


7-201
 
91.25


7-202
 
91.26


7-203
 
91.27


7-204
 
91.28


7-205
 
91.29


7-206
 
91.30


7-207
 
91.31


7-208
 
91.32


7-209
 
91.33


7-211
 
91.35


7-212
 
91.36


7-213
 
91.37


7-214
 
91.42


7-215
 
91.38


7-216
 
91.39


7-217
 
91.40


7-218
 
91.41


7-301
 
91.34


7-401
 
110.10


8-101
 
95.001


8-102
 
95.002


8-105
 
95.003


8-106
 
95.004


8-107
 
95.004


8-108
 
95.005


8-109
 
95.006


8-110
 
95.007


8-111
 
95.008


8-112
 
95.009


8-113
 
95.010


8-201
 
95.030


8-202
 
95.030


8-204
 
95.032


8-205
 
95.033


8-206
 
95.034


8-207
 
95.035


8-208
 
95.036


8-209
 
95.037


8-210
 
95.038


8-211
 
95.039


8-212
 
95.040


8-301
 
95.055


8-302
 
95.056


8-303
 
95.057


8-304
 
95.058


8-305
 
95.059


8-306
 
95.060


8-307
 
95.061


8-308
 
95.062


8-309
 
95.063


8-310
 
95.064


8-311
 
95.065


8-312
 
95.066


8-313
 
95.067


8-314
 
95.067


8-401
 
95.080


9-101
 
150.080


9-102
 
150.081


9-104
 
150.082


9-105
 
150.083


9-106
 
150.001


9-201
 
150.015


9-202
 
150.015


9-301
 
150.016


9-302
 
150.016


9-401
 
150.017


9-402
 
150.017


9-403
 
150.017


9-501
 
150.018


9-502
 
150.018


9-601
 
150.019


10-211
 
114.01


10-214
 
114.02


10-215
 
114.50


10-216
 
114.51


10-217
 
114.52


10-218
 
114.53


10-219
 
114.54


10-220
 
114.55


10-221
 
114.56


10-222
 
114.57


10-223
 
114.58


10-224
 
114.60


10-225
 
114.59


10-226
 
114.60


10-227
 
114.62


10-307
 
113.01


10-318
 
113.02


10-401
 
111.01


10-402
 
111.02


10-403
 
111.03


10-404
 
111.04


10-405
 
111.05


10-406
 
111.06


10-407
 
111.07


10-408
 
111.01


10-409
 
111.08


10-410
 
111.09


10-411
 
111.10


10-412
 
111.25


10-414
 
111.26


10-415
 
111.27


10-416
 
111.28


10-417
 
111.29


10-418
 
111.30


10-419
 
111.25


10-420
 
111.31


10-421
 
111.32


10-431
 
150.030


10-432
 
150.031


10-442
 
131.51


10-443
 
115.01


10-444
 
115.02


10-601
 
112.01


10-601.01
 
112.02


10-601.02
 
112.03


10-601.03
 
112.04


10-601.04
 
112.25


10-601.05
 
112.26


10-601.07
 
112.27


10-601.09
 
112.28


10-601.10
 
112.29


10-601.11
 
112.30


10-601.12
 
112.31


10-602
 
112.05


10-603
 
112.07


10-604
 
112.08


10-605
 
112.09


10-701
 
90.01


10-702
 
90.02


10-703
 
90.04


10-704
 
90.05


10-705
 
90.06


10-706
 
90.07


10-707
 
90.08


10-708
 
90.03


11-101
 
151.01


11-201
 
151.35


11-202
 
151.35


11-301
 
151.20


11-401
 
151.02


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




–
 
- -
 
T.S.O. I


–
 
4-26-73
 
150.082


–
 
10-11-73
 
70.02


1017
 
4-25-74
 
150.015, 150.016


1038
 
6-12-75
 
95.034, 95.039


1040
 
10-9-75
 
95.034, 95.039


1045
 
12-11-75
 
30.01


1046
 
12-11-75
 
30.17


1047
 
12-11-75
 
30.02, 30.18


1049
 
12-11-75
 
31.21


1050
 
12-11-75
 
32.01, 32.02, 32.05 - 32.09


1051
 
12-11-75
 
32.12


1052
 
12-11-75
 
36.01 - 36.06, 36.10


1054
 
12-11-75
 
33.01


1055
 
12-11-75
 
34.02


1056
 
12-11-75
 
94.20, 94.21


1066
 
3-11-76
 
96.20


1080
 
11-11-76
 
91.25, 91.30


1082
 
12-9-76
 
150.017


1086
 
2-24-77
 
31.01


1089
 
2-24-77
 
131.20


1090
 
2-24-77
 
112.07


1099
 
10-13-77
 
92.02


1163
 
12-11-80
 
36.12


1166
 
4-23-81
 
150.015 - 150.018


1174
 
9-24-81
 
70.20 - 70.22


1176
 
10-8-81
 
33.01


1178
 
10-8-81
 
113.02


1179
 
10-8-81
 
32.13, 32.14


1182
 
1-14-82
 
33.01


1187
 
9-9-82
 
96.25


1191
 
4-14-83
 
112.02, 114.50 - 114.62


1193
 
6-9-83
 
150.019


1194
 
7-23-83
 
151.35, 151.01, 151.20


1196
 
9-8-83
 
32.42, 32.43


1199
 
9-22-83
 
31.23


1200
 
9-22-83
 
32.01 - 32.05, 32.09


1201
 
9-22-83
 
35.01


1202
 
9-22-83
 
32.41


1204
 
9-22-83
 
95.064


1205
 
9-22-83
 
95.065


1208
 
9-22-83
 
113.02


1210
 
9-22-83
 
91.40


1213
 
9-22-83
 
36.30 - 36.43


1214
 
9-22-83
 
95.006


1238
 
3-28-85
 
94.21, 94.23 - 94.35


1242
 
7-25-85
 
96.17


1246
 
10-10-85
 
30.01


1248
 
10-10-85
 
70.24


1249
 
10-10-85
 
114.01


1255
 
5-8-86
 
113.01


1256
 
7-10-86
 
70.20


1261
 
11-13-86
 
30.18


1262
 
11-13-86
 
31.02


1263
 
11-13-86
 
36.07, 36.09, 36.13, 36.14


1264
 
11-13-86
 
36.31 - 36.34, 36.37 - 36.42


1265
 
11-13-86
 
95.066


1266
 
11-13-86
 
30.35


1267
 
11-13-86
 
32.41


1268
 
11-13-86
 
34.30


1269
 
11-13-86
 
95.067


1270
 
11-13-86
 
95.067


1274
 
3-12-87
 
95.032


1280
 
9-24-87
 
32.02


1281
 
9-24-87
 
32.09


1282
 
9-24-87
 
32.70


1283
 
9-24-87
 
95.065


1285
 
9-24-87
 
95.007


1286
 
9-24-87
 
95.008


1292
 
5-12-88
 
150.017


1307
 
5-11-89
 
150.001


1321
 
12-28-89
 
70.24


1322
 
12-28-89
 
35.13


1323
 
12-28-89
 
35.12


1327
 
12-28-89
 
91.34


1328
 
12-28-89
 
113.01


1344
 
5-24-90
 
96.44


1345
 
6-28-90
 
96.44


1346
 
7-5-90
 
96.17, 96.25


1359
 
1-10-91
 
70.23


1361
 
1-24-91
 
30.18


1362
 
1-24-91
 
31.02


1360
 
2-28-91
 
T.S.O. I


1361A
 
2-28-91
 
94.36


1369
 
9-12-91
 
113.02


1381
 
2-13-92
 
115.01


1382
 
2-13-92
 
115.02


1386
 
2-27-92
 
113.01


1396
 
6-9-92
 
90.01 - 90.08


1417
 
1-14-93
 
150.019


1421
 
2-25-93
 
32.01


1422
 
2-25-93
 
32.04


1434
 
8-26-93
 
35.30 - 35.33


1442
 
10-14-93
 
112.01


1445
 
12-9-93
 
30.20


1459
 
7-28-94
 
35.52


1461
 
7-28-94
 
35.57


1465
 
8-11-94
 
94.20


1466
 
8-11-94
 
94.20


1468
 
10-27-94
 
T.S.O. I


1471
 
12-12-94
 
150.018


1478
 
3-2-95
 
131.01


1481
 
3-9-95
 
32.04


1482
 
3-9-95
 
30.34


1483
 
3-9-95
 
35.55


1484
 
3-9-95
 
35.51


1485
 
3-9-95
 
33.02


1486
 
3-9-95
 
34.31


1488
 
3-9-95
 
95.009


1489
 
3-9-95
 
95.010


1503
 
7-13-95
 
151.35


1505
 
7-27-95
 
70.24


1508
 
8-24-95
 
150.017


1515
 
1-25-96
 
35.50


1516
 
1-25-96
 
35.54


1517
 
1-25-96
 
35.57


1518
 
1-25-96
 
33.02


1519
 
1-25-96
 
33.03


1520
 
1-25-96
 
50.03


1532
 
1-25-96
 
95.006


1535
 
5-9-96
 
112.03


1551
 
7-25-96
 
112.04


1562
 
11-14-96
 
112.01, 112.25 - 112.31


1569
 
4-10-97
 
112.25 - 112.27


1572
 
4-24-97
 
34.32


1574
 
5-8-97
 
151.20


1577
 
6-12-97
 
110.10, 112.01


1586
 
8-14-97
 
131.50


1589
 
9-25-97
 
70.24


1593
 
9-25-97
 
31.01


1594
 
9-25-97
 
32.03


1595
 
9-25-97
 
30.30


1596
 
9-25-97
 
30.31


1597
 
9-25-97
 
30.34


1598
 
9-25-97
 
30.35


1599
 
9-25-97
 
30.37


1600
 
9-25-97
 
30.38


1601
 
9-25-97
 
36.07


1602
 
9-25-97
 
35.52


1603
 
9-25-97
 
35.54


1604
 
9-25-97
 
35.06


1605
 
9-25-97
 
35.73


1606
 
9-25-97
 
33.04


1619
 
11-13-97
 
33.05


1635
 
7-23-98
 
30.19


1637
 
7-23-98
 
35.52


1638
 
7-23-98
 
35.53


1639
 
7-23-98
 
35.54


1640
 
7-23-98
 
35.71


1641
 
7-23-98
 
35.72


1642
 
7-23-98
 
35.73


1643
 
7-23-98
 
35.70


1645
 
7-23-98
 
35.09


1646
 
7-23-98
 
35.10


1647
 
7-23-98
 
35.01


1648
 
7-23-98
 
35.14


1649
 
7-23-98
 
33.02


1651
 
7-23-98
 
34.31


1654
 
7-23-98
 
96.27


1655
 
7-23-98
 
96.27


1657
 
7-23-98
 
95.006


1658
 
7-23-98
 
95.011


1661
 
7-23-98
 
115.01


1662
 
7-23-98
 
110.01


1670
 
11-23-98
 
35.15


1672
 
- -
 
32.40


1677
 
4-8-99
 
70.20


1695
 
9-23-99
 
32.55 - 32.57


1712
 
1-27-00
 
10.99


1715
 
2-10-00
 
94.20


1749
 
12-28-00
 
35.01


1752
 
3-22-01
 
70.03


1753
 
3-22-01
 
130.04. 130.05


1762
 
3-22-01
 
32.031, 35.52, 36.41


1766
 
6-14-01
 
97.01 - 97.15, 97.99


1780
 
10-25-01
 
110.10 - 110.16, 110.99


1789
 
1-24-02
 
Adopting Ordinance


1790
 
2-13-02
 
112.01


1791
 
2-13-02
 
32.13


1792
 
2-13-02
 
10.99


1795
 
3-14-02
 
Repealing 150.065, 150.066


1796
 
3-14-02
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I


1804
 
5-23-02
 
96.23, 96.26, 96.40


1811
 
8-8-02
 
70.04


1815
 
10-24-02
 
30.20, 31.22, 31.23, 33.07, Repealing 31.24


1817
 
10-10-02
 
70.04


1818
 
10-10-02
 
70.05 - 70.07


1819
 
10-10-02
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II


1829
 
1-23-03
 
110.01 - 111.10, 111.25 - 111.33, 111.50 - 111.59


1834
 
4-10-03
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II


1841
 
6-12-03
 
70.06


1844
 
7-24-03
 
32.55, 32.56, 32.57, 32.58


1848
 
9-25-03
 
95.067


1849
 
10-9-03
 
112.04


1850
 
10-23-03
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II


1855
 
11-13-03
 
150.015, 150.016


1856
 
11-24-03
 
150.020


1857
 
11-24-03
 
150.047


1858
 
11-24-03
 
150.050


1862
 
1-8-04
 
30.18, 31.24, 32.09, 32.41, 33.01, 34.02, 34.31, 35.09, 35.10, 35.14, 35.52,
35.53, 35.72, 36.07, 36.09, 36.13, 36.32, 36.321, 36.41, 95.002, 95.006,
95.0061, 95.067, 150.053


1865
 
1-8-04
 
32.40


1866
 
1-22-04
 
95.032


1870
 
3-25-04
 
130.04, 130.05, 130.06


1874
 
7-8-04
 
150.001


1878
 
11-23-04
 
35.15


1881
 
12-9-04
 
70.20


1885A
 
2-10-05
 
151.01


1886
 
2-10-05
 
151.35


1890
 
2-10-05
 
150.002


1891
 
2-10-05
 
33.05


1898
 
5-12-05
 
31.25, 92.01 - 92.05


1901
 
6-9-05
 
150.021


1904
 
7-14-05
 
33.08


1905
 
8-11-05
 
33.08


1908
 
11-10-05
 
112.06 - 112.09, Repealing 52.12


1910
 
11-10-05
 
31.24, Repealing 31.16, 31.17


1911A
 
11-22-05
 
150.017


1921
 
3-9-06
 
150.016


1925
 
3-23-06
 
70.03


1926
 
4-13-06
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I


1927
 
4-27-06
 
112.01


1932
 
5-25-06
 
70.06


1937
 
7-27-06
 
35.16


1942
 
9-28-06
 
33.08, 70.20


1943
 
11-9-06
 
94.20, 94.24, 94.26 - 94.30, 94.34, 94.35, Repealing 94.37 - 94.40, 131.01,
131.02, 131.04


1952
 
12-14-06
 
34.40 - 34.42


1969
 
4-12-07
 
Repealing 95.031


1988
 
12-27-07
 
98.01 - 98.09, 98.15 - 98.17, 98.20 - 98.25


1999
 
7-24-08
 
94.20


2002
 
9-11-08
 
112.01


2007
 
10-16-08
 
150.046


2010
 
2-19-09
 
38.01, 38.10 - 38.18, 38.30 - 38.33, 38.40 - 38.44, 38.50 - 38.57


2011
 
2-19-09
 
50.01 -50.17, 50.99


2012
 
2-19-09
 
112.01


2017
 
5-28-09
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I


2021
 
7-23-09
 
30.18, Repealing 32.15


2022
 
7-23-09
 
151.01


2026
 
9-24-09
 
38.31


2030
 
11-24-09
 
38.01, 38.10 - 38.18, 38.30 - 38.33, 38.40 - 38.44, 38.50 - 38.57


2033
 
2-11-10
 
112.01

Table of Contents
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCES  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) i
ARTICLE 1: TITLE AND PURPOSE.................................................................................................................1
SECTION 1.01 TITLE..............................................................................................................................................1
SECTION 1.02 PURPOSES.......................................................................................................................................1
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS...............................................................................................................................2
ARTICLE 3: DISTRICTS AND OFFICIAL MAP ..........................................................................................41
SECTION 3.01 DISTRICTS. ..................................................................................................................................41
SECTION 3.02 PROVISION FOR OFFICIAL ZONING MAP. .....................................................................................41
ARTICLE 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS...........................................................................................................42
SECTION 4.01 PLANNING COMMISSION RECOMMENDATIONS. ...........................................................................42
SECTION 4.02 DISTRICT REGULATIONS, RESTRICTIONS, BOUNDARY CREATION. ..............................................42
SECTION 4.03 JURISDICTION. .............................................................................................................................42
SECTION 4.04 PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE DECLARED TO BE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS. ................................42
SECTION 4.05 ZONING AFFECTS EVERY BUILDING AND USE.............................................................................42
SECTION 4.06 LOT. ............................................................................................................................................42
SECTION 4.07 REDUCTIONS IN LOT AREA PROHIBITED......................................................................................42
SECTION 4.08 OBSTRUCTIONS TO VISION AT STREET INTERSECTIONS PROHIBITED...........................................43
SECTION 4.09 YARD REQUIREMENTS.................................................................................................................43
SECTION 4.10 DRAINAGE. ..................................................................................................................................43
SECTION 4.11 PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS IN REQUIRED YARDS........................................................................43
SECTION 4.12 ACCESSORY BUILDING AND USES. ...............................................................................................44
SECTION 4.13 THROUGH LOTS............................................................................................................................45
SECTION 4.14 PERMITTED MODIFICATIONS OF HEIGHT REGULATIONS. .............................................................45
SECTION 4.15 OCCUPANCY OF BASEMENTS AND CELLARS.................................................................................45
SECTION 4.16 NON-CONFORMING, GENERAL INTENT........................................................................................45
SECTION 4.17 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD. ..........................................................................................46
SECTION 4.18 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES..................................................................................................46
SECTION 4.19 NONCONFORMING USES. .............................................................................................................46
SECTION 4.20 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE. .....................................................................................................47
SECTION 4.21 USES UNDER SPECIAL PERMIT NOT NONCONFORMING USES. ......................................................47
SECTION 4.22 REAR YARD SETBACKS. ...............................................................................................................47
SECTION 4.23 FEES. ............................................................................................................................................47
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS .................................................................................................................48
SECTION 5.01 DISTRICTS; USE. ..........................................................................................................................48
SECTION 5.02 DISTRICTS; BOUNDARIES. ............................................................................................................48
SECTION 5.03 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES. ...........................................................48
SECTION 5.04 CLASSIFICATION OF DISTRICTS UPON ANNEXATION AND CONFORMANCE WITH THE LAND USE PLAN............................................................................................................................................49
SECTION 5.05 TA – TRANSITIONAL AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT..........................................................................50
SECTION 5.06 LLR - LARGE LOT RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT......................................................................52
SECTION 5.07 R-1 - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. .............................................................................................54
SECTION 5.08 R-2 - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.....................................................................................................56
SECTION 5.09 R-3 - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT......................................................................................................58
SECTION 5.10RMMOBILE HOME RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT ................................................................................60
SECTION 5.11 NRC - NEIGHBORHOOD RESIDENTIAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.................................................62
SECTION 5.12 C-1 DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT....................................................................................65
SECTION 5.13 C-2 - HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.....................................................................................68
SECTION 5.14 C-3 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT ........................................................................................71
SECTION 5.15 I-1 - LIGHT INDUSTRIAL. .............................................................................................................74
SECTION 5.16 I-2 - HEAVY INDUSTRIAL. ..........................................................................................................77
SECTION 5.17 FF/FW FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICTS .................................................................................................80
SECTION 5.18 RESIDENTIAL /MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (RMD)......................................................91
SECTION 5.19 LWC – LAKE WANAHOO CONSERVATION DISTRICT...................................................................97
SECTION 5.20 (HPD) HISTORIC PRESERVATION DISTRICT (OVERLAY DISTRICT) .............................................98
Table of Contents
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCES  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) ii
SECTION 5.21 TRANSPORTATION CORRIDOR DISTRICT (OVERLAY DISTRICT) ..............................101
SECTION 5.22 RESIDENTIAL ACREAGE OVERLAY DISTRICT (OVERLAY DISTRICT) ....................................103
SECTION 5.23 REPEALED - SECTION INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK)………………………………….……….110
SECTION 5.24 AIRPORT HAZARD (AHO) OVERLAY DISTRICT………………………………………..……….110
ARTICLE 6: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS………………………………………………………… ….116
ARTICLE 7: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS.......................................................................................118
SECTION 7.01 OFF-STREET AUTOMOBILE STORAGE AND STACKING................................................................118
SECTION 7.02 SCHEDULE OF MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS .......................120
SECTION 7.03 OFF-STREET PARKING: SHARED PARKING REQUIREMENTS........................................................121
SECTION 7.04 OFF-STREET PARKING: PARKING FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES ...................................121
SECTION 7.05 OFF-STREET PARKING DESIGN CRITERIA ..................................................................................122
SECTION 7.06 SIGN REGULATIONS...................................................................................................................122
SECTION 7.07 SIGNAGE PLANS.........................................................................................................................129
SECTION 7.08 OTHER SIGNAGE PROVISIONS.....................................................................................................130
SECTION 7.08.07 OFF-PREMISE SIGNS ..............................................................................................................131
SECTION 7.09 PERMIT PROCEDURES ................................................................................................................132
SECTION 7.10 HOME OCCUPATIONS .................................................................................................................135
SECTION 7.11 TOWER REGULATIONS................................................................................................................136
SECTION 7.12 FENCES ......................................................................................................................................146
SECTION 7.13 STORAGE OR PARKING OF VEHICLES, BOATS, CAMPERS AND TRAILERS......................................148
SECTION 7.14 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR INDUSTRIAL USES ..................................................................148
SECTION 7.15 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS ..................................................................................................149
SECTION 7.16 WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS ...........................................................................................................152
SECTION 7.17 SAND AND GRAVEL MINERAL, STONE, ROCK, AND SOIL EXTRACTION AND QUARRIES ............153
SECTION 7.18 WASTE DISPOSAL SITES AND LANDFILLS ..................................................................................153
SECTION 7.19 SCHOOLS ...................................................................................................................................154
SECTION 7.20 UTILITY SUBSTATION OR PUMPING STATION.............................................................................154
SECTION7.21 JUNK YARDS OR SALVAGE YARDS ............................................................................................154
SECTION 7.22 TOWNHOUSES.............................................................................................................................154
SECTION 7.23 PRESERVATION GUIDELINES ......................................................................................................154
SECTION 7.24 GUIDELINES FOR APPLYING THE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR'S STANDARDS ……………… 155
SECTION 7.25 COMMERCIAL CABIN CAMPGROUNDS ……………………………………………………….. 159
SECTION 7.26 ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS ………………………………………………………………….. 160
SECTION 7.27 GRANTING OF WAIVERS …………………………………………………………………….. 164
ARTICLE 8: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.....................................................................................................165
SECTION 8.01 MEMBERS, TERMS AND MEETINGS............................................................................................165
SECTION 8.02 APPEALS TO BOARD, RECORD OF APPEAL, HEARINGS AND STAYS. ..........................................165
SECTION 8.03 POWERS AND JURISDICTION ON APPEAL....................................................................................165
SECTION 8.04 APPEALS TO DISTRICT COURT. ..................................................................................................166
ARTICLE 9: AMENDMENT...........................................................................................................................167
SECTION 9.01 AMENDMENTS. ..........................................................................................................................167
SECTION 9.02 PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW. ..............................................................................................167
SECTION 9.03 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR..........................................................................................................167
SECTION 9.04 BUILDING PERMITS....................................................................................................................167
SECTION 9.05 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. ..................................................................................................168
SECTION 9.06 PENALTIES.................................................................................................................................168
SECTION 9.07 REMEDIES..................................................................................................................................168
ARTICLE 10: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN RELATIONSHIP .....................................................................169
ARTICLE 11: LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS............................................................................................169
SECTION 11.01 SEPARABILITY. ........................................................................................................................169
SECTION 11.02 PURPOSE OF CATCH HEADS.....................................................................................................169
Table of Contents
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCES  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) iii
SECTION 11.03 REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES. ..................................................................................169
SECTION 11.04 EFFECTIVE DATE......................................................................................................................169
Article 1: Title and Purpose
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCES  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 1
ARTICLE 1: TITLE AND PURPOSE
Section 1.01 Title This Ordinance may be known and may be cited and referred to as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska.
Section 1.02 Purposes This ordinance has been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan and to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the community; to lessen congestion in streets; to secure safety from fire and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to promote the distribution of population, land classifications and land development to support provisions for adequate transportation, water flows, water supply, drainage, sanitation, recreation, and other public requirements; to protect property against blight and depreciation; and to secure economy in governmental expenditures.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 2
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
Section 2.01 Rules For the purpose of this ordinance the following rules shall apply:
2.01.01 Words and numbers used singularly shall include the plural. Words and numbers used in the plural shall include the singular. Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
2.01.02 The word "persons" includes a corporation, members of a partnership or other business organization, a committee, board, council, commission, trustee, receiver, agent or other representative.
2.01.03 The word "shall" is mandatory.
2.01.04 The words "use", "used", "occupy" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended", "arranged" or "designed" to be used or occupied.
2.01.05 The word "commission" shall refer to the Planning Commission of Wahoo, Nebraska.
2.01.06 Undefined words or terms not herein defined shall have their ordinary meaning in relation to the context.
Section 2.02 Abbreviation and Acronyms
For purposes of this Ordinance, the following shall be standard abbreviations and acronyms found through the regulation.
2.02.01 AU = Animal Unit
2.02.02 CAFO = Confined Animal Feeding Operation
2.02.03 FCC = Federal Communication Commission
2.02.04 FT = Foot or Feet
2.02.05 GIS = Geographic Information System
2.02.06 kV = Kilovolt
2.02.07 kW = Kilowatt
2.02.08 LFO = Livestock Feeding Operation
2.02.09 NDA = Nebraska Department of Aeronautics or successor department
2.02.10 NDEQ = Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality or successor department
2.02.11 NSFM = Nebraska State Fire Marshall or successor department
2.02.12 NHHS = Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services or successor department
2.02.13 NDOR = Nebraska Department of Roads or successor department
2.02.14 R.O.W. = right-of-way or rights-of-way
2.02.15 SF = Square Feet
2.02.16 SY = Square Yard
2.02.17 USDA = United States Department of Agriculture
2.02.18 YD = Yard
Section 2.03 Definitions.
2.03.01 ABANDONMENT shall mean to cease or discontinue a use or activity without intent to resume as distinguished from short term interruptions such as during periods of remodeling, maintenance, or normal periods of vacation or seasonal closure.
2.03.02 ABUT, ABUTTING shall mean to border on, being contiguous with or have property or district lines in common, including property separated by an alley
2.03.03 ACADEMIES shall mean education and instruction facilities including but not limited to dance or music academies, gymnastic, or martial arts schools. Academies shall not include early childhood care facilities, public schools, or private schools that meet the State of Nebraska requirements for elementary or secondary education, or industrial trade schools.
2.03.04 ACCESS OR ACCESS WAY shall mean the place, means, or way by which pedestrians and vehicles shall have safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress to a property or use as required by this Regulation.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 3
2.03.05 ACCESSORY BUILDING see “Building, Accessory”.
2.03.06 ACCESSORY LIVING QUARTERS shall mean living quarters within an accessory building located on the same premises with the main building, for use by temporary guests of the occupant of the premises, such quarters having no kitchen facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit.
2.03.07 ACCESSORY STRUCTURE shall mean a detached subordinate structure located on the same lot with the principal structure, the use of which is incidental and accessory to that of the principal structure. Accessory structures are not intended to be used for any type of dwelling unit.
2.03.08 ACCESSORY USE shall mean a use incidental, related, appropriate and clearly subordinate to the main use of the lot or building, which accessory use does not alter the principal use of the subject lot or affect other properties in the district.
2.03.09 ACREAGE shall mean any tract or parcel of land which does not qualify as a farm or development.
2.03.10 ADJACENT shall mean near, close, or abutting; for example, an Industrial District across the street or highway from a Residential District shall be considered as "Adjacent".
2.03.11 ADULT BOOKSTORE See Section 7.26
2.03.12 ADULT CABARET See Section 7.26 Adult Establishment
2.03.13 ADULT COMPANIONSHIP ESTABLISHMENT See Section 7.26
2.03.14 ADULT DAY SERVICE shall mean a facility as defined and licensed by the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services, which provides care and an array of social, medical or other support services for a period of less than 24 consecutive hours in a community-based group program to four or more persons who require or request such services due to age or functional impairment. Adult Day Service does not include services provided under the Developmental Disabilities Services Act.
2.03.15 ADULT ESTABLISHMENT See Section 7.26.
2.03.16 ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR, HEALTH CLUB See Section 7.26
2.03.17 ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER See Section 7.26
2.03.18 ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE See Section 7.26 Adult Arcade
2.03.19 ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATERS See Section 7.26
2.03.20 ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESS See Section 7.26
2.03.21 ADULT SAUNA See Section 7.26
2.03.22 ADVERTISING STRUCTURE shall mean any notice or advertisement, pictorial or otherwise, and all such structures used as an outdoor display, regardless of size and shape, for the purposes of making anything known, the origin or place of sale of which is not on the property with such Advertising Structure.
2.03.23 AGRICULTURAL AND FARM BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES shall mean any building or structure which is necessary or incidental to the normal conduct of a farm including but not limited to residence of the operator, residence of hired men, barns, buildings and sheds for housing livestock, poultry and farm machinery, buildings for the storage or shelter of grain, hay and other crops, silos, windmills and water storage tanks.
2.03.24 AGRICULTURE shall mean the growing of field crops, fruit, vegetables, nursery stock and other feed grains, truck gardening; forest and forest products; horticulture; raising and grazing of livestock and
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 4
poultry; animal husbandry; dairy farms; animal kennels; furbearing animals; processing and selling of products produced on the premises, not including, confined feeding of livestock, or packing and rendering plants.
2.03.25 AGRICULTURE, PROCESSING FACILITY shall mean a plant or establishment where value is added to agricultural commodities through processing, fabrication, or other means and where 80 percent or more of the direct sales from the facility are to other than the ultimate consumer of the processed commodity.
2.03.26 AIRPORT shall mean any area which is used or is intended to be used for the taking off and landing of aircraft, including helicopters, and any appurtenant areas which are used or are intended to be used for airport buildings or facilities, including open spaces, taxiways, and tie-down areas.
2.03.27 ALLEY shall mean a minor public service street or public thoroughfare 20 feet or less in width, through a block of lots primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on another street. Buildings facing an alley shall not be construed as satisfying the requirements of this regulation related to frontage on a dedicated street.
2.03.28 ALTERATION shall mean any change, addition or modification in construction or occupancy of an existing structure.
2.03.29 ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL see “Structural Alteration”.
2.03.30 AMENDMENT shall mean a change in the wording, context, or substance of this Regulation, an addition or deletion or a change in the district boundaries or classifications upon the zoning map.
2.03.31 AMUSEMENT ARCADE shall mean a building or a part of a building where five or more pinball machines, video games, or other similar player-orientated amusement devices are available and are maintained for use.
2.03.32 ANIMAL HOSPITAL shall mean a facility dedicated to treatment of animals, including, cats, dogs, bovine, swine, and other domestic and agricultural animals.
2.03.33 ANIMALS, DOMESTIC see “Household Pet”.
2.03.34 ANIMAL UNIT (A.U.) are defined as follows:
One (1) A.U.= One (1) Cow/Calf combination
One (1) A.U.= One (1) Slaughter, Feeder Cattle;
One (1) A.U.= One (1) Horses or Donkeys;
One (1) A.U.= One (1) Mature Dairy Cattle;
One (1) A.U.= One (1) Swine, Weaned Pigs, Sows with litters;
One (1) A.U.= Five (5) Sheep;
One (1) A.U.= Ten (10) Laying Hens or Broilers, or other fowl;
One (1) A.U.= Ten (10) Turkeys;
One (1) A.U.= Ten (10) Domesticated Ducks and/or Geese.
One (1) A.U.= One(1) Exotic Animals (Llama, Ostrich, Emu)
2.03.35 ANTENNA shall mean a device, designed and intended for transmitting or receiving television, radio, or microwave signals, direct satellite service (including direct-to-home satellite service), and/or video programming services via multi-point distribution services.
2.03.36 ANTIQUE SHOPS shall mean a place offering primarily antiques for sale. An antique for the purpose of this ordinance shall be a work of art, piece of furniture, decorative object, or the like, belonging to the past, at least 30 years old.
2.03.37 APARTMENT shall mean a room or a suite of rooms within an apartment house or multiple family dwelling arranged, intended or designed for a place of residence of a single family or group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit. Also see “Dwelling Unit”.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 5
2.03.38 APARTMENT HOUSE see “Dwelling, Multiple”.
2.03.39 APPEARANCE shall mean the outward aspect visible to the public.
2.03.40 APPROPRIATE shall mean the sympathetic, or fitting, to the context of the site and the whole community.
2.03.41 APPURTENANCES shall mean the visible, functional objects accessory to and part of buildings.
2.03.42 ARCHITECTURAL CANOPY SIGN see “Sign, Architectural Canopy”
2.03.43 ARCHITECTURAL CHARACTER see “Architectural Concept”
2.03.44 ARCHITECTURAL CONCEPT shall mean the basic aesthetic idea of a building, or group of buildings or structures, including the site and landscape development that produces the architectural character.
2.03.45 ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE shall mean a prominent or significant part or element of a building, structure, or site. Architectural features may include special lines, massing, and/or texture.
1. LINES shall mean visual elements of the building, either within the façade or on the building edge, which are in a linear form either horizontally or vertically and may be composed of masonry, glass, or other related materials.
2. MASS shall pertain to the volume, bulk of a building or structure.
3. TEXTURE shall mean the quality of a surface, ranging from mirror finish, smooth, to coarse and unfinished.
2.03.46 ARCHITECTURAL STYLE shall mean the characteristic form and detail, as of buildings of a particular historic period.
2.03.47 ARTISAN PRODUCTION SHOP shall mean a building or portion thereof used for the creation of original handmade works of art or craft items by more than three but less than six artists or artisans, as either a principal or accessory use.
2.03.48 ARTIST STUDIO shall mean a place designed to be used, or used as, both a dwelling place and a place of work by an artist, artisan, or craftsperson, including persons engaged in the application, teaching, or performance of fine arts such as, but not limited to, drawing, vocal or instrumental music, painting, sculpture, and writing.
2.03.49 ASSISTED-LIVING FACILITY shall mean a facility as defined and licensed by the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services where shelter, food, and care are provided for remuneration for a period of more than 24 consecutive hours to four or more persons residing at such facility who require or request such services due to age, illness, or physical disability.
An assisted-living facility does not include a home, apartment or facility where:
a. Casual care is provided at irregular intervals, or
b. A competent person residing in such home, apartment, or facility provides for or contracts for his or her own personal or professional services if no more than 25% of persons residing in such home, apartment, or facility receive such services.
An assisted-living facility is not a nursing home and cannot provide complex nursing interventions.
2.03.50 ATTACHED PERMANENTLY shall mean attached to real estate in such a way as to require dismantling, cutting away, unbolting from permanent foundation or structural change in such structure in order to relocate it to another site.
2.03.51 AUTOMOBILE FILLING STATION shall mean an establishment engaged in the dispensing or sales of fuel for automotive and light trucks and may additionally sell convenience items. Also see “Convenience Store”
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 6
2.03.52 AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION shall mean an establishment engaged in repair and/or servicing of automobiles and light truck; retail dispensing or sales of vehicular fuels; and the sale and installation of lubricants, tires, batteries and similar vehicle accessories.
2.03.53 AUTOMATIC TELLER MACHINE (ATM) shall mean an automated device that performs banking or financial functions at a location remote from the controlling financial institution.
2.03.54 AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD shall mean any lot, or the use of any portion of a lot, for the dismantling or wrecking of automobiles, tractors, farm machinery, or other motor vehicles, or for the storage or keeping for sale of parts and equipment resulting from such dismantling or wrecking.
2.03.55 BALLROOM shall mean a place or hall used for dancing, other than those listed under the definition of “Adult Cabaret”. Ballrooms shall also be used for reunions, weddings and receptions.
2.03.56 BAR shall mean any establishment whose principal business is serving alcoholic beverages at retail for consumption on the premises. Also see “Nightclub”.
2.03.57 BASE FLOOD shall mean any depression two feet or more below the land which serves to give direction to a current of water less than nine months of the year, and which has a bed and well-defined bank.
2.03.58 BASEMENT shall mean that portion of a building having more than one-half of its height below grade. This portion is not a completed structure and serves as a substructure or foundation for the remainder of the building.
2.03.59 BEACON shall mean any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.
2.03.60 BED and BREAKFAST INN shall mean any place of lodging that provides rented rooms to 10 or fewer people that is the personal residence of the owner, that is occupied by the owner at the time of the rental, and in which the only meal served to renters is breakfast. All bed and breakfast establishments shall meet the requirements for bed and breakfast facilities of the Nebraska State Fire Marshal, the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services, and any and all other governmental agencies having appropriate jurisdiction.
2.03.61 BEDROOM shall mean a room within a dwelling unit planned and intended for sleeping, separable from other rooms by a door.
2.03.62 BEER GARDEN shall mean an outdoor area included in licensed premises of a tavern, bar, or brewpub, which is used for the service and consumption of alcoholic liquors, and which is contained by a fence or wall preventing the uncontrolled entrance or exit of persons from the premises, and preventing the passing of alcoholic liquors to persons outside the premises. The tavern, bar, or brewpub must obtain and meet conditions of a Beer Garden Permit as outlined in Municipal Code. Said outdoor area shall not exceed seventy-five percent (75%) of the gross floor area of the adjoining licensed structure.
2.03.63 BERM shall mean a raised form of earth to provide screening or to improve the aesthetic character.
2.03.64 BEST INTERESTS OF COMMUNITY shall mean interests of the community at large and not interest of the immediate neighborhood.
2.03.65 BIG BOX RETAIL STORE shall mean a singular retail or wholesale user who occupies no less than 75,000 square feet of gross floor area, typically requires high parking to building area ratios and has a regional sales market Regional retail/wholesale sales can include, but are not limited to, membership warehouse clubs that emphasize bulk sales, discount stores, and department stores.
2.03.66 BILLBOARD shall mean the same as "Advertising Structure".
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 7
2.03.67 BLOCK shall mean a parcel of land platted into lots and bounded by public streets or by waterways, right-of-ways, unplatted land, City-County boundaries, or adjoining property lines, or a combination thereof.
2.03.68 BLOCK FRONTAGE shall mean that section of a block fronting on a street between two intersecting streets or other block boundary.
2.03.69 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT shall mean that board that has been created by the city and which has the statutory authority to hear and determine appeals, interpretations of, and variances to the zoning regulations.
2.03.70 BOARDING OR ROOMING HOUSE shall mean a building containing a single dwelling unit and provisions for not more than five guests, where lodging is provided with or without meals for compensation.
2.03.71 BREW-ON PREMISES STORE shall mean a facility that provides the ingredients and equipment for a customer to use to brew malt liquor at the store. Brew-on-premises stores do not include the sell of intoxicating liquor, unless the owner of the brew-on-premises store holds the appropriate liquor license.
2.03.72 BREW PUB shall mean a restaurant or hotel which includes the brewing of beer as an accessory use. The brewing operation processes water, malt, hops, and yeast into beer or ale by mashing, cooking, and fermenting. By definition, these establishments produce no more than 10,000 barrels of beer or ale annually. The area, by definition, used for brewing, including bottling and kegging, shall not exceed 25 percent of the total floor area of the commercial space.
2.03.73 BREWERY shall mean an industrial use that brews ales, beers, meads and/or similar beverages on site. Breweries are classified as a use that manufactures more than 10,000 barrels of beverage (all beverages combined) annually.
2.03.74 BREWERY, CRAFT shall mean a brew pub or a micro brewery.
2.03.75 BREWERY, MICRO shall mean a facility for the production and packaging of malt beverages of low alcoholic content for distribution, retail or wholesale, on or off premises, with a capacity of not more than 10,000 barrels per year. The development may include other uses such as standard restaurant, bar, or live entertainment as otherwise permitted in the zoning district.
2.03.76 BROADCASTING TOWER shall mean a structure for the transmission or broadcast of radio, television, radar, or microwaves which exceed the maximum height permitted in the district in which it is located; provided, however, that noncommercial radio towers not exceeding 50 feet in height shall not be considered broadcast towers.
2.03.77 BUFFER shall mean a strip of land established to protect one type of land use from another incompatible land use or between a land use and a private or public road. Also see “Screening”.
2.03.78 BUFFER ZONE shall mean an area of land that separates two zoning districts and/or land uses that acts to soften or mitigate the effects of one use on the other.
2.03.79 BUILDING shall mean any structure built and maintained for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind, but shall not include temporary buildings as defined in "Structure, Temporary". Trailers, with or without wheels, shall not be considered as buildings.
2.03.80 BUILDING ACCESSORY shall mean any detached subordinate building which serves a function customarily incidental to that of the main building or main use of the premises. Customary accessory building includes farm buildings, garages, carports, and small storage sheds.
2.03.81 BUILDING, AREA OF shall mean the sum in square feet of the ground areas occupied by all buildings and structures on a lot.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 8
2.03.82 BUILDING CODE shall mean the various codes of the City that regulate construction and requires Building Permits, electrical permits, mechanical permits, plumbing permits, and other permits to do work regulated by the officially adopted codes of the State of Nebraska and the City of Wahoo, and other codes adopted by the City that pertain to building construction.
2.03.83 BUILDING GROUPINGS shall mean for the purpose of the side yard regulation, a group of business or industrial buildings separated by a common party wall shall be considered as one building occupying one lot.
All ground under the building shall be maintained in common ownership by the original owner or a business owners association. The same association shall control the condition of all facades of the building/structure. The overall building/structure shall meet the minimum setbacks of the zoning district. All sight triangles shall be met on corner lots. All uses to be located in such building/structure shall comply with permitted uses within the zoning district; conditional uses occupying the structure must apply for a conditional use permit. The storage of any inventory parts, or other material needed for the allowable uses shall be maintained within the structure itself and not outside on the property. All intermediate walls shall meet the City’s building codes for fire separation.
2.03.84 BUILDING, HEIGHT shall mean the vertical distance above grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched, hipped, or shed roof, measured from the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within five feet horizontal distance at the exterior wall of the building.
2.03.85 BUILDING INSPECTOR shall mean the individual appointed and/or employed by the City to enforce the prescribed and adopted building codes for the City.
2.03.86 BUILDING, PRINCIPAL shall mean a building within which the main or primary use of the lot or premises is located. (Also, see Principal Use.)
2.03.87 BUILDING SETBACK LINE shall mean
a line parallel, or nearly parallel, to the street line indicating the minimum of distance as prescribed by the zoning regulations between any property line and the closed point of the building line or face of any building or structure related thereto, including all overhangs.
2.03.88 BUSINESS OFFICE shall mean any office environment dealing with the administrative activities of any service, retail, or manufacturing activity.
2.03.89 CAMPGROUND, COMMERCIAL shall mean a parcel of land intended for the temporary occupancy of tents, campers, and major recreational vehicles, but not including mobile home parks, permanent mobile homes, or camping cabins and which the primary purpose is recreational, having open areas that are natural in character.
2.03.90 CAMPGROUND, COMMERCIAL CABIN shall mean a parcel of land intended for the temporary occupancy of camping cabins, which shall not include mobile home parks or permanent mobile homes, and which the primary purpose is recreational, having open areas that are natural in character.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 9
2.03.91 CAMPING CABIN shall mean a small cabin located within a commercial cabin campground that is intended for temporary shelter, and includes sleeping quarters, in all cases a full bathroom, but kitchens are optional.
2.03.92 CAR WASH shall mean a building or structure or an area of land with machine or hand operated facilities for the cleaning, washing, polishing, or waxing of motor vehicles.
2.03.93 CARPORT shall mean a permanent roofed structure with not more than two enclosed sides used or intended to be used for automobile shelter and storage.
2.03.94 CELLAR shall mean a building space having more than one-half of its height below the average adjoining grade lines.
2.03.95 CEMETERY shall mean land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for such purposes, including columbariums, crematoriums, and mausoleums.
2.03.96 CHANNEL shall mean the geographical area within either the natural or artificial banks of a watercourse or drainageway.
2.03.97 CHARITABLE shall mean a public or semi-public institutional use of a philanthropic, charitable, benevolent, religious, or eleemosynary character, but not including sheltering or caring of animals.
2.03.98 CHILD CARE shall mean the provision of care as follows:
1. To four or more children under age 13 at any time families other than that of the provider;
2. For on the average of less than 12 hours per day;
3. For compensation, either indirect or direct;
4. On a regular basis; and
5. By a person other than their parents/guardians.
2.03.99 CHILD CARE CENTER shall mean a facility licensed to provide child care for 13 or more children. In addition to these regulations, Child Care Centers shall meet all requirements of the State of Nebraska.
2.03.100CHURCH, STOREFRONT shall mean a religious facility contained within a store or similar structure not typically used for religious activities that are now used as a meeting place for a congregation. Structures adapted for congregations including barns, stores, warehouses, old public buildings, and single-family dwellings.
2.03.101CITY shall mean the City of Wahoo.
2.03.102CLEAR VIEW ZONE shall mean the area of a corner lot closest to the intersection that is kept free of visual impairment to allow full view of both pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Also see “Sight Triangle”.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 10
2.03.103CLINIC shall mean a building or portion of a building containing offices and facilities for providing medical, dental, and psychiatric services for outpatients only.
2.03.104CLUB shall mean an association of persons (whether or not incorporated), religious or otherwise, for a common purpose, but not including groups which are organized primarily to render a service carried on as a business for profit.
2.03.105CLUSTER SUBDIVISION shall mean a development designed to concentrate buildings in specific areas on a site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, and the preservation of environmentally sensitive areas.
2.03.106CODE shall mean the Municipal Code of the City
of Wahoo.
2.03.107COFFEE HOUSE shall mean an informal restaurant primarily offering coffee, tea, and other beverages, and where light refreshments and limited menu meals may also be sold.
2.03.108COFFEE KIOSK shall mean a retail food business in a freestanding building that sells coffee, or other beverages, and premade bakery goods from a drive-through window to customers seated in their automobiles for consumption off the premises and that provides no indoor or outdoor seating.
2.03.109COMMISSION shall mean the Wahoo Planning Commission.
2.03.110COMMON OPEN SPACE shall mean that undivided land in a subdivision which may be jointly owned by all property owners of the subdivision, for the benefit of the owners of the individual building sites of said development.
2.03.111COMMUNITY CENTER shall mean a place, structure, or other facility used for and providing religious, fraternal, social, and/or recreational programs generally open to the public and designed to accommodate and serve various segments of the community.
2.03.112COMPATIBILITY shall mean harmony in the appearance of two or more external design features in the same vicinity.
2.03.113COMPATIBLE USES shall mean a land use that is congruous with, tolerant of, and has no adverse effects on existing neighboring uses. Incompatibility may be affected by pedestrian or vehicular traffic generation, volume of goods handled and environmental elements such as noise, dust, odor, air pollution, glare, lighting, debris generated, contamination of surface or ground water, aesthetics, vibration, electrical interference, and radiation.
2.03.114COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN, or COMPREHENSIVE PLAN, shall mean the Comprehensive Plan of Wahoo, Nebraska as adopted by the City Council, setting forth policies for the present and foreseeable future community welfare as a whole and meeting the purposes and requirements set forth in Nebr. Rev. Stat. § 19-903 (R.R.S. 1997).
2.03.115CONDITIONAL USE shall mean a use where allowed by the district regulations, that would not be appropriate generally throughout the zoning district without restrictions, but which, if controlled as to number, size, area, location, relation to the neighborhood or other minimal protective characteristics would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 11
2.03.116CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT shall mean a permit issued by the City Council that authorizes the recipient to make conditional use of property in accordance with the provisions of Article 6 and any additional conditions placed upon, or required by said permit.
2.03.117CONDOMINIUM shall mean real estate, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those portions, pursuant to the Nebraska Condominium Act, as set forth in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 76-825 to 76-894 (R.R.S.1996).
2.03.118CONFINED LIVESTOCK FEEDING shall mean the process and area used for confinement of livestock for feeding purposes including the definitions of “Confinement” and “Feedlot, Commercial”.
2.03.119CONFINEMENT shall mean totally roofed buildings, which may be open-sided (for ventilation purposes only) or completely enclosed on the sides,, wherein animals or poultry are housed over solid concrete or dirt floors, or slatted (partially open) floors over pits or manure collection areas in pens, stalls, cages, or alleys, with or without bedding materials and mechanical ventilation. The word "confinement" shall not mean the temporary confined feeding of livestock during seasonal adverse weather. Also see “Feedlot, Commercial”.
2.03.120CONFLICTING LAND USE shall mean the use of property which transfers over neighboring property lines negative economic, or environmental effects, including, but not limited to, noise, vibration, odor, dust, glare, smoke, pollution, water vapor, mismatched land uses and/or density, height, mass, mismatched layout of adjacent uses, loss of privacy, and unsightly views.
2.03.121CONGREGATE HOUSING shall mean a residential facility for four or more persons 55 years or over, their spouses, or surviving spouses, providing living and sleeping facilities including meal preparation, dining areas, laundry services, room cleaning and common recreational, social, and service facilities for the exclusive use of all residents including resident staff personnel who occupy a room or unit in the residential facility.
2.03.122CONSERVATION shall mean the protection and care that prevent destruction or deterioration of historical or otherwise significant structures, buildings or natural resources.
2.03.123CONSERVATION AREA shall mean environmentally sensitive and valuable lands protected from any activity that would significantly alter their ecological integrity, balance or character, except in overriding public interest, including but not limited to: wetlands, floodways, flood plains, drainage ways, river or stream banks, and areas of significant biological productivity or uniqueness.
2.03.124CONSERVATION EASEMENT shall mean an easement granting a right or interest in real property that is appropriate to retaining land or water areas predominantly in their natural, scenic, open, or wooded condition and retaining such areas as suitable habitat for fish, plants, or wildlife, or maintaining existing land uses.
2.03.125CONVENIENCE STORE shall mean a one-story, retail store containing less than 2,000 square feet of gross floor area that is designed and stocked to sell primarily food, beverages, and other household supplies to customers who purchase only a relatively few items (in contrast to a "supermarket.") It is dependent on, and is designed to attract and accommodate large volumes of stop-and-go traffic. Also see “Self-service Station”.
2.03.126CONTIGUOUS shall mean the same as "Abut".
2.03.127COPY CENTER shall mean a retail establishment that provides duplicating services using photocopying, blueprint, and offset printing equipment, and may include the collating and binding of booklets and reports.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 12
2.03.128COURT shall mean an open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building or buildings and abounded on two or more sides by such buildings.
2.03.129COURT, INNER shall mean a court enclosed on all sides by the exterior walls of a building or buildings.
2.03.130COURT, OUTER shall mean a court enclosed on all but one side by exterior walls of building or buildings or lot lines on which fences, hedges, or walls are permitted.
2.03.131 CUL-DE-SAC shall mean a short public way that has only one outlet for vehicular traffic and terminates in a vehicular turn-around.
2.03.132CURVE LOT see "Lot, Curve".
2.03.133DENSITY shall mean the number of dwelling units per gross acre of land.
2.03.134DEPARTMENT STORE shall mean a business which is conducted under a single owner’s name wherein a
variety of unrelated merchandise and services are housed, enclosed and exhibited and sold directly to the customer for whom the goods and services are furnished.
2.03.135DESIGN STANDARDS shall mean the document adopted for evaluation of all projects proposed within the Transportation Corridor overlay district. Design Standards shall be applicable to all sites located within the Transportation Corridor district, with the exception of one unit dwellings or two unit dwellings.
2.03.136DETENTION BASIN shall mean a facility for the temporary storage of stormwater runoff.
2.03.137DEVELOPER shall mean any person, corporation, partnership, or entity that is responsible for any undertaking that requires a building or zoning permit, conditional use permit or sign permit.
2.03.138DEVELOPMENT shall mean any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations for which necessary permits may be required.
2.03.139DEVELOPMENT CONCEPT PLAN see “Site Plan”.
2.03.140DEVELOPMENT REVIEW shall mean the review, by the county of subdivision plats, site plans, rezoning requests, or permit review.
2.03.141DISCOUNT CENTER shall mean a single or group of stores, offering merchandise for sale at less than usual retail prices. Merchandise may be discounted due to either quantity price breaks or merchandise has been discontinued and discounted to another retailer.
2.03.142DISSOLVE: A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Display accomplished by varying the light intensity or pattern, where the first message gradually appears to dissipate and lose legibility simultaneously with the gradual appearance and legibility of the second message.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 13
2.03.143DOG KENNEL see Kennel, Commercial”.
2.03.144DOMESTIC ANIMALS see “Household Pet”.
2.03.145DOWNZONING shall mean a change in zoning classification of land to a less intensive or more restrictive district such as from commercial district to residential district or from a multiple family residential district to single family residential district.
2.03.146DRAINAGEWAY shall mean any depression two feet or more below the surrounding land serving to give direction to a current of water less than nine months of the year, having a bed and well-defined banks; provided that in the event of doubt as to whether a depression is a watercourse or drainageway, it shall be presumed to be a watercourse.
2.03.147DRIVE-IN FACILITY shall mean an establishment where customers can be served without leaving the confinement of their vehicle.
2.03.148DRIVEWAY shall mean any vehicular access to an off-street parking or loading facility.
2.03.149DUMP shall mean a place used for the disposal, abandonment, discarding by burial, incineration, or by any other means for any garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, rubble, waste material, offal or dead animals. Such use shall not involve any industrial or commercial process.
2.03.150DUPLEX shall mean the same as "Dwelling, Two Family".
2.03.151DWELLING shall mean any building or portion thereof which is designed and used exclusively for single family residential purposes, excluding mobile homes.
2.03.152DWELLING FOR THE ELDERLY AND/OR HANDICAPPED shall mean a two-family or multiple-family residential building having accommodations for and occupied exclusively by elderly or handicapped residents and necessary maintenance personnel. Elderly residents are those who at least 62-years of age. Handicapped persons are those people having an impairment which is expected to be of long, continuous and indefinite duration, is a substantial limitation to their ability to live independently, and is of a nature that such ability could be improved by more suitable housing.
2.03.153DWELLING, FARM shall mean a dwelling located on a farm or ranch and occupied by the owner, tenant or employee of the farm or ranch.
2.03.154DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOME shall mean a factory-built structure which is to be used as a place for human habitation, which is not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than to a permanent site, which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles, and which bears a label certifying that it was built in compliance with standards promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
2.03.155DWELLING, MOBILE HOME Any prefabricated structure, composed of one or more parts, used for living and sleeping purposes, shipped or moved in essentially a complete condition and mounted on wheels, skids or roller, jacks blocks, horses, skirting or a permanent or temporary foundation or any prefabricated structure which has been or reasonably can be equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting the structure from place to place, whether by motive power or other means. The term mobile home shall include trailer home and camp car, but the definition shall not apply to any vehicle lawfully operated upon fixed rails.
1. Permanently Attached: Attached to real estate in such a way as to require dismantling, cutting away, unbolting from permanent continuous foundation or structural change in such mobile home in order to relocate it on another site in accordance to manufacturers recommendations.
2. Permanent Foundation: Base on which building rests to be constructed from either poured concrete or laid masonry block or brick on a footing to be placed a minimum of 42 inches below the final ground level.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 14
2.03.156DWELLING, MODULAR shall mean any dwelling whose construction consists entirely of or the major portions of its construction consist of a unit or units not fabricated on the final site for the dwelling unit, which units are movable or portable until placed on a permanent foundation and connected to utilities, pursuant to the Nebraska Uniform Standards for Modular Housing Units Act, as set forth in Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 71-1557 to 71-1568.01 (R.S.Supp.,2000). Further, such dwelling must also meet or be equivalent to the construction criteria set forth in the Nebraska Uniform Standards for Modular Housing Units Act. Such dwelling is considered to be a conventional type single-family dwelling, and those that do not meet the above criteria shall be considered a mobile home.
2.03.157DWELLING, MULTIPLE shall mean a building or buildings designed and used for occupancy by three (3) or more families, all living independently of each other and having separate kitchen and toilet facilities for each family.
2.03.158DWELLING, SEASONAL shall mean a dwelling designed and used as a temporary residence and occupied less than six months in each year.
2.03.159DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY a building having accommodations for or occupied exclusively by one family which meet all the following standards:
1. The home shall have no less than 900 square feet of floor area, above grade, for single story construction;
2. The home shall have no less than an 18 foot exterior width;
3. The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of two and one-half inches for each 12 inches of horizontal run;
4. The exterior material shall be of a color, material and scale comparable with those existing in residential site-built, single family construction;
5. The home shall have a non-reflective roof material that is or simulates asphalt or wood shingles, tile, or rock. Said roof may be finished in metal provided it is non-reflective and meets standards established for residential or commercial use;
6. The home shall be placed on a continuous permanent foundation and have wheels, axles, transporting lights, and removable towing apparatus removed, and
7. The home shall meet and maintain the same standards that are uniformly applied to all single-family dwellings in the zoning district.
8. Permanent foundation: Base on which building rests to be constructed from either poured concrete or laid masonry block or brick on a footing to be placed a minimum of 42 inches below the final ground level.
2.03.160DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE shall mean a one-family dwelling in a row of at least two such units and not more than 12 units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit. Said dwelling units are separated by a common wall (wall shall meet all applicable fire and building codes and shall not have any penetrations from one unit to another) through the center of the structure that also sits along the property line separating ownership of the structure. Each unit is located on a separate parcel of land within the development site.
2.03.161DWELLING, TWO FAMILY shall mean a building designed or used exclusively for the occupancy of two families living independently of each other and having separate kitchen and toilet facilities for each family.
2.03.162DWELLING UNIT One room, or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy or lease on a weekly, monthly, or longer basis, and physically separate from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure, and containing independent cooking, toilet and sleeping facilities.
2.03.163EARTH-SHELTERED RESIDENCE shall a residence designed as a complete structure below or partially below ground level, whose perimeter walls comply with the yard requirements of the district in which it is located, and which was not intended to serve as a substructure or foundation for a building.
2.03.164EASEMENT shall mean a space or a lot or parcel of land reserved for or used for public utilities or public or private uses.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 15
2.03.165EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION shall mean a public or nonprofit institution or facility which conducts regular academic instruction at preschool, kindergarten, elementary, secondary, and collegiate levels, including graduate schools, universities, junior colleges, trade schools, nonprofit research institutions and religious institutions. Such institutions must either: (1) Offer general academic instruction equivalent to the standards established by the State Board of Education; or (2) Confer degrees as a college or university or undergraduate or graduate standing; or (3) Conduct research; or (4) Give religious instruction. Private schools, academies, or institutes incorporated or otherwise, which operate for a profit, commercial, or private trade schools are not included in this definition.
2.03.166ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTION shall mean any building or group of buildings devoted to and supported by charity.
2.03.167EFFECTIVE DATE shall mean the date that this chapter shall have been adopted, amended, or the date land areas became subject to the regulations contained in this chapter as a result of such adoption or amendment.
2.03.168ENCROACHMENT shall mean an advancement or intrusion beyond the lines or limits as designated and established by the Regulation, and to infringe or trespass into or upon the possession or right of others without permission.
2.03.169ENLARGEMENT shall mean the expansion of a building, structure, or use in volume, size, area, height, length, width, depth, capacity, ground coverage, or in number.
2.03.170ERECTED shall mean constructed upon or moved onto a site.
2.03.171EXPRESSWAY shall mean a street or road that provides fast and efficient movement of large volumes of vehicular traffic between areas and does not provide direct access to property.
2.03.172 EXTERIOR BUILDING COMPONENT shall mean an essential and visible part of the exterior of a building.
2.03.173 EXTERNAL DESIGN FEATURE shall mean the general arrangement of any portion of a building, sign, landscaping, or structure and including the kind, color, and texture of the materials of such portion, and the types of roof, windows, doors, lights, attached or ground signs, or other fixtures appurtenant to such portions as will be open to public view from any street, place, or way.
2.03.174EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION shall mean the area beyond the corporate limits, in which the City has been granted the powers by the state to exercise zoning and building regulations and is exercising such powers.
2.03.175FACADE shall mean the exterior wall of a building exposed to public view from the building's exterior.
2.03.176FACTORY shall mean a structure or plant within which something is made or manufactured from raw or partly wrought materials into forms suitable for use.
2.03.177FADE: A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Display accomplished by varying the light intensity, where the first message gradually reduces intensity to the point of not being legible and the subsequent message gradually increases intensity to the point of legibility.
2.03.178FAMILY shall mean a household head and one or more persons related to the head by blood, marriage or adoption living together in a single dwelling unit.
2.03.179FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME I shall mean a child care operation in the provider’s place of residence which serves between four and eight children at any one time. A Family Child Care Home I provider may be approved to serve no more than two additional school-age children during non-school hours. In addition to these regulations, a Family Child Care Home I shall meet requirement of the State of Nebraska.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 16
2.03.180FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME II shall mean a child care operation either in the provider’s place of residence or a site other than the residence, serving twelve or fewer children at any one time. In addition to these regulations, a Child Care Home shall meet requirement of the State of Nebraska.
2.03.181FARM an area containing at least 20 acres or more and produces $1,000.00 or more per year in agricultural products and which is used for growing of the usual farm products such as vegetables, fruit, and grain, and the storage on the area, as well as for the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals. The term farming includes the operating of such area for one or more of the above uses with the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing the produce and the feeding of livestock as hereinafter prescribed provided such accessory uses do not include the feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other animals.
2.03.182FEEDLOT, COMMERCIAL shall mean a lot or building or combination of lots and buildings intended for the confined feeding, breeding, raising, or holding of animals and specifically designed as a confinement area in which manure may accumulate, or where the concentration of animals is such that a vegetation cover cannot be maintained in the enclosure.
2.03.183FENCE shall mean a structure serving as an enclosure, barrier or boundary.
2.03.184FENCE, OPEN shall mean a fence, including gates, which has, for each one foot wide segment extending over the entire length and height of fence, 50 percent or more of the surface area in open spaces which affords direct views through the fence.
2.03.185FENCE, SOLID shall mean any fence which does not qualify as an open fence.
2.03.186FIREWORKS shall mean any substance or combination of substances or articles prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, and includes blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, or toy guns in which explosives other than toy paper caps are used, firecrackers, torpedoes, sky rockets, Roman candles, Daygo bombs, sparklers, or other fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound, or any tablet or other device containing any explosive substance. Nothing in this regulation shall be construed as applying to tot paper caps containing not more than 0.25 of a grain (16.20 milligrams) of explosive composition per cap.
2.03.187FIREWORKS STAND shall mean any portable building and/or structure used for the retail sale of fireworks, usually on a temporary basis.
2.03.188FIREWORKS STORAGE shall mean any permanent building and/or structure where fireworks are stored for any portion of a year provided there is no retail sales made from the storage location. Said storage facility may also be used for the delivery and distribution of fireworks on a wholesale basis.
2.03.189FLOOD shall mean the water of any watercourse or drainage way which is above the banks or outside the channel and banks of such watercourse or drainageway.
2.03.190FLOOD PLAIN shall mean those lands which are subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year as identified by FEMA.
2.03.191FLOODWAY shall mean the channel of a watercourse or drainageway and those portions of the flood plain adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the flood water of any watercourse or drainageway.
2.03.192FLOOR AREA whenever the term "floor area" is used in this Regulation as a basis for requiring off-street parking for any structure, it shall be assumed that, unless otherwise stated, said floor area applies not only to the ground floor area but also to any additional stories of said structure. All horizontal dimensions shall be taken from the exterior faces of walls.
2.03.193FOOD PROCESSINGshall mean a business that takes a raw material and processes it into a consumable form. This would include taking live or dead livestock and butchering it into specific cuts of meat. Food
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 17
processing may also comprise of the manufacturing of consumer ready products such as frozen goods including frozen foods such as appetizers, vegetables, and similar foods that are supplied directly to wholesalers, restaurants, and/or grocery stores.
2.03.194FOOD SALES shall mean establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail sale of food or household products for home consumption. Typical uses include groceries, delicatessens, meat markets, retail bakeries, and candy shops.
2.03.195FOOD SALES (LIMITED) shall mean food sales establishments occupying 10,000 square feet or less of space.
2.03.196FOOD SALES (GENERAL) shall mean food sales establishments occupying more than 10,000 square feet of space. Typically a supermarket.
2.03.197FOOD STORAGE (MEAT LOCKER) shall mean a use that rents cold storage to individuals for the purpose storing meat and other perishable items.
2.03.198FRONTAGE shall mean that portion of a parcel of property which abuts a dedicated public street or highway.
2.03.199GARAGE, PRIVATE shall mean a detached accessory building or a portion of a main building on the same lot as a dwelling for the housing of vehicles of the occupants of the dwelling, including carports.
2.03.200GARAGE, PUBLIC shall mean any garage other than a private garage.
2.03.201GARAGE, REPAIR shall mean a building designed and used for the storage, care, repair, or refinishing of motor vehicles including both minor and major mechanical overhauling, paint, and body work. Also see “Service Station”.
2.03.202GARBAGE shall mean any waste food material of an animal or vegetable nature, including that which may be used for the fattening of livestock.
2.03.203GATED COMMUNITIES shall mean residential areas that restrict access to normally public spaces. These are subdivisions of usually high-end houses. The type of gates can range from elaborate guard houses to simple electronic arms.
2.03.204GRADE shall mean the average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of a building. In case walls are parallel to and within five feet of a sidewalk, the ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk.
2.03.205GREENHOUSE shall mean a building or premises used for growing plants, preparation of floral arrangements for off-site delivery to customers, cold storage of flowers or dry storage of materials used for agricultural or horticultural purposes.
2.03.206GREENWAY shall mean a parcel or parcels of land, together with the improvements thereon, dedicated as an easement for access and/or recreation; usually a strip of land set aside for a walkway, bicycle trail, bridal path, or other similar access-way.
2.03.207GROUND COVER shall mean plant material used in landscaping which remains less than 12 inches in height at maturity. Also see “Landscaping”.
2.03.208GROUND WATER shall mean water occurring beneath the surface of the ground that fills available openings in the rock or soil materials such that they may be considered saturated.
2.03.209GROUP CARE HOME shall mean a home which is operated under the auspices of an organization which is responsible for providing social services, administration, direction, and control for the home which is designed to provide twenty-four hour care for individuals in a residential setting.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 18
2.03.210GROUP HOME FOR THE HANDICAPPED shall mean a dwelling with resident staff shared by four or more handicapped persons who live together as a single housekeeping unit and in a long term, family-like environment in which staff persons provide care, education, and participation in community activities for the residents with the primary goal of enabling the residents to live as independently as possible in order to reach their maximum potential. As used herein, the term "handicapped" shall mean having:
1. A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities;
2. A record of having such an impairment; or
3. Being regarded as having such impairment.
Handicap shall not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-401. (R.R.S.Supp, 2000).
2.03.211GROUP HOUSING shall mean two or more separate buildings on a lot, each containing one or more dwelling units.
2.03.212GUEST ROOM shall mean a room which is designed to be occupied by one or more guest for sleeping purposes, having no kitchen facilities, not including dormitories.
2.03.213HALF-STORY shall mean a story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, plates of which are not more than three feet above the floor of such story.
2.03.214HALFWAY HOUSE shall mean a licensed home for individuals on release from more restrictive custodial confinement or initially placed in lieu of such more restrictive custodial confinement, living together as a single housekeeping unit, wherein supervision, rehabilitation and counseling are provided to mainstream residents back into society, enabling them to live independently.
2.03.215HAZARDOUS WASTE shall mean waste products of industrial or chemical process including finished surplus, used, contaminated or unwanted fertilizer, herbicide, petroleum products, or other such processed waste material.
2.03.216HEALTH CLUB shall mean privately owned for profit facilities such as gymnasiums, athletic clubs, health clubs, recreational clubs, reducing salons, and weight control establishments.
2.03.217HEALTH RECREATION FACILITY shall mean an indoor or outdoor facility including uses such as game courts, exercise equipment, locker rooms, whirlpool spa and/or sauna and pro shop.
2.03.218HEDGE shall mean a plant or series of plants, shrubs or other landscape material, so arranged as to form a physical barrier or enclosure.
2.03.219HEIGHT OF BUILDING shall mean the vertical distance above grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, of the peak of a gable roof, or of any other type of pitched, hipped, or mansard roof. The grade may mean the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a five foot horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the building, when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than 10 feet above grade. The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the building.
2.03.220HOME IMPROVEMENT CENTER shall mean a facility of more than 30,000 square feet of gross floor area, engaged in the retail sale of various basic hardware lines, such as tools, builders’ hardware, paint and glass, housewares and household appliances, garden supplies, and cutlery.
2.03.221HOME OCCUPATION shall mean an “in-home” or “home based” or entrepreneurial business operating from a residential dwelling within Wahoo. Home occupations are considered accessory uses to properties in all zoning districts.
Home occupations include (but not limited to) art/craft making, seamstress services, professional offices (real estate/insurance/medical), multi-level marketing, vending services, service businesses (contracting/janitorial), instruction (music), consulting, wholesale/catalogue sales, personal service (Beauty/barber) shops, and renting of rooms for residential purposes. Any portion of a residential
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 19
property, including a home phone, computer, mailing address, etc., used in deriving income or sales, are included in this definition. Family Child Care Home I and II are exempt as Home Occupations except for any signage restrictions.
2.03.222HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION shall mean a private, nonprofit corporation or association of homeowners of properties in a fixed area, established for the purpose of owning, operating, and maintaining various common properties and facilities.
2.03.223 HOSPITAL shall mean an establishment providing physical health services, in-patient, out-patient, or overnight accommodations, and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured.
2.03.224HOTEL shall mean a building or portion thereof, or a group of buildings, offering transient lodging accommodations on a daily rate to the general public and providing services associated with restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreational facilities. The word "hotel" includes motel, inn, automobile court, motor inn, motor lodge, motor court, tourist court, motor hotel.
2.03.225HOUSE TRAILER see “Dwelling: Mobile Home”.
2.03.226HOUSEHOLD PET shall mean an animal that is customarily kept for personal use or enjoyment within the home. Household pet shall include but not be limited to domestic dogs, domestic cats, domestic tropical birds, fish, and rodents.
2.03.227IMPERVIOUS SURFACE shall mean a surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material making the surface highly resistant to infiltration by water, such as compacted sand, rock, gravel, or clay and conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots, and driveways.
2.03.228INCIDENTAL USE shall mean a use, which is subordinate to the main use of a premise.
2.03.229INDUSTRY shall mean the manufacture, fabrication, processing reduction or destruction of any article, substance or commodity, or any other treatment thereof in such a manner as to change the form, character, or appearance thereof and including storage elevators, truck storage yards, warehouses, wholesale storage and other similar types of enterprise.
2.03.230INFILL DEVELOPMENT shall mean the construction of a building or structure on a vacant parcel located in a predominately built up area.
2.03.231INFILL SITE shall mean any vacant lot, parcel, or tract of land within developed areas of the city, where at least 80 percent of the land within a 300-foot radius of the site has been developed, and where water, sewer, streets, schools, and fire protection have already been constructed or are provided.
2.03.232INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE shall mean any motor vehicle which: (1) Does not have a current state license plate; or, (2) Which may or may not have a current state license plate, but is disassembled or wrecked in part or in whole, or is unable to move under its own power, or is not equipped as required by Nebraska State Law for operation upon streets or highways. A vehicle which is wholly or partially dismantled shall not be considered inoperable when said vehicle is inside a completely enclosed building.
2.03.233INTENSITY shall mean the degree to which land is used referring to the levels of concentration or activity in uses ranging from uses of low intensity being agricultural and residential to uses of highest intensity being heavy industrial uses. High intensity uses are normally uses that generate concentrations of vehicular traffic and daytime population and are less compatible with lower intensive uses.
2.03.234INTENT AND PURPOSE shall mean that the Commission and Council by the adoption of this Regulation, have made a finding that the health, safety, and welfare of the Community will be served by the creation of the District and by the regulations prescribed therein.
2.03.235 INTERMEDIATE CARE FACILITY FOR THE MENTALLY RETARDED (ICF/MR) shall mean a facility as defined in the Developmental Disabilities and Behavioral Health Facilities Section and licensed by the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services where shelter, food and training or
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 20
habilitation services, advice, counseling, diagnosis, treatment, care, nursing care, or related services are provided for a period of more than 24 consecutive hours to four or more persons residing at the facility who have mental retardation or related conditions, including epilepsy, cerebral palsy, or other developmental disabilities.
2.03.236JUICE BAR See Section 7.26, “Adult Establishment”.
2.03.237JUNK shall be any worn-out, cast-off, old, or discarded articles of scrap, copper, brass, iron, steel, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste, dismantled or wrecked automobiles, or parts thereof, and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material.
2.03.238JUNK YARD shall mean any lot, land parcel, building, or structure or part thereof for storage, collection, purchase, sale, salvage, or disposal of machinery, farm machinery, and including motor vehicles, parts and equipment that were the result of dismantling or wrecking, or keeping of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap materials, with no burning permitted. For motor vehicles, see "Automobile Wrecking Yard".
2.03.239KENNEL, BOARDING AND TRAINING shall mean any lot or premises on which four or more dogs or cats or any combination thereof, at least four months of age, are boarded, bred, or trained for a fee.
2.03.240KENNEL, COMMERCIAL shall mean an establishment where four or more dogs or cats, or any combination thereof, other household pets, or non-farm/non-domestic animals at least four months of age are groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold as a business.
2.03.241LAGOON shall mean a wastewater treatment facility which is a shallow, artificial pond where sunlight, bacterial action, and oxygen interact to restore wastewater to a reasonable state of purity. This includes both human and livestock wastes. All lagoons shall meet the minimum design criteria established by the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality and the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services. All lagoons shall have the proper permits approved prior to starting construction.
2.03.242LANDFILL shall mean a disposal site employing a method of disposing solid wastes in a manner that minimizes environmental hazards in accordance with state and federal requirements.
2.03.243LANDSCAPE shall mean plant materials, topography, and other natural physical elements combined in relation to one another and to man-made structures.
2.03.244LANDSCAPING shall include the original planting of suitable vegetation in conformity with the requirements of this Regulation and the continued maintenance thereof.
2.03.245LARGE BOX RETAIL shall mean a singular retail or wholesale user that occupies no less than 30,000 square feet of gross floor area. These uses typically include: membership wholesale clubs emphasizing in large bulk sales, discount stores, pharmacies, grocery stores, especially warehouse style point of sale concepts and department stores.
2.03.246LAUNDRY, SELF SERVICE shall mean an establishment that provides home-type washing, drying, and/or ironing facilities for customers on the premises.
2.03.247LIFE CARE FACILITY shall mean a facility for the transitional residency of the elderly and/or disabled persons, progressing from independent living to congregate apartment living where residents share common meals and culminating in full health and continuing care nursing home facility. Also see Congregate Housing.
2.03.248LIGHT CUT-OFF ANGLE shall mean an angle from vertical, extending downward from a luminary, which defines the maximum range of incident illumination outward at the ground plane.
2.03.249LIMITS OF GRADING shall mean the outermost edge of the area in which the existing topography is to be altered by cutting and/or filling.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 21
2.03.250LOADING SPACE shall mean an off-street space or berth on the same lot with a main building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading, and which abuts a street, alley, or other appropriate means of ingress and egress.
2.03.251LOT shall mean a parcel or tract of land which is or may be occupied by a permitted use, together with yards, and other required open spaces, that have frontage upon a street, and is part of a recorded subdivision plat or has been recorded prior to the adoption of the regulations, or a parcel of real property delineated on an approved record of survey, lot-split or sub-parceling map as filed in the office of the County Recorder and abutting at least one public street or right-of-way, two thoroughfare easements, or one private road.
2.03.252LOT AREA shall mean the total area, on a horizontal plane, within the lot lines of a lot.
2.03.253LOT, CORNER shall mean a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets at an angle of not more
than 135 degrees. If the angle is greater than 135 degrees, the lot shall be considered an "Interior Lot". The setbacks for a front yard shall be met on all abutting streets.
2.03.254LOT COVERAGE shall mean the portion of a lot or building site which is occupied by any building or structure, excepting paved areas, walks and swimming pools, regardless of whether said building or structure is intended for human occupancy or not.
2.03.255LOT, CURVE shall mean a lot
fronting on the outside curve of the right-of-way of a curved street, which street has a centerline radius of 300 feet or less.
2.03.256LOT DEPTH shall mean the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines. Corner lots shall provide at least one dimension equal to the required lot depth prescribed in the affected zoning district.
2.03.257LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE shall mean a lot having a frontage on two non-intersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.
2.03.258LOT, FLAG shall mean lots, being those lots landlocked from public right-of-way, except for a narrow tract of land of less width than required under assigned zoning.
2.03.259LOT, FRONTAGE shall mean the side of a lot abutting on a street or an improved county road. For purposes of determining yard requirements of corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot abutting a street or road shall be considered frontage.
2.03.260LOT, INTERIOR shall mean a lot other than a corner lot which has frontage on one street only.
2.03.261LOT LINE shall mean the property line bounding a lot.
2.03.262LOT LINE, FRONT shall mean the property line abutting a street.
2.03.263LOT LINE, REAR shall mean a lot line not abutting a street which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 22
2.03.264LOT LINE, SIDE shall mean any lot line not a front lot line or rear lot line.
2.03.265LOT, NONCONFORMING shall mean a lot having less area or dimension than that required in the district in which it is located and which was lawfully created prior to the zoning thereof whereby the larger area or dimension requirements were established, or any lot, other than one shown on a plat recorded in the office of the County Registrar of Deeds, which does not abut a public road or public road right-of-way and which was lawfully created prior to the effective date of the zoning regulations.
2.03.266LOT THROUGH shall mean a lot other than a corner lot, fronting on more than one street.
2.03.267LOT OF RECORD shall mean a lot held in separate ownership as shown on the records of the County Registrar of Deeds at the time of the passage of a regulation or regulation establishing the zoning district in which the lot is located.
2.03.268LOT WIDTH shall mean the minimum street frontage measured along the front street property line except when a lot fronts on the inside or concave side of a horizontal curvilinear alignment of a street or on a corner lot; in which case, the minimum lot width shall be measured along the front building line of the principal use structure extended to both lot property lines.
2.03.269MANUFACTURED HOME PARK shall mean a parcel of land under single ownership that has been planned and improved for the placement of manufactured housing used or to be used for dwelling purposes and where manufactured home spaces are not offered for sale or sold. The term "manufactured home park" does not include sales lots on which new or used manufactured homes are parked for the purposes of storage, inspection, or sale.
2.03.270MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION shall mean any area, piece, parcel, tract or plot of ground subdivided and used or intended to be used for the purpose of selling lots for occupancy by manufactured homes.
2.03.271MANUFACTURING shall mean uses primarily engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products. These uses are usually described as plants, factories, or mills and characteristically use power driven machines and materials handling equipment. Uses engaged in assembling component parts of manufactured products are also considered manufacturing if the new product is neither a structure nor other fixed improvement. Also included is the blending of material such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins, or liquors. Manufacturing production is usually carried on for the wholesale market, for interplant transfer, or to order for industrial users, rather than for direct sale to the domestic consumer.
2.03.272MAP, OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICT shall mean a map delineating the boundaries of zoning districts which, along with the zoning text, is officially adopted by the Wahoo City Council.
2.03.273MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT shall mean any building, room, place, or establishment other than a regularly licensed and established hospital or dispensary where non-medical or non-surgical manipulative exercises or devices are practiced upon the human body manually or otherwise by any person other than a licensed physician, surgeon, dentist, occupational and/or physical therapist, chiropractor, or osteopath with or without the use of therapeutic, electrical, mechanical, or bathing device. Said establishment shall comply with all state regulations as per §71-1,278 through §71-1,283, Nebr. R.R.S., 1943
2.03.274MASSAGE PARLOR See Section 7.26, “Adult Establishment”.
2.03.275MASSAGE THERAPY ESTABLISHMENT shall mean any duly licensed place in which a massage therapist practices his or her profession of massage therapy, as defined in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 71-1,278 (R.S.Supp.,2000).
2.03.276MASTER FEE SCHEDULE shall mean a fee schedule maintained by the City of Wahoo and passed, and amended periodically, which establishes the required fees to be collected for specific Planning, Zoning, Subdivision, and Building Inspection activities.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 23
2.03.277MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT shall mean equipment, devices, and accessories, the use of which relates to water supply, drainage, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and similar purposes.
2.03.278MEDICAL CLINIC shall mean a facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical service for sick or injured persons exclusively on an out-patient basis, including emergency treatment, diagnostic services to outpatients, employees or visitors. The term “medical clinic”, includes immediate care facilities, where emergency treatment is the dominant form of care provided at the facility.
2.03.279MINI-STORAGE OR MINI-WAREHOUSE see “Self-Service Storage Facility”.
2.03.280MISCELLANEOUS STRUCTURES shall mean structures, other than buildings, visible from public ways. Examples are: memorials, stagings, antennas, water tanks and towers, sheds, shelters, fences, and walls, kennels, transformers, drive-up facilities.
2.03.281MIXED USE shall mean properties where various uses, such as office, commercial, institutional, and residential, are combined in a single building or on a single site in an integrated development project with significant functional interrelationships and a coherent physical design.
2.03.282MOBILE HOME see “Dwelling, Mobile Home”.
2.03.283MOBILE HOME PARK see “Manufactured Home Park”.
2.03.284MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION see “Manufactured Home Subdivision”.
2.03.285MOTEL see Hotel”.
2.03.286MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL see “Truck and Freight Terminal”
2.03.287MOTOR VEHICLE shall mean every self-propelled land vehicle, not operated upon rails, except mopeds and self-propelled invalid chairs.
2.03.288NEB. REV. STAT. shall refer to the Nebraska State Statutes.
2.03.289NIGHTCLUB shall mean a commercial establishment dispensing beverages for consumption on the premises and in which dancing is permitted or entertainment is provided. Also see “Bar”.
2.03.290NONCOMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM shall mean any public water supply system that is not a community water supply system.
2.03.291NON-CONFORMING BUILDING shall mean a building or portion thereof which was lawful when established but which does not conform to subsequently established zoning or zoning regulations.
2.03.292NON-CONFORMING USE shall mean a use lawful when established but which does not conform to subsequently established zoning or zoning regulation.
2.03.293NON-FARM BUILDINGS are all buildings except those buildings utilized for agricultural purposes on a farmstead of twenty acres or more which produces $1,000 dollars or more of farm products each year.
2.03.294NUISANCE shall mean anything that interferes with the use or enjoyment of property, endangers personal health or safety, or is offensive to the senses such as noise, dust, odor, smoke, gas, pollution, congestion, lighting, and litter.
2.03.295NURSERY shall mean the use of a premises for the propagation, cultivation, and growth of trees, shrubs, plants, vines, and the like from seed or stock, and the sale thereof, and including the sale of trees, shrubs, plants, vines, and the like purchased elsewhere and transplanted into the soil of the premises. In connection with the sale of plants, such fungicides, insecticides, chemicals, peat moss, humus, mulches, and fertilizers as are intended to be used in preserving the life and health of the plants may be sold.
2.03.296NURSERY SCHOOL see “Preschool”.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 24
2.03.297 NURSING HOME shall mean a long term care facility as defined and licensed by the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services as one of the following:
a. Skilled Nursing Facility means a facility where medical care, skilled nursing care, rehabilitation or related services and associated treatment are provided for a period of more than 24 consecutive hours to persons residing at such facility who are ill, injured or disabled.
b. Nursing Facility means a facility where medical care, nursing care, rehabilitation or related services and associated treatment are provided for a period of more than 24 consecutive hours to persons residing at such facility who are ill, injured or disabled.
c. Intermediate Care Facility means a facility where shelter, food and nursing care or related services are provided for a period of more than 24 consecutive hours to persons residing at such facility who are ill, injured or disabled and do not require hospital or skilled nursing facility care.
2.03.298OFFICE shall mean a building or a portion of a building wherein services are performed involving, primarily, administrative, professional, or clerical operations.
2.03.299OFFICIAL MAP see “Map, Official Zoning District”.
2.03.300OFF-STREET PARKING AREA or VEHICULAR USE shall refer to all off street areas and spaces designed, used, required, or intended to be used for parking, including driveways or access ways in and to such areas.
2.03.301OPEN LOTS shall mean pens or similar concentrated areas, including small shed-type areas or open-front buildings, with dirt, or concrete (or paved or hard) surfaces, wherein animals or poultry are substantially or entirely exposed to the outside environment except for possible small portions affording some protection by windbreaks or small shed-type areas.
2.03.302OPEN SPACE shall mean a parcel or parcels of land, together with the improvements thereon, primarily set aside for recreational use and enjoyment, exclusive of land areas used for streets, alleys, roads, driveways, parking areas, structures, and buildings.
2.03.303OPEN SPACE, COMMON shall mean a separate and distinct area set aside as open space within or related to a development, and not on individually owned lots or dedicated for public use, but which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development. Rights-of-way, private streets, driveways, parking lots or other surfaces designed or intended for vehicular use or required yards shall not be included as common open space.
2.03.304OUTDOOR ADVERTISING shall include the definitions of "Advertising Structure" and "Sign".
2.03.305 OUTDOOR CAFÉ shall mean an outdoor area, adjacent to a street level eating or drinking establishment which derives sixty-five percent (65%) or more of its gross proceeds from the sale of food, located adjacent to the public pedestrian walkway and used exclusively for dining, drinking, and pedestrian circulation. The area shall be separated from the public sidewalk by railings, fencing, or landscaping or a combination thereof. Outdoor cafés shall not be used for smoking.
2.03.306OVERLAY DISTRICT shall mean a district in which additional requirements act in conjunction with the underlying zoning district. The original zoning district designation does not change.
2.03.307OWNER shall mean one or more persons, including corporations, who have title to the property, building or structure in question.
2.03.308PAINTBALL shall mean all guns and other devices used for the purpose of firing pellets containing a latex paint at a person or target.
2.03.309PAINTBALL COURSE, COMMERCIAL shall mean a commercial recreational park containing obstacle courses for the purpose of staging paintball battles. Said facility generally collects a fee, either as membership or on a visit by visit basis that allows individuals to participate in paintball activities.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 25
2.03.310PARCEL shall mean a lot or a contiguous group of lots in single ownership or under single control, which may be considered as a unit for purposes of development.
2.03.311PARK shall mean any public or private land available for recreational, educational, cultural, or aesthetic use.
2.03.312PARKING AREA, PRIVATE shall mean an area, other than a street, used for the parking of automotive vehicles capable of moving under their own power and restricted from general public use.
2.03.313PARKING AREA, PUBLIC shall mean an area, other than a private parking area or street used for the parking of vehicles capable of moving under their own power, either free or for remuneration.
2.03.314PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE shall mean an area, other than a street or alley, reserved for the parking of an automobile, such space having a dimension not less than nine feet by 20 feet, plus such additional area as is necessary to afford adequate ingress and egress.
2.03.315PARKWAY shall mean an arterial highway with full or partial control of access, and located within a park or ribbon of park like development.
2.03.316PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE shall mean a financial guarantee to ensure that all improvements, facilities, or work required by this chapter will be completed in compliance with these regulations as well as with approved plans and specifications of a development.
2.03.317PERMANENT FOUNDATION shall mean a base constructed from either poured concrete or laid masonry block or brick or other acceptable materials and placed on a footing located below ground level to a point below the frost line upon which a building or structure is permanently attached.
2.03.318PERMANENT TREE PROTECTION DEVICES shall be structural measures, such as retaining walls or aeration devices that are designed to protect the tree and its root systems throughout its lifetime.
2.03.319PERMANENTLY ATTACHED shall mean connected to real estate in such a way as to require dismantling, cutting away, or unbolting in order to remove, relocate, or replace.
2.03.320PERMITTED USE shall mean any land use allowed without condition within a zoning district.
2.03.321PERSON shall mean an individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, City, County, special district or any other group or combination acting as an entity, except that it shall not include Wahoo, Nebraska.
2.03.322PLANNED DEVELOPMENT shall mean a development designed to provide for an unusual or different arrangement of residential, business, or industrial uses in accordance with an approved development plan.
2.03.323PLANNING COMMISSION shall mean the Planning Commission of Wahoo, Nebraska.
2.03.324PLANT MATERIALS shall mean trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers, grass, perennials, annuals, and bulbs.
2.03.325PLAT shall mean a map that delineates the subdivision of a quantity of land. A plat commonly shows the location, boundaries, legal description, streets and other features relevant to the development and improvement of the property.
2.03.326POLICY shall mean a statement or document of the City, such as the comprehensive plan, that forms the basis for enacting legislation or making decisions.
2.03.327PREMISES shall mean a tract of land, consisting of one lot or irregular tract, or more than one lot or irregular tract, provided such lots or tracts are under common ownership, contiguous, and used as a single tract. A building or land within a prescribed area.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 26
2.03.328PRESCHOOL shall mean an early childhood program which provides primarily educational services, where children do not nap and where children are not served a meal.
2.03.329PROFESSIONAL OFFICE shall mean a use that centers on office activities of professions such as attorneys, accountants, chiropractors, doctors, dentists, engineers, architects, planners, banks and other consulting service based businesses.
2.03.330PROHIBITED USE shall mean any use of land, other than nonconforming, which is not listed as a permitted use or conditional use within a zoning district.
2.03.331PROMOTIONAL DEVICE shall mean any sign intended to be displayed either with or without a frame, with or without characters, letters, illustrations, or other material, on a fabric of any kind. National flags, flags of political subdivisions, or symbolic flags of any institutions or business shall be considered a promotional device for the purpose of this definition. Banners, pennants, inflatable characters, streamers, or fringe-type ribbons or piping shall be considered as a promotional device.
2.03.332PROTECTED ZONE shall mean all lands that fall outside the buildable areas of a parcel, all areas of a parcel required to remain in open space, and/or all areas required as landscaping strips according to the provisions of the Zoning Regulation.
2.03.333PUBLIC UTILITY shall mean any business which furnishes the general public telephone service, telegraph service, electricity, natural gas, water and sewer, or any other business so affecting the public interest as to be subject to the supervision or regulation by an agency of the state or federal government.
2.03.334PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY shall mean a water supply system designed to provide public piped water fit for human consumption, if such system has at least 15 service connections or regularly serves at least twenty-five individuals. This definition shall include: (1) Any collection, treatment, storage, or distribution facilities under the control of the operator of such system and used primarily in connection with such system; and (2) Any collection or pretreatment storage facilities not under such control which are used primarily in the connection with such system.
2.03.335PUBLIC WAY shall mean an alley, avenue, boulevard, bridge, channel, ditch, easement, expressway, freeway, highway, land, parkway, right-of-way, road, sidewalk, street, subway, tunnel, viaduct, walk or other ways in which the general public or public entity have a right, or which are dedicated, whether improved or not.
2.03.336RAILROAD shall mean the land use including the right-of-way (R. O. W.) abutting railroad properties occupied by uses pertinent to the railroad operation and maintenance, but not including properties owned by the railroad and leased for use by others.
2.03.337RECREATIONAL FACILITY shall mean facilities for the use by the public for passive and active recreation including tennis, handball, racquetball, basketball, track and field, jogging, baseball, soccer, skating, swimming, or golf. This shall include country clubs and athletic clubs, but not facilities accessory to a private residence used only by the owner and guests, nor arenas or stadiums used primarily for spectators to watch athletic events. In addition, recreational facilities shall mean museums, amphitheaters, race tracks (including all motor powered vehicles) and wildlife conservation areas (used for public viewing), and theme parks.
2.03.338RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) shall mean a vehicular unit less than 40 feet in overall length, eight feet in width, or 12 feet in overall height, primarily designed as a temporary living quarters for recreational camping or travel use having either its own power or designed to be mounted on or drawn by a motor vehicle. Recreational vehicle includes motor home, truck camper, travel trailer, camping trailer, and fifth wheel.
2.03.339RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) PARK shall mean a tract of land upon which two or more recreational vehicle sites are located, established, or maintained for occupancy by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living quarters for recreation or vacation purposes by campers, vacationers, or travelers.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 27
2.03.340RESIDENCE shall mean a building used, designed, or intended to be used as a home or dwelling place for one or more families.
2.03.341RESTAURANT shall mean a public eating establishment at which the primary function is the preparation and serving of food primarily to persons seated within the building.
2.03.342RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN shall mean an establishment that has the facilities to serve prepared food and/or beverages to customers seated within motor vehicles for consumption either on or off the premises.
2.03.343RESTAURANT, ENTERTAINMENT shall mean an establishment where food and drink are prepared, served, and consumed, within a building or structure that integrally includes electronic and mechanical games of skill, simulation, and virtual reality, play areas, video arcades or similar uses, billiards, and other forms of amusement.
2.03.344RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD shall mean an establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and/or beverages in ready-to-consume individual servings, for consumption either within the establishment, for carryout, or drive-in; and where food and/or beverages are usually served in paper, plastic, or other disposable containers.
2.03.345RETAIL TRADE shall mean uses primarily engaged in selling merchandise for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of goods. Uses engaged in retail trade sell merchandise to the general public or to households for personal consumption.
2.03.346RETENTION BASIN shall mean a pond, pool, or basin used for the permanent storage of stormwater runoff.
2.03.347REVERSE SPOT ZONING shall mean an arbitrary zoning or rezoning of a small tract of land that is not consistent with the comprehensive land use plan and that uniquely burdens an individual owner largely to secure some public benefit. Reverse spot zoning usually results from downzoning a tract of land to a less intensive use classification than that imposed on nearby properties.
2.03.348REZONING shall mean an amendment to or change in the zoning regulations either to the text or map or both.
2.03.349REZONING, PIECEMEAL shall mean the zoning reclassification of individual lots resulting in uncertainty in the future compatible development of the area.
2.03.350RIGHT-OF-WAY shall mean an area or strip of land, either public or private, on which an irrevocable right of passage has been dedicated, recorded, or otherwise legally established for the use as a public way of vehicles or pedestrians or both. In addition to the roadway, it normally incorporates the curbs, lawn strips, sidewalks, lighting, and drainage facilities, and may include special features such as grade separation, landscaped areas, viaducts and bridges.
2.03.351ROAD shall mean the same as "Street".
2.03.352ROAD, PRIVATE shall mean a way, other than driveways, open to vehicular ingress and egress established for the benefit of certain, adjacent properties. Also see “Right-of-Way” and “Street”.
2.03.353ROAD, PUBLIC shall mean all public right-of-way reserved or dedicated for street or road traffic. Also see “Right-of-Way” and “Street”.
2.03.354ROOM shall mean an un-subdivided portion of the interior of a dwelling unit, excluding bathroom, kitchen, closets, hallways, and service porches.
2.03.355SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA shall mean a round, parabolic antenna incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, or cone and used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 28
2.03.356SCHOOL, DAY shall mean a preschool or nursery school for children.
2.03.357SCHOOL, DAY, PRE-, OR NURSERY shall mean a school or center for children under school age, whether licensed as a day care center or not, shall be approved by the Nebraska State Fire Marshall as being in safety conformance with the National Fire Protection Association, Pamphlet 101, known as the Life Safety Code and shall be approved by the Nebraska Department of Health and Welfare as meeting their health and welfare standards.
2.03.358SCREENING shall mean a structure or planting that conceals from view from public ways the area behind such structure or planting.
2.03.359SCROLL: A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Display where the message appears to move vertically across the display surface.
2.03.360SELECTIVE CLEARING shall be the careful and planned removal of trees, shrubs, and plants using specific standards and protection measures.
2.03.361SELF-SERVICE STATION shall mean an establishment where motor fuels are stored and dispensed into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles by persons other than the service station attendant and may include facilities available for the sale of other retail products.
2.03.362SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY shall mean a building or group of buildings containing individual, compartmentalized, and controlled access stalls or lockers for storage of a customer’s goods and wares.
2.03.363SEPARATE OWNERSHIP shall mean ownership of a parcel of land by a person who does not own any of the land abutting such parcel.
2.03.364SERVICE STATION shall mean buildings and premises where the primary use is the supply and dispensing at retail of motor fuels, lubricants, batteries, tires, and motor vehicle accessories and where light maintenance activities such as engine tune-ups, lubrications, and washing may be conducted, but not including heavy maintenance and repair such as engine overhauls, painting, and body repair.
2.03.365SETBACK LINE shall mean a line, as shown on a recorded plat or otherwise established by the Wahoo City Council, beyond which no part of the exterior wall of a building or structure may project.
2.03.366SETBACK LINE, FRONT YARD shall mean the line which defines the depth of the required front yard. Said setback line shall be parallel with the right-of-way line or highway setback line when one has been established.
2.03.367SETBACK LINE, REAR YARD OR SIDE YARD shall mean the line which defines the width or depth of the required rear or side yard. Said setback line shall be parallel with the property line, removed therefrom by the perpendicular distance prescribed for the yard in the district.
2.03.368SHOPPING CENTER shall mean a group of commercial establishments planned, constructed, and managed as a total entity with customer and employee parking provided on-site, provisions for goods delivery that is separated from customer access, aesthetic considerations, and protection from the elements.
2.03.369 SHOPPING CENTER, COMMERCIAL STRIP shall mean a commercial development, usually one store deep, that fronts on a major street for a distance of one city block or more. Includes individual buildings on their own lots, with or without on-site parking and small linear shopping centers with shallow on-site parking in front of the stores.
2.03.370SHRUB shall mean a multi-stemmed woody plant other than a tree.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 29
2.03.371SIDEWALK or WALKWAY shall mean that portion of a dedicated right-of-way or easement improved and intended for pedestrian use only.
2.03.372SIDEWALK CAFE shall mean an outdoor area adjacent to a street level eating or drinking establishment which derives sixty-five percent (65%) or more of its gross proceeds from the sale of food, located upon
a portion of the public pedestrian walkway and used exclusively for dining, drinking, and pedestrian circulation. The area shall be separated from the public sidewalk by railings, fencing, or landscaping or a combination thereof. A sidewalk café occupying any portion of the public space abutting the record owner’s property must obtain and meet conditions of a Sidewalk Café Permit as outlined in Municipal Code. Sidewalk cafés shall not be used for smoking.
2.03.373SIGHT TRIANGLE is an area at a street intersection in which nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of two and one-half feet and 10 feet above the grades of the bottom of the curb of the intersecting streets, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines, 45 feet in each direction along the curb line of the streets. At
the intersection of major or arterial streets, the distance of 45 feet shall be increased to 75 feet for each arterial leg of the intersection.
2.03.374SIGN shall mean and include any outdoor sign, display, declaration, device, figure, drawing, illustration, message, placard, poster, billboard, insignia, or other things which are designed, intended, or used for direction, information, identification, or to advertise, to inform, or to promote any business, product activity, service, or any interest.
2.03.375SIGN, ADVERTISING shall mean a sign which directs attention to any product, activity, or service; provided, however, that such sign shall not be related or make reference to the primary use, business activity, or service conducted on the premises.
2.03.376SIGN, ANIMATED shall mean any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene, appearance or optical illusion of movement, or appears to flash, undulate, pulse, blink, move closer or further from the viewer, expand or contract, bounce, rotate, twist or otherwise portray movement.
2.03.377SIGN, ANNOUNCEMENT shall mean a small announcement or professional signs, not over six square feet in area, except that an announcement sign or bulletin board not over 18 square feet in area, set back at least 20 feet from any highway, street, road, or roadway easement may be erected in connection with any of the permitted principal uses of a nonresidential nature.
2.03.378SIGN, ARCHITECTURAL CANOPY shall mean an enclosed, illuminated (backlit awning) or non-illuminated structure that is attached to the wall of a building with the face of the sign approximately parallel to the wall and with the sign's area integrated into its surface.
Sight Triangle
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 30
2.03.379SIGN AREA of a sign on which copy can be placed but not including the minimal supporting framework or bracing. the area of individually painted letter signs, individual letter signs or directly or indirectly illuminated individual letter signs, shall be calculated on the basis of the smallest geometric figure that will enclose the entire copy area of the sign. Any such calculation shall include the areas between the letters and lines, as well as the areas of any devices, illuminated or non-illuminated.
2.03.380SIGN, AUDIBLE shall mean any sign that conveys either a written message supported by an audible noise including music, spoken message, and / or sounds to attract attention to the sign. Audible signs also include signs conveying only the audible noise
including music, spoken message, and / or sounds to attract attention.
2.03.381SIGN, AWNING OR CANOPY shall mean any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy.
2.03.382SIGN, BANNER shall mean any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is permanently mounted to a pole or building by a permanent frame at one or more edges. National flags, state or municipal flags, or official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banners.
2.03.383SIGN. BILLBOARD shall mean a sign that identifies or communicates a commercial or noncommercial message related to an activity conducted, a service rendered, or a commodity sold at a location other than where the sign is located. A billboard will be permanently attached to structural supports anchored to a
permanent foundation or on the façade of a structure.
2.03.384SIGN, BREAKAWAY GROUND MONUMENT shall mean a sign mounted directly in the ground with supports which meet MUTCD criteria for breakaway supports, a maximum height not to exceed six feet.
2.03.385SIGN, BUILDING shall mean any sign supported by, painted on or otherwise attached to any building or structure.
2.03.386SIGN, BUILDING MARKER shall mean any sign indicating the name of a building and date and incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material.
2.03.387SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY shall mean a sign or portion
thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without, altering the face or the surface
of the sign. A sign on which the message changes more than eight times per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this ordinance. A sign on which the only copy changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature shall be considered a “time and temperature” portion of a sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this ordinance.
2.03.388SIGN, CLOSED shall mean a sign in which more than 50 percent of the entire area is solid or tightly closed or covered.
Sign, Ground (Low Profile)
Sign, Electronic Message
Sign, Flashing
Sign, Banner Sign, Billboard
Sign, Off-Premises
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 31
2.03.389SIGN, COMMERCIAL MESSAGE shall mean any sign wording, logo, or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity.
2.03.390SIGN, COMMUNITY OR CIVIC shall mean a sign containing business logos and/or logos of civic organizations. The sign is intended to provide space for several businesses and/or organizations on one sign, and all advertising is similar in size. The primary intent of the community or civic sign is for informational purposes and to communicate information to the motoring public as to businesses and organizations that are active in the community. Community or civic signs are owned and operated by the local chamber of commerce or other civic organization or non-profit entity.
2.03.391SIGN, CONSTRUCTION shall mean a temporary sign identifying an architect, engineer, contractor, subcontractor, and / or material supplier who participates in construction on the property on which the sign is located.
2.03.392SIGN, DESTINATION shall mean a sign used to inform and direct the public to important public places and buildings, landmarks, and historical sites in the most simple, direct, and concise manner possible.
2.03.393 SIGN, DIRECTIONAL shall mean any sign which serves primarily to designate the location or direction of any area or place. This definition shall also include any sign approved by the Utilities Department in connection with major street construction projects or any sign considered by the Nebraska Department of Roads as a directional sign. A business name and/or logo is acceptable on a directional sign.
2.03.394SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE DISPLAY shall mean a sign that uses changing lights, including digital/LED display, to form a sign message or messages wherein the sequence of messages and the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes.
2.03.395SIGN, FLASHING shall mean a sign, which, by method or manner of illumination, flashes on or off, winks, or blinks with varying light intensity, shows motion, or creates the illusion of being on or off.
2.03.396SIGN, FREESTANDING shall mean any sign supported by uprights or braces placed on or in the ground, which is used principally for advertising or identification purposes and is not supported by any building.
2.03.397 SIGN, GROUND (LOW PROFILE) shall mean a sign mounted directly to the ground with a maximum height not to exceed six feet.
2.03.398 SIGN, HIGHWAY shall mean any roadway designated by the Nebraska Department of Roads as a federal and/or state highway and shall include the traveled portions thereof and those portions between the traveled portions and the property lines adjacent thereto.
2.03.399SIGN, ILLUMINATED shall mean a sign illuminated in any manner by an artificial light source.
2.03.400SIGN, INCIDENTAL shall mean a sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the zone lot on which it is located, such as “no parking,” “entrance,” “loading only,” “telephone,” and other similar directives. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off the zone lot on which the sign is located shall be considered incidental.
2.03.401SIGN, INFORMATIONAL shall mean a sign that provides direction, either on public right-of-way or private property, to businesses or services located within a community. These signs may include community or civic signs, logo signs, tourist oriented directional signs or directional signs.
Sign, Ground (Low Profile)
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 32
2.03.402SIGN, LOGO shall mean signs owned and operated by an agent for the Nebraska Department of Roads.
The signs are located in the right-of-way on interstate or primary highways. The signs are designed to accommodate businesses that furnish gas, food, lodging, or camping and meet any criteria established by the Nebraska Department of Roads.
2.03.403SIGN, MARQUEE shall mean any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
2.03.404 SIGN, MOBILE or SIGN, PORTABLE shall mean a sign, not securely anchored to the ground or to a building or structure and capable of being moved from place to place.
2.03.405SIGN, NAMEPLATE shall mean a sign not exceeding two square feet for each dwelling.
2.03.406SIGN, NON-CONFORMING shall mean any sign that does not conform to the requirements of this ordinance.
2.03.407SIGN, OBSOLETE shall mean a sign that advertises a business no longer in existence or a product no longer offered for sale and has advertised such business or product for a period of six months after the termination of the existence of such business or the termination of sale of the product advertised.
2.03.408SIGN, OFF-PREMISES shall mean a sign including the supporting sign structure which directs the attention of the general public to a business, service, or activity not usually conducted, or a product not offered or sold, upon the premises where such sign is located.
2.03.409 SIGN, ON-PREMISE shall mean a sign, display, or device-advertising activities conducted on the property on which such sign is located.
2.03.410 SIGN, OPEN shall mean a sign attached to or hung from a marquee, canopy, or other covered structure, projecting from and supported by the building and extending beyond the building wall, building line, or street lot line.
2.03.411SIGN, PENNANT shall mean any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
2.03.412SIGN, POLE shall mean a sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other support so that the bottom edge of the sign face is six feet or more above grade.
2.03.413 SIGN, POLITICAL CAMPAIGN shall mean those signs promoting or expressing an opinion regarding a candidate for public office or an issue to be decided by a public election.
2.03.414 SIGN, PORTABLE, or SIGN, MOBILE shall mean a sign, not securely anchored to the ground or to a building or structure and capable of being moved from place to place.
2.03.415 SIGN, PROJECTING shall mean a projecting sign attached to a building in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than eight inches beyond the surface of such building or wall.
2.03.416 SIGN, PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY shall mean that portion of the right-of-way dedicated to the public for public use located between adjacent property lines and including the traveled portion thereof and that portion between the curb lines of the traveled portion thereof and
the adjacent property lines.
2.03.417 SIGN, REAL ESTATE shall mean a temporary sign that identifies property or properties that are for sale or lease. Sign, Projecting
Sign, Subdivision
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 33
2.03.418 SIGN, ROOF shall mean a sign identifying the name of a business, enterprise, or the product sold on the premises and erected on and over the roof of a building and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof.
2.03.419SIGN, ROOF (INTEGRAL) shall mean any sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches.
2.03.420SIGN, SETBACK shall mean the horizontal distance from the property line to the nearest projection of the existing or proposed sign.
2.03.421SIGN, SUBDIVISION shall mean a sign erected on a subdivision that identifies the platted subdivision where the sign is located.
2.03.422SIGN, SUBDIVISION ENTRANCE shall mean a sign that is permanently constructed at the entrance(s) of the subdivision and includes the name of the subdivision in the form of attached letters or sign. The subdivision entrance sign may include specific types of landscaping such as water, stone, brick, etc.
2.03.423SIGN, SURFACE shall mean the entire area of a sign.
2.03.424SIGN, SUSPENDED shall mean a sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface.
2.03.425SIGN, TEMPORARY shall mean a sign constructed of cloth, fabric, or other material with or without a structural frame intended for a limited period of display, including but not limited to, displays for holidays or public demonstrations, special events, community festivals, parades, farmer’s markets, charity benefits, garage sales and election-oriented political signs. Temporary signs shall include sandwich board signs, banners constructed of light-weight materials not permanently attached to building or land, and portable signs as defined in this section.
2.03.426SIGN, TOURIST ORIENTED DIRECTIONAL shall mean a sign owned and operated by a contracted agent of the Nebraska Department of Roads and located in the right-of-way on rural highways and cannot be erected on the interstate or interchanges on expressways. These signs shall meet all applicable criteria
established by the Nebraska Department of Roads.
2.03.427SIGN, VIDEO shall mean any on-premises or off-premises sign that convey either a commercial or non-commercial message, including a business or organization name, through means of a television or other video screen.
2.03.428SIGN, WALL shall mean any sign attached parallel to, but within eight inches of, a wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface.
2.03.429SIGN, WINDOW shall mean any sign, pictures, symbol, or
combination thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or service, that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
2.03.430SIMILAR USE shall mean the use of land, buildings, or structures of like kind or general nature with other uses within a zoning district as related to bulk, intensity of use, traffic generation and congestion, function, public services requirements, aesthetics or other similarities.
Sign, Subdivision Entrance
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 34
2.03.431SITE BREAK shall mean a structural or landscape device to interrupt long vistas and create visual interest in a site development.
2.03.432SITE PLAN shall mean a plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, the boundaries of a site and the location of all buildings, structures, uses, drives, parking, drainage, landscape features, and other principal site development improvements for a specific parcel of land.
2.03.433SITE, SEPTIC shall mean the area bounded by the dimensions required for the proper location of the septic tank system.
2.03.434SKATE, IN-LINE shall mean a boot-type device, which is placed on an individual’s feet. In-line skates contain wheels on the bottom of the boot, which are attached in linear fashion.
2.03.435SKATE PARK shall mean a recreational facility containing skateboard ramps and other obstacle courses and devices for use with skateboards and in-line skates.
2.03.436SKATEBOARD shall mean a foot board mounted upon four or more wheels and is usually propelled by the user who sometimes stands, sits, kneels, or lies upon the device while it is in motion.
2.03.437SKATEBOARD PIPE shall mean an outdoor structure which is shaped into a half circle or oval, which are designed and principally intended to permit persons on skateboards to move continuously from one side to the other.
2.03.438SKATEBOARD RAMP shall mean an outdoor structure with an upward inclined surface, essentially one of the sides of a pipe, which are designed and principally intended to permit persons on skateboards to move from horizontal to vertical and back to horizontal.
2.03.439SLUDGE shall mean solids removed from sewage during wastewater treatment and then disposed of by incineration, dumping, burial, or land application.
2.03.440SOLID WASTE shall mean waste materials consisting of garbage, trash, refuse, rubble, sewage, offal, dead animals, or paunch manure.
2.03.441SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS See Section 7.26
2.03.442SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES See Section 7.26
2.03.443SPOT ZONING shall mean an arbitrary zoning or rezoning of a small tract of land that is not consistent with the comprehensive land use plan and primarily promotes the private interest of the owner rather than the general welfare. Spot zoning usually results from an upzoning to a more intensive use classification.
2.03.444STANDARD SYSTEM shall mean a sewage treatment system employing a building sewer, septic tank, and a standard soil absorption system.
2.03.445STATE shall mean the State of Nebraska.
2.03.446STORAGE shall mean the keeping, in a roofed or unroofed area, of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles on the same tract or premises for more than 30 days.
2.03.447STORM DRAIN shall mean a conduit that carries natural storm and surface water drainage but not sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
2.03.448STORMWATER DETENTION shall mean any storm drainage technique that retards or detains runoff, such as a detention or retention basin, parking lot storage, rooftop storage, porous pavement, dry wells, or any combination thereof.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 35
2.03.449STORMWATER MANAGEMENT shall mean the collecting, conveyance, channeling, holding retaining, detaining, infiltrating, diverting, treating, or filtering of surface water, or groundwater, and/or runoff, together with applicable managerial (non-structural) measures.
2.03.450STORMWATER RETENTION AREA shall mean an area designed by a licensed professional engineer and approved by the City to retain water to control the flow of stormwater.
2.03.451STORMWATER RUNOFF shall mean surplus surface water generated by rainfall that does not seep into the earth but flows over land to flowing or stagnant bodies of water.
2.03.452STORY shall mean a space in a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor above, or if there is not floor above, then the space between such floor and the ceiling or roof above.
2.03.453STORY, ONE-HALF shall mean the same as "Half-Story".
2.03.454STREET shall mean a public thoroughfare or right-of-way dedicated, deeded, or condemned for use as such, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property including public streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, parkways, roads, place, way, drive, lanes, viaducts, subways, tunnels, and bridges. Where explicitly authorized by the City Council, private streets may be authorized as part of planned developments.
2.03.455STREET, ARTERIAL shall mean a street designed with the primary function of efficient movement of through traffic between and around areas of a City with controlled access to abutting property, including necessary control of entrances, exits, and curb use. See also Street, Major.
2.03.456STREET CENTERLINE shall mean the centerline of a street right-of-way as established by official surveys.
2.03.457STREET, COLLECTOR shall mean a street or highway, that is intended to carry traffic from minor streets to major streets. Collector streets are usually the principal entrance streets to residential developments and the streets for circulation within the development in the Comprehensive Plan.
2.03.458STREET, CURVILINEAR (CURVED) shall mean
local streets that deviate from straight alignment and change direction without sharp corners or bends.
2.03.459STREET FRONTAGE shall mean the distance for which a lot line of a zone lot adjoins a public street, from one lot line intersecting said street to the furthest distant lot line intersecting the same street.
2.03.460STREET, FRONTAGE ACCESS shall mean a street parallel and adjacent to a major street, major inter-regional highway, or major collection road and primarily for service to the abutting properties, and being separated from the major street by a dividing strip.
2.03.461STREET HARDWARE shall mean man-made objects other than buildings that are part of the streetscape. Examples are: lamp posts, utility poles, traffic signs, benches, litter containers, planting containers, letter boxes, fire hydrants.
2.03.462STREET, LOCAL shall mean a street designed for local pedestrian and vehicular traffic that provides direct access to abutting residential, commercial, or industrial properties.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 36
2.03.463STREET, LOOPED shall mean a continuous local street without intersecting streets and having its two outlets connected to the same street.
2.03.464STREET, MAJOR shall mean a street or highway used primarily for fast or high volume traffic, including expressways, freeways, boulevards, and arterial streets as designated in the Comprehensive Plan. (Also known as Arterial Streets).
2.03.465STREET, MINOR see Street, Local.
2.03.466STREET, PRIVATE shall mean an open, unoccupied space, other than a street or alley dedicated to the public, but permanently established as the principal means of
vehicular access to abutting properties. The term "private street" includes the term "place."
2.03.467STREET, SIDE shall mean that street bounding a corner lot and which extends in the same general direction as the line determining the depth of the lot.
2.03.468STREETS LINE shall mean a dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and the contiguous street.
2.03.469STREETSCAPE shall mean the scene as may be observed along a public street or way composed of natural and man-made components, including buildings, paving, plantings, street hardware, and miscellaneous structures.
2.03.470STRUCTURE shall mean anything constructed or built, any edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, which requires location on the ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground, including swimming and wading pools and covered patios, excepting outdoor areas such as paved areas, walks, tennis courts, and similar recreation areas.
2.03.471STRUCTURE, ADVERTISING shall mean the same as "Advertising Structure".
2.03.472STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY shall mean a structure without a permanent foundation or footing and which will be removed when the designated time period, activity, or use has ceased.
2.03.473STRUCTURAL, ALTERATION shall mean any change in the support members of a building, such as in a bearing wall, column, beam or girder, floor or ceiling joists, roof rafters, roof diaphragms, foundations, piles, or retaining walls or similar components.
2.03.474SUBDIVIDER shall mean any person, group, corporation, partnership, or other entity, or any agency thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision.
2.03.475SUBDIVISION shall mean the division of a land, lot, tract, or parcel into two or more lots, parcels, plats, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose of sale, lease, offer, or development, whether immediate or future, provided that the smallest lot created by the division is less than 10 acres in size. The term shall also include the division of residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, or other land whether by deed, metes, and bounds description, lease, map, plat, or other instrument.
2.03.476SUPERMARKET see “Food Sales”
2.03.477SURFACE WATERS shall mean all waters within the jurisdiction of this state, including all streams, lakes, ponds, impounding reservoirs, marshes, wetlands, watercourses, waterways, springs, canal systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, natural or artificial, public or private, situated wholly or partly within or bordering upon the state.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 37
2.03.478TANNING STUDIO shall mean any business that uses artificial lighting systems to produce a tan on an individual’s body. These facilities may be either a stand-alone business or as an accessory use in spas, gymnasiums, athletic clubs, health clubs, and styling salons. This use is not included with any type of adult establishment.
2.03.479TATOO PARLOR / BODY PIERCING STUDIO shall mean an establishment whose principal business activity is the practice of tattooing and/or piercing the body of paying customers.
2.03.480TAVERN see “Bar”.
2.03.481TEMPORARY USE shall mean a use intended for a limited time period and said use may contain a structure(s) that is not permanently attached.
2.03.482THEATER shall mean a building or structure used for dramatic, operatic, motion pictures, or other performance, for admission to which entrance money is received and no audience participation or meal service.
2.03.483TOWER shall mean a structure situated on a site that is intended for transmitting or receiving television, radio, or telephone communications. Also see “Antenna”.
2.03.484TRAILER, AUTOMOBILE shall mean a vehicle without motive power, designed and constructed to travel on the public thoroughfares and to be used for human habitation or for carrying property, including a trailer coach.
2.03.485TRANSITION: A visual effect used on an Electronic Message Display to change from one message to another.
2.03.486TRAVEL: A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Display where the message appears to move horizontally across the display surface.
2.03.487TRUCK AND FREIGHT TERMINAL shall mean a facility for the receipt, transfer, short-term storage, and dispatching of goods transported by truck. Included in the use type would be express and other mail and package distribution facilities operated by a courier such as the U.S. Postal Service or UPS.
2.03.488TRUCK REPAIR shall mean the repair, including major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, or other work that may include noise, glare, fumes, smoke, or other characteristics to an extent greater than normally found in gasoline service stations, of trucks having a hauling capacity of over one ton and buses but excluding pickups and other vehicles designed for the transport of under eight passengers.
2.03.489TRUCK STOP shall mean a facility intended to provide services to the trucking industry, including but not limited to the following activities: dispensing of fuel, repair shops, automated washes, restaurants, and motels; all as a part of one facility.
2.03.490UPZONING shall mean a change in zoning classification of land to a more intensive or less restrictive district such as from residential district to commercial district or from a single family residential district to a multiple family residential district.
2.03.491USE, BEST shall mean the recommended use or uses of land confined in an adopted comprehensive plan. Such use represents the best use of public facilities, and promotes health, safety and general welfare.
2.03.492USE, HIGHEST shall mean an appraisal or real estate market concept that identifies the use of a specific tract of land that is most likely to produce the greatest net return on investment.
2.03.493USE, PRINCIPAL shall mean the main use of land or structure, as distinguished from an accessory use. Also see “Building, Principal”.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 38
2.03.494USED MATERIALS YARD shall mean any lot or a portion of any lot used for the storage of used materials. This shall not include "Junk Yards" or "Automobile Wrecking Yards".
2.03.495UTILITARIAN STRUCTURE shall mean a structure or enclosure relating to mechanical or electrical services to a building or development.
2.03.496UTILITY EASEMENT shall mean the same as "Easement".
2.03.497UTILITY HARDWARE shall mean devices such as poles, crossarms, transformers and vaults, gas pressure regulating assemblies, hydrants, and buffalo boxes that are used for water, gas, oil, sewer, and electrical services to a building or a project.
2.03.498UTILITIES, OVERHEAD OR UNDERGROUND "LOCAL DISTRIBUTION" SYSTEM OF shall mean the local service distribution circuit or lines and related appurtenances served from a substation, town border station, reservoir, or terminal facility which is served from a main supply line, main transmission line, or main feeder line as may be applicable to electric, communications, gas, fuel, petroleum, fertilizer, or other chemical utilities. Local electric distribution systems shall be limited to include all lines and appurtenances carrying a primary voltage of less than 161 KV from an electric transformer substation to the consumer. The local telephone distribution system shall be limited to include the local exchange lines, the local toll lines, and the local communications equipment facilities structure.
2.03.499UTILITIES, OVERHEAD OR UNDERGROUND "TRANSMISSION LINE, SUPPLY LINE, WHOLESALE CARRIER OR TRUNK LINE, MAIN FEEDER LINE", or other applicable designation shall mean the main supply or feeder line serving a local distribution system of utilities, and shall include but is not limited to pumping stations, substations, regulating stations, generator facilities, reservoirs, tank farms, processing facilities, terminal facilities, towers, and relay stations, and treatment plants.
2.03.500UTILITY SERVICE shall mean any device, including wire, pipe, and conduit, which carries gas, water, electricity, oil and communications into a building or development.
2.03.501VARIANCE shall mean a relief from or variation of the provisions of this chapter, other than use regulations, as applied to a specific piece of property, as distinct from rezoning.
2.03.502VEGETATION shall mean all plant life; however, for purposes of this Zoning Regulation it shall be restricted to mean trees, shrubs, and vines.
2.03.503VEHICLE shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved solely by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
2.03.504VEHICLE, MOTOR see “Motor Vehicle”.
2.03.505VISUAL OBSTRUCTION shall mean any fence, hedge, tree, shrub, wall or structure exceeding two feet in height, measured from the crown of intersecting or intercepting streets, alleys or driveways, which limit the visibility of persons in motor vehicles on said streets, alleys, or driveways. This does not include trees kept trimmed of branches below a minimum height of eight feet.
2.03.506WALKWAY, see SIDEWALK.
2.03.507WAREHOUSE shall mean a building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials.
2.03.508WAREHOUSE AND DISTRIBUTION shall mean a use engaged in storage, wholesale, and distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment.
2.03.509WASTEWATER LAGOON see “Lagoon”.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 39
2.03.510WATERS OF THE STATE shall mean all waters within the jurisdiction of this state, including all streams, lakes, ponds, impounding reservoirs, marshes, wetlands, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water surface or underground, material or artificial, public or private, situated wholly within or bordering upon the state.
2.03.511WETLAND shall mean an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that, under normal circumstances, does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soiled conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
2.03.512WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT shall mean an establishment for the on-premises sales of goods primarily to customers engaged in the business of reselling the goods.
2.03.513WHOLESALE TRADE shall mean a use primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm or professional business users; or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers in buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or companies. The principal types of establishments included are: Merchant wholesalers; sales branches and sales offices (but not retail stores) maintained by manufacturing enterprises apart from their plants for the purpose of marketing their products; agents, merchandise or commodity brokers, and commission merchants; petroleum bulk storage, assemblers, buyers, and associations engaged in cooperative marketing of farm products. The chief functions of uses in wholesale trade are selling goods to trading establishments, or to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm and professional; and bringing buyer and seller together. In additional to selling, functions frequently performed by wholesale establishments include maintaining inventories of goods; extending credit; physically assembling, sorting and grading goods in large lots, breaking bulk and redistribution in smaller lots; delivery; refrigeration; and various types of promotion such as advertising and label designing.
2.03.514YARD shall mean any open space on the same lot with a building or a dwelling group, which open space is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward to the sky, except for building projections or for accessory buildings or structures permitted by this Regulation.
2.03.515YARD, FRONT shall mean a space between the front yard setback line and the front lot line or highway setback line, and extending the full width of the lot.
2.03.516YARD, REAR shall mean a space between the rear yard setback line and the rear lot line, extending the full width of the lot.
2.03.517YARD, SIDE shall mean a space extending from the front yard or from the front lot line where no front yard is required by this Regulation, to the rear yard, or rear lot line, between a side lot line and the side yard setback line.
2.03.518ZONE LOT shall mean a parcel of land in single ownership that is of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for area, coverage, and use, and that can provide such yards and other open spaces as required by the zoning regulations.
2.03.519ZONING ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER shall mean the person or persons authorized and empowered by the City to administer and enforce the requirements of these regulations.
2.03.520ZONING DISTRICT shall mean an area delineated on a zoning map for which uniform use regulations are specified.
2.03.521ZONING DISTRICT, CHANGE OF shall mean the legislative act of removing one or more parcels of land from one zoning district and placing them in another zoning district on the zone map of the City.
Article 2: Definitions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 40
Article 3: Districts and official map
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 41
ARTICLE 3: DISTRICTS AND OFFICIALMAP
Section 3.01 Districts. In order to regulate and restrict the height, location, size and type of buildings, structures and uses allowed on land in the City and the area within one mile of the corporate boundaries, the City is hereby divided into districts.
Section 3.02 Provision for Official Zoning Map.
3.02.01The City is hereby divided into districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map, which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance. The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Section 3.02 of Ordinance No. 1886 of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska", together with the date of the adoption of this Ordinance.
If, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, changes are made in the district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the City Council.
3.02.02In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the City Council may by resolution adopt a new Official Zoning Map. The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original Official Zoning Map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor attested by the City Clerk and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map, adopted October 11, 2018, Ordinance No. 2293, supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted March 12, 2015, (Ordinance No. 2175) of the City of Wahoo Nebraska."
Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment.
Article 4: General Provisions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 42
ARTICLE 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 4.01 Planning Commission Recommendations. Pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-901 (R.R.S.1996), it shall be the purpose of the Planning Commission to hold public hearings upon, and make recommendation to the legislative body, regarding proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan and zoning regulations within the jurisdiction of the city.
The Commission shall make a preliminary report and hold public hearings thereon before submitting its final report, and the City Council shall not hold its public hearings or take action until it has received the final report of the Commission.
Section 4.02 District Regulations, Restrictions, Boundary Creation. No such regulation, restriction, or boundary shall become effective until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearings shall be given by publication thereof in a paper of general circulation in the City at least one time 10 days prior to such hearing.
Section 4.03 Jurisdiction. The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply within the corporate limits of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska, and within the territory beyond said corporate limits as now or hereafter fixed, for a distance of one mile, as established on the map entitled "The Official Zoning Map of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska", and as may be amended by subsequent annexation.
Section 4.04 Provisions of Ordinance Declared to be Minimum Requirements. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare. Whenever the provisions of this Ordinance require a lower height of building or lesser size of yards, courts or other spaces, or require a lower height of building or lesser number of stories, or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other higher standards than are required in any other ordinance, the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern. Wherever the provisions of any other ordinance requires a greater width or size of yards, courts, or other open spaces, or requires a lower height of building or a lesser number of stories, or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other higher standards than are required by the provisions of this Ordinance, the provisions of such ordinance shall govern.
Section 4.05 Zoning Affects Every Building and Use. No building or land shall hereafter be reused and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered unless for a use expressly permitted by and in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located, except that any structure damaged or destroyed may be restored if such structure does not involve a non-conforming use.
Section 4.06 Lot.
4.06.01 Every building hereafter erected, reconstructed, converted, moved or structurally altered shall be located on a lot or lot of record and in no case shall there be more than one principal building on a lot unless otherwise provided.
4.06.02 More than one principal building of a single permitted use may be located upon a lot or tract in the following instances if recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.
2.03.521.1 Institutional buildings
2.03.521.2 Public or semi-public buildings
2.03.521.3 Multiple-family dwellings
2.03.521.4 Commercial or industrial buildings
2.03.521.5 Home for the aged
2.03.521.6 Agricultural buildings
Section 4.07 Reductions in Lot Area Prohibited. No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in area so that yards, lot area per family, lot width, building area, or other requirements of this Ordinance are not maintained. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose.
Article 4: General Provisions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 43
Section 4.08 Obstructions to Vision at Street Intersections Prohibited. On a corner lot, there shall be no obstruction to vision between a height of two and one-half feet and a height of ten feet above the grades of the bottom of the curb of the intersecting streets within the area measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines a distance of 45 feet along the curb line of the streets. At the intersection of major or arterial streets, the distance of 45 feet shall be increased to 75 feet for each arterial leg of the intersection. The requirements of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit any necessary retaining wall.
Section 4.09 Yard Requirements.
4.09.01 Yard requirements shall be set forth under the Schedule of Lot, Yard, and Bulk Requirements for each zoning district. Front, side and rear yards shall be provided in accordance with the regulations hereinafter indicated and shall be unobstructed from the ground level
to the sky, except as herein permitted.
4.09.02 All accessory buildings that are attached to principal buildings (e.g., attached garages) shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building, unless otherwise specified.
4.09.03 The City Council may permit a variation in front yard setbacks to allow new or relocated structures to conform to the average existing setback provided that
1.) More than 30 percent of the frontage on one side of a street between intersecting streets is occupied by structures on the effective date of this Ordinance, and
2.) A minority of such structures have observed or conformed to an average setback line.
4.09.04 The City Council may permit a variation in front yard setbacks for new additions attached to existing non-conforming structures to match the setback of said existing structure, if variation does not cause safety issues or affect existing utility conditions.
4.09.05 Any side or rear yard in a residential district which is adjacent to any existing industrial or commercial use shall be no less than 25 feet and shall contain landscaping and planting suitable to provide effective screening.
4.09.06 Any yard for a commercial or industrial use located within any Commercial or Industrial Zoning District which is adjacent to any residential use or district shall be increased to 40 feet and shall contain landscaping and planting suitable to provide effective screening; except in the Downtown Commercial District. Included in the increased yard, a solid or semi-solid fence or wall at least six feet, but not more than eight feet high shall be provided adjacent to an adjoining residential district unless the adjacent residential district and industrial district are separated by a street right-of-way. The owner or owners of the property in the Commercial and/or Industrial District shall maintain said fence or wall in good condition. Said fencing shall be constructed of commercially available fencing.
Section 4.10 Drainage. No building, structure, or use shall be erected on any land, and no change shall be made in the existing contours of any land, including any change in the course, width, or elevation of any natural or other drainage channel, that will obstruct, interfere with, or substantially change the drainage from such land to the detriment of neighboring lands. Anyone desiring to build or otherwise change the existing drainage situation shall be responsible for providing to the City or their designated agent that such changes will not be a detriment to the neighboring lands.
Section 4.11 Permitted Obstructions in Required Yards. The following shall not be considered to be obstructions when located in the required yards:
4.11.01 All Yards: Steps and accessibility ramps used for wheelchair and other assisting devices which are four feet or less above grade which are necessary for access to a permitted building or for access to a lot from a street or alley; chimneys projecting 24 inches or less into the yard; recreational and laundry-drying equipment; approved freestanding signs; arbors and trellises; flag poles; window unit air conditioners projecting not more than 18 inches into the required yard; and fences or walls subject to applicable height restrictions are permitted in all yards.
4.11.02 Front Yards: Bay windows projecting three feet or less into the yard are permitted. Porches projecting five feet or less into the yard are permitted.
4.11.03 Rear and Side Yards: Open off-street parking spaces or outside elements of central air conditioning systems.
Article 4: General Provisions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 44
4.11.04 Double Frontage Lots: The required front yard shall be provided on each street.
4.11.05 Building Groupings: For the purpose of the side yard regulation a group of business or industrial buildings separated by a common party wall shall be considered as one building occupying one lot.
Section 4.12 Accessory Building and Uses.
4.12.01 No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot prior to beginning construction of the principal building. In no event shall an Accessory Building be used as a dwelling unless a certificate of occupancy
shall have been issued for such use.
4.12.02 No detached accessory building or structure shall exceed the maximum permitted height of the principal building or structure or as designated in each individual zoning district.
4.12.03 No accessory building shall be erected in or encroach upon the required side yard on a corner lot or the front yard of a double frontage lot.
4.12.04 Detached garages shall not be located less than 10 feet from the Rear Lot Line when the garage is entered from an alley and vehicular entrance door is oriented toward the alley. Setback may be reduced to 5 feet if the vehicular entrance door is
perpendicular to the alley and the garage is entered parallel to the alley.
4.12.05 Detached accessory buildings or structures shall be located no closer to any other accessory or principal building than six feet if said accessory building or structure creates a fire hazard or would subject the residential structure to potential fire, such as a detached fireplace, barbecue ovens, flammable liquid storage or similar use.
4.12.06 Accessory buildings that are 576 square feet or less in total area may use a concrete “monolithic floor slab” in accordance with local building codes.
4.12.07 Accessory uses located in the LLR Large Lot Residential District shall have a combined maximum square footage of 2,400 square feet,
but in no case shall have more than the footprint of the primary structure on a three-acre lot. Lots of more than the minimum three acres may be allowed accessory building space above the applicable maximum, equal to one percent of additional lot size (434 additional square feet per full acre).Where additional lot size is used to calculate accessory building size above the maximum, no subdivision or splitting of the lot area used for calculation shall be permitted. Accessory buildings in LLR District may be of pole type construction
4.12.08 Carports provided they are attached to a permanent foundation.
4.12.09 Detached garages and outbuildings in Residential Districts (R-1, R-2, R-3 and NRC) for storage uses and other structures customary and
appurtenant to the permitted uses shall be constructed of materials customarily used in residential construction, as provided herein:
1. Shall be constructed of materials that are in good repair,
2. The sidewalls of said building shall not exceed 10 feet in height,
3. Garages shall have an overhang of at least six inches,
4. Garages shall have a maximum width of 36 feet,
5. Garages shall be framed, constructed and finished in materials customary to and consistent in appearance with residential construction.
6. Post-framed buildings for accessory use must have a minimum of forty-two inch footing depth for the poles.
7. Non-glass exterior materials shall be nonreflective.
4.12.10 Regulation of accessory uses shall be as follows:
1. Except as herein provided, no accessory building shall project beyond a required yard line along any street.
2. Service station pumps and pump island may occupy the required yards, provided, however, that they are not less than 15 feet from street lines.
Article 4: General Provisions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 45
3. Storage of an unlicensed boat, boat trailer, camp trailer, or other vehicle shall not be permitted in any required yard.
4.12.11 Except on sites where the principal use is a one unit or two unit dwelling, accessory structures located on sites within the Transportation Overlay District will adhere to the Design Standards.
Section 4.13 Through Lots.
4.13.01 Through Lots shall follow the following criteria:
1. Where a Through Lot abuts an arterial or major arterial, as indicated in the Comprehensive Development Plan and access is made from the other frontage street and access along said classification is restricted, the Rear Yard setback for fences and screening devices shall be zero feet. The Rear Yard setback for accessory buildings shall follow the prescribed setback within the zoning district.
2. Where a Through Lot is part of a triple frontage lot and abuts a major thoroughfare, the Rear Yard shall meet the standards of 4.13.01 (1), while the other two frontages shall be treated as a Corner Lot with a Front Yard setback and a Street Side Yard setback.
3. Where a Through Lot occurs, other than along a major thoroughfare, the following shall apply:
a. Where all principal structures in the development face the same frontage, then the Rear Yard setback for fences and screening shall be zero feet and all accessory buildings shall meet the prescribed setback within the zoning district. This shall apply similarly at triple frontage lots, provided the remaining two frontages are treated like a typical Corner Lot.
Where principal structures face different directions along both frontages, the Rear Yard setback for fences and screening shall be the same as any prescribed Rear Yard setback within the zoning district. This shall apply similarly at triple frontage lots, provided the remaining two frontages are treated like a typical Corner Lot. All accessory buildings in this condition, shall comply with the minimum Rear Yard setbacks rather than the reduced setback allowed for accessory buildings.
Section 4.14 Permitted Modifications of Height Regulations.
4.14.01 The height limitations of this Ordinance shall not apply to:
Belfries Public Monuments
Chimneys Ornamental Towers and Spires
Church Spires Radio/Television Towers less than 125 feet in height
Conveyors Cooling Towers
Elevator Bulkheads Smoke Stacks
Fire Towers Stage Towers or Scenery Lots
Water Towers and Standpipes Tanks
Flag Poles Air-Pollution Prevention Devices
Silos
Provided that the appropriate yard setbacks are increased by one foot for every two feet in excess of the maximum height requirement for the given zoning district, and structure does not encroach on airport hazard areas for the Wahoo Municipal Airport as depicted in the Nebraska Department of Aeronautics (NDA) zoning map for Wahoo Municipal Airport.
4.14.02 When permitted in a district, public or semi-public service buildings, hospitals, institutions, or schools may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet when each required yard line is increased by at least one foot for each one foot of additional building height above the height regulations for the district in which the building is located.
Section 4.15 Occupancy of Basements and Cellars. No basement or cellar shall be occupied for residential purposes until the remainder of the building has been completed.
Section 4.16 Non-Conforming, General Intent. It is the intent of this ordinance to permit lawful non-conformities to continue until they are removed, but not encourage their survival. Such uses are declared by this ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this ordinance that non-conformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district except as may be authorized in this title.
Article 4: General Provisions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 46
Section 4.17 Nonconforming Lots of Record. In any district, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this ordinance, a building or structure and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record as of the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both that are generally applied in the district. However, the yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Said lot of record must have been owned separately and individually from adjoining tracts of land at a time when the creation of a lot of such size and width at such location would have been lawful; and has remained in separate and individual ownership from adjoining lots or tracts of land continuously during the entire period in which this or a previous ordinance would have prohibited creation of such lot. Variance of area, width and yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the board of adjustment.
Section 4.18 Nonconforming Structures.
4.18.01 Authority to continue: Any structure which is devoted to a use which is permitted in the zoning district in which it is located, but which is located on a lot which does not comply with the applicable lot size requirements and/or the applicable bulk regulations, may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the restrictions of this section.
4.18.02 Enlargement, Repair, Alterations: Any such structure described in Section 4.18.01 may be enlarged, maintained, repaired or remodeled, provided, however, that no such enlargement, maintenance, repair or remodeling shall either create any additional nonconformity or increase the degree of existing nonconformity of all or any part of such structure, except that as to structures located on a lot that does not comply with the applicable lot size requirements, the side yard requirements shall be in conformance with this section, and unless otherwise permitted by conditional use permit unless otherwise approved or as specified in the Residential District.
4.18.03 Damage or Destruction: In the event that any structure described in Section 4.18.01 is damaged or destroyed, by any means, to the extent of more than 50 percent of its structural value, such structure shall not be restored unless it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zoning district in which it is located; provided that structures located on a lot that does not comply with the applicable lot size requirements in Section 4.18.01, shall not have a side yard of less than five feet. When a structure is damaged to the extent of less than 50 percent of its structural value, no repairs or restoration shall be made unless a building permit is obtained and restoration is actually begun within one year after the date of such partial destruction and is diligently pursued to completion.
4.18.04 Moving: No structure shall be moved in whole or in part for any distance whatever, to any other location on the same or any other lot unless the entire structure shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located after being moved.
Section 4.19 Nonconforming Uses.
4.19.01 Nonconforming Uses of Land: Where at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this ordinance as enacted or amended, such use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
1. No such non-conforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment or this ordinance;
2. No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance.
3. If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than 12 months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this ordinance for the district in which such land is located.
4.19.02 Nonconforming Uses of Structures: If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this ordinance, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful subject to the following provisions:
1. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to use permitted in the district in which it is located;
Article 4: General Provisions
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 47
2. Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this ordinance but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building;
3. If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure or structures and premises may be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the board of adjustment either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the board of adjustment may require appropriate conditions and safeguard in accord with the provisions of this ordinance;
4. Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in any or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed;
5. When a nonconforming use of a structure or structure and premises in combination is discontinued or abandoned for 12 months, the structure or structure and premises in combination shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located;
6. Where nonconforming use status is applied to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming statutes of the land.
Section 4.20 Repairs and Maintenance.
4.20.01 On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs or on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of passage of amendment of this ordinance shall not be increased.
4.20.02 Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official.
Section 4.21 Uses under Special Permit not Nonconforming Uses. Any use for which a special permit is issued as provided in this ordinance shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall without further action be deemed a conforming use in such district.
Section 4.22 Rear Yard Setbacks. In any Residential District, the Rear Yard Setback shall be the lesser of the minimum amount noted or 20% of the total lot depth.
Section 4.23 Fees. All fees for any zoning or subdivision related action shall be required prior to the issuance or investigation of any said permit request. Fees shall be adopted by the City Council by separate Resolution.
ARTICLE 5: Zoning Districts
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 48
ARTICLE 5: ZONING DISTRICTS
5.01 Districts; Uses
5.02 Districts; Boundaries
5.03 District Boundaries; Interpretation
5.04 Districts; Classification of Districts upon Annexation and Conformance with Land Use Plan
5.05 District (TA); Transitional Agricultural
5.06 District (LLR); Large Lot Residential
5.07 District (R-1); Residential District
5.08 District (R-2); Residential District
5.09 District (R-3); Residential District
5.10 District (RM); Mobile Home Residential District
5.11 District (NRC); Neighborhood Residential Commercial District
5.12 District (C-1); Downtown Commercial District
5.13 District (C-2); Highway Commercial District
5.14 District (C-3); General Commercial District
5.15 District (I-1); Light Industrial District
5.16 District (I-2); Heavy Industrial District
5.17 District (FF/FW); Flood Plain (overlay)
5.18 District (RMD); Residential/Mixed Use Development District
5.19 District (LWC); Lake Wanahoo Conservation District
5.20 District (HO); Historic Preservation Overlay District
5.21 District (TC); Transportation Corridor Overlay District
5.22 District (RAO) Residential Acreage Overlay District
5.23 (intentionally left blank)
5.24 District (AHO) Airport Hazard Overlay District
Section 5.01 Districts; Use. For the purpose of this Chapter, the Municipality is hereby divided into 18 districts, designated as follows:
(TA) Agricultural
(LLR) Large Lot Residential
(R-1) Residential District
(R-2) Residential District
(R-3) Residential District
(R-M) Residential – Mobile Home District
(NRC) Neighborhood Residential Commercial District
(C-1) Downtown Commercial District
(C-2) Highway Commercial District
(C-3) General Commercial District
(I-1) Light Industrial District
(I-2) Heavy Industrial District
(FF/FW) Flood Plain (overlay)
(RMD) Residential/Mixed Use District
(LWC) Lake Wanahoo Conservation District
(HO) Historic Overlay District
(TC) Transportation Corridor Overlay District
(RAO) Residential Acreage Overlay District
(AHO) Airport Hazard Overlay District
Section 5.02 Districts; Boundaries. The boundaries of the districts are hereby established as shown on the maps entitled "Official Zoning Map of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska." Said maps and all explanatory matter thereon accompany and are hereby made a part of this Chapter as if fully written herein. The Official Zoning District Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, and attested by the City Clerk. No changes shall be made on the Zoning District Map except as may be required by amendments to this Chapter. Such changes shall be promptly indicated on the Zoning District Map with the Ordinance number, nature of change, and date of change noted on the map. (Ref. §19-904 RS Neb.)
Section 5.03 Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
ARTICLE 5: Zoning Districts
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 49
5.03.01 Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines;
5.03.02 Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines;
5.03.03 Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be construed as following such City limits;
5.03.04 Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks;
5.03.05 Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line; boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines;
5.03.06 Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections 5.03.01 – 5.03.05 above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map;
5.03.07 Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections 5.03.01 – 5.03.06 above, the Board of Zoning Adjustment shall interpret the district boundaries;
5.03.08 Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of passage of this Ordinance, The Board of Zoning Adjustment may permit the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 50 feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot.
Section 5.04 Classification of Districts Upon Annexation and Conformance with the Land Use Plan. Areas annexed into the corporate limits of Wahoo shall be zoned to conform to the Land Use Plan.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.05 Transitional Agricultural
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 50
Section 5.05 TA – Transitional Agricultural District
5.05.01 Intent:
The Transitional Agricultural District is established for the purpose of preserving agricultural resources that are compatible with adjacent urban growth. It is not intended for commercial feedlot operations for livestock or poultry. Because the areas are not in the identified growth areas for the community, the district is designed to limit urban sprawl.
Permitted and conditional uses in this district located within the Transportation Corridor Overlay District must adhere to Design Standards.
5.05.02 Permitted Uses: The following shall be permitted as uses by right.
1. Agricultural uses, excluding the expansion of existing or development of new intensive livestock facilities operations exceeding one animal unit per acre.
2. Farm dwellings for the owners and their families, tenants, and employees.
3. Irrigation and flood control projects.
4. Public parks, playgrounds, buildings and grounds
5. Public Uses, including but not limited to recreational uses, fire stations, utilities and utility distribution systems pursuant to Section 7.20
6. Public and private nursery, primary and secondary education structures pursuant to Section 7.19
7. Churches, places of worship and cemeteries.
8. Fish hatcheries and facilities.
9. Orchards.
5.05.03 Conditional Uses: A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the Transitional Agricultural District if a conditional use permit for such use has been obtained in accordance with Article 6 of these regulations.
1. Airports and heliports, including crop dusting.
2. Agricultural service establishments primarily engaged in performing agricultural, animal husbandry or horticultural services.
3. Family Child Care Home II
4. Bed and Breakfast establishments.
5. Telecommunication, Radio and television towers and transmitters pursuant to Section 7.11.
6. Single family structures for farm residence or adjacent farm residence for relatives of consanguinity and marriage or farm workers.
7. Commercial Cabin Camp grounds, pursuant to Section 7.25.
8. Wind generating systems pursuant to the following conditions and Section 7.16:
a. No tower or propeller shall be so located as to ever be within 100 feet of any structure, power line or antenna located on other than the property on which the system is located.
b. The bottom tip of any propeller shall be at least 10 feet above any accessible pedestrian area.
c. The system and component parts must be totally surrounded by a fence having a minimum height of six feet and a maximum height of eight feet unless otherwise physically inaccessible to the public.
d. The system shall not cause interference to the radio and television reception on adjoining property.
e. The system shall contain a braking device for speeds above 40 miles per hour.
f. The safety results of an approved testing laboratory shall be submitted.
g. Proof that the system is covered by a homeowner’s insurance policy shall be submitted.
h. The maximum height shall be determined by anemometer studies which find out where the proper wind strata are in specific areas.
i. No system shall interfere with the wind access of an existing system. Systems shall be a minimum of five rotor blade lengths apart based upon the largest rotor in the area.
9. Kennels, Boarding and Training.
10. Kennels, Commercial.
11. Public and private charitable institutions.
12. Greenhouses and nurseries.
13. Animal clinics, animal hospitals, and veterinarian services.
14. Auction/sale barns and yards.
15. Salvage and junk yards.
16. Expansion of nonconforming uses, structures or land.
17. Private and/or public golf courses and driving ranges
Zoning Districts: Section 5.05 Transitional Agricultural
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 51
5.05.04 Temporary Uses: The following temporary uses shall be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit
1. Temporary greenhouses.
2. Fireworks stands provided the criteria are met as established by the City through separate Ordinances.
3. Buildings and uses incidental to construction work which shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work.
4. Temporary structure for festivals or commercial events.
5.05.05 Permitted Accessory Uses: The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
1. Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures.
2. Solar panels.
3. Parking as required in Section 7.01 - 7.05
4. Landscaping and screening as required in Section 7.15
5. Fences as required in Section 7.12
6. Signs as required in Section 7.06 – 7.09
7. Home occupations in conformance with Section 7.10
8. Carports in conformance with Section 4.12
9. Decks, gazeboes, elevated patios either attached or detached.
10. Dish antennas/mini dishes in conformance with Section 7.11.
11. Family Child Care Home I
5.05.06 Height and Lot Requirements:
1. The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows:
Uses
Lot Area (Acres)
Lot Width (feet)
Front Yard (feet)
Side Yard (feet)
Rear Yard (feet)
Max. Height (feet)
Farm
20
----
50
20
50
35
Farm Dwelling
20
----
50
20
50
35
Other Residential
20
----
50
20
50
35
Other uses
1
100
50
20
50
35
Zoning Districts: Section 5.06 LLR Large Lot Residential
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 52
Section 5.06 LLR - LARGE LOT RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
5.06.01 Intent:
This zone is intended to provide for low-density, acreage residential development in selected areas adjacent or in close proximity to the corporate limits of the City and other developed areas within the City jurisdiction. Generally, these districts are located near urban and built-up areas within reasonable reach of fire protection and hard surfaced roads.
Permitted and conditional uses in this district located within the Transportation Corridor Overlay District must adhere to Design Standards.
5.06.02 Permitted Uses: The following shall be permitted uses by right.
1. Agricultural uses, animals shall not be permitted on first three acres. On tracts larger than three acres then there is a maximum of one animal unit per acre for every acre over the three acre minimum.
2. Single-family dwelling.
3. Irrigation and flood control projects.
4. Public parks, playgrounds, buildings and grounds
5. Public uses, including but not limited to recreational uses, fire stations, utilities and utility distribution systems pursuant to Section 7.20
6. Public and private nursery, primary and secondary education structures pursuant to Section 7.19
5.06.03 Conditional Uses: A building of premises may be used for the following purposes in the LLR Large Lot Residential District if a conditional use permit for such has been obtained in accordance with Article 6 of these regulations.
1. Airports and heliports, including crop dusting.
2. Agricultural service establishments primarily engaged in performing agricultural, animal husbandry or horticultural services.
3. Places of worship such as churches, synagogues and temples.
4. Cemeteries, crematories, mausoleums and columbaria.
5. Family Child Care Home II
6. Bed and Breakfast establishments
7. Telecommunication, Radio and television towers and transmitters pursuant to Section 7.11.
8. Camp grounds.
9. Wind generating systems pursuant to Section 7.16.
10. Kennels, Boarding and Training
11. Kennels, Commercial.
12. Public and private charitable institutions.
13. Greenhouses and Nurseries.
14. Expansion of nonconforming uses, structures or land.
5.06.04 Temporary Uses: The following temporary uses shall be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit
1. Buildings and uses incidental to construction work which shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work.
2. Temporary structure for festivals or commercial events.
5.06.05 Permitted Accessory Uses:
1. Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures in accordance with Section 4.12
2. Dish antennas/mini dishes pursuant to Section 7.11.
3. Solar panels.
4. Parking as required in Section 7.01 - 7.05
5. Landscaping and screening as required in Section 7.15
6. Fences as required in Section 7.12
7. Signs as required in Section 7.06 – 7.09
8. Home occupations in conformance with Section 7.10
9. Decks, gazeboes, elevated patios either attached or detached.
10. Carports in conformance with Section 4.12
11. Family Child Care Home I
Zoning Districts: Section 5.06 LLR Large Lot Residential
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 53
12. Livestock provided there is a maximum of one Animal Unit per acre for every acre over the three acre minimum.
5.06.06 Height and Lot Requirements:
1. The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows:
Uses
Lot Area (acres)
Lot Width (feet)
Front Yard (feet)
Side Yard (feet)
Rear Yard (feet)
Max. Height (feet)
Max. Lot Coverage
Residential Uses
3
220
50
15
504
35
35%
Other Uses
3
220
50
15
504
35
40%
Accessory Uses
-
-
75
5
51
*3
*2
1 See Section 4.12.04
2 See Section 4.12.07
3 Maximum height of Accessory buildings shall not exceed the height of the Primary structure.
4 See Section 4.22
Zoning Districts: Section 5.07 R-1 Residential
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 54
Section 5.07 R-1 - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
5.07.02 Intent:
This District is intended to provide for low-density residential uses consisting of single family dwelling units and accessory structures.
Permitted and conditional uses in this district located within the Transportation Corridor Overlay District must adhere to Design Standards.
5.07.02 Permitted Uses: The following shall be permitted uses by right.
1. Single-family dwelling.
2. Public and private nursery, primary and secondary education structures pursuant to Section 7.19
3. Public parks, playgrounds, buildings and grounds
4. Public uses, including but not limited to recreational uses, fire stations, utilities and utility distribution systems pursuant to Section 7.20
5. Places of worship such as churches, synagogues and temples
5.07.03 Conditional Uses: A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the R-1 Residential District if a conditional use permit for such has been obtained in accordance with Article 6 of these regulations.
1. Bed and Breakfast establishments
2. Cemeteries, crematories, mausoleums and columbaria.
3. Academies, including dance, music, gymnastics, or martial arts, not including uses defined in Adult Establishment
4. Expansion of nonconforming uses, structures or land.
5.07.04 Temporary Uses: The following temporary uses shall be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit
1. Buildings and uses incidental to construction work which shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work.
2. Temporary structure for festivals or commercial events.
5.07.05 Permitted Accessory Uses:
1. Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures in accordance with Section 4.12
2. Dish antennas/mini dishes in conformance with Section 7.11.
3. Solar panels.
4. Parking as required in Section 7.01 - 7.05
5. Landscaping and screening as required in Section 7.15
6. Fences as required in Section 7.12
7. Signs as required in Section 7.06 – 7.09
8. Home occupations in conformance with Section 7.10
9. Decks, gazeboes, elevated patios either attached or detached.
10. Carports in conformance with Section 4.12
11. Family Child Care Home I
Zoning Districts: Section 5.07 R-1 Residential
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 55
5.07.06 Height and Lot Requirements:
1. The height and minimum lot requirements shall be follows:
Uses
Lot Area
(Sq. Ft.)
Lot Width (feet)
Front Yard (feet)
Side Yard (feet)
Rear Yard (feet)
Max. Height (feet)
Max. Lot Coverage
Residential Uses
10,000
75
25
7
253
35
35%
Other Uses
15,000
75
25
10
303
35
40%
Accessory Uses/Structures
-
-
25
5
51
20 4
*2
1 See Section 4.12.04
2 Provide total area of accessory structure for single family does not exceed 15% of the lot size, and the total lot coverage of all buildings does not exceed 50%. Square footage of accessory structures shall not exceed the footprint of the primary structure in any case. Contiguous lots comprising such tracts, when their total is used for computation of accessory building size, shall be merged as one parcel by a filing with the Register of Deeds.
3 See Section 4.22
4 Maximum height for detached accessory structures shall be measured from the floor to the midpoint of a pitch roof; in no case shall the height of an accessory structure exceed the height of the primary structure.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.08 R-2 Residential
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 56
Section 5.08 R-2 - Residential District.
5.08.01 Intent:
It is the intent of this District to provide low to medium density residential uses and development of residential dwellings including two-family dwellings.
Permitted and conditional uses in this district located within the Transportation Corridor Overlay District must adhere to Design Standards.
5.08.02 Permitted Uses: The following shall be permitted as uses by right.
1. Single family dwellings.
2. Public and private nursery, primary and secondary education structures pursuant to Section 7.19
3. Public parks, playgrounds, buildings and grounds
4. Public uses including but not limited to fire stations, utilities and utility distribution systems pursuant to Section 7.20.
5. Places of worship such as churches, synagogues and temples
6. Two Family Dwellings with no more than two total units.
7. Townhouses with no more than two total units pursuant to Section 7.22.
8. Condominiums with no more than two total units.
5.08.03 Conditional Uses: A building or premises may be used for the following purpose in the R-2 Residential District if a conditional use permit for such use has been obtained in accordance with Article 6 of these regulations.
1. Family Child Care Home II
2. Medical clinics and Hospitals
3. Cemeteries, crematories, mausoleums and columbaria.
4. Clubs, Fraternities, Lodges, and Meeting Places of a Non-commercial Nature.
5. Bed and Breakfast establishments
6. Expansion of nonconforming uses, structures or land
7. Retirement/nursing homes, including Skilled Nursing facilities, Nursing facilities, and Intermediate Care facilities; Assisted-Living facilities; Adult Day Services; and Intermediate Care Facilities for the Mentally Retarded (ICF/MR)
8. Academies, including dance, music, gymnastics, or martial arts, not including uses defined in Adult Establishment
5.08.04 Temporary Uses: The following temporary uses shall be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit
1. Buildings and uses incidental to construction work that shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work.
2. Temporary structure for festivals or commercial events.
5.08.05 Permitted Accessory Uses: The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
1. Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures in accordance with Section 4.12
2. Dish antennas/mini dishes in conformance with Section 7.11.
3. Solar panels.
4. Parking as required in Section 7.01 - 7.05
5. Landscaping and screening as required in Section 7.15
6. Fences as required in Section 7.12
7. Signs as required in Section 7.06 – 7.09
8. Home occupations in conformance with Section 7.10
9. Decks, gazeboes, elevated patios either attached or detached.
10. Carports in conformance with Section 4.12
11. Family Child Care Home I
Zoning Districts: Section 5.08 R-2 Residential
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 57
5.08.06 Height and Lot Requirements:
1. The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows:
Uses
Lot Area
(Sq. Ft.)
Lot Width (feet)
Front Yard (feet)
Side Yard (feet)
Rear Yard (feet)
Max. Height (feet)
Max. Lot Coverage
Residential Uses
7,500
60
25
5
253
35
35%
Two Family Dwelling
3,750 per unit
35 per unit
25
5
253
35
35%
Townhouses and Condominiums
2,600 per unit
25 per unit
25
54
203
35
75%
Other Uses
10,000
60
25
10
303
35
40%
Accessory Uses
-
-
25
5
51
20 5
*2
1 See Section 4.12.04
2 Provide total area of accessory structure for single family on lots of 7,500 square feet does not exceed 864-sq. ft. and the total lot coverage of all buildings does not exceed 50%; accessory structures on tracts with square footage greater than 7,500 square feet shall not exceed the footprint of the primary structure in any case and shall not exceed 15% of lot coverage. Contiguous lots comprising such tracts, when their total is used for computation of accessory building size, shall be merged as one parcel by a filing with the Register of Deeds.
3 See Section 4.22.
4 The side yard along the common wall shall be 0 feet. The common wall shall be along the adjoining lot or property line; except for Condominiums.
5 Maximum height for detached accessory structures shall be measured from the floor to the midpoint of a pitch roof; in no case shall the height of an accessory structure exceed the height of the primary structure.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.09 R-3 Residential
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 58
Section 5.09 R-3 - Residential District.
5.09.01 Intent:
It is the intent of this District to provide for medium density residential uses and development of residential dwellings.
Permitted and conditional uses in this district located within the Transportation Corridor Overlay District must adhere to Design Standards.
5.09.02 Permitted Uses: The following shall be permitted as uses by right.
1. Single family dwellings
2. Two family dwellings
3. Townhouses pursuant to Section 7.22
4. Condominiums
5. Multi-family dwellings
6. Public and private nursery, primary and secondary education structures pursuant to Section 7.19.
7. Public parks, playgrounds, buildings and grounds
8. Public uses, including but not limited to recreational uses, fire stations, utilities and utility distribution systems pursuant to Section 7.20
9. Places of worship such as churches, synagogues and temples
5.09.03 Conditional Uses: A building or premise may be used for the following purposes in the R-3 Residential District if a special permit for such use has been obtained in accordance with Article 6 of these regulations:
1. Family Child Care Home II
2. Medical clinics and Hospitals
3. Cemeteries, crematories, mausoleums and columbaria
4. Bed and Breakfast establishments
5. Clubs, fraternities, lodges, and meeting places of a non-commercial nature
6. Retirement and/or nursing home, including Skilled Nursing facilities, Nursing facilities, and Intermediate Care facilities; Assisted-Living facilities; Adult Day Services; and Intermediate Care Facilities for the Mentally Retarded (ICF/MR)
7. Funeral homes and mortuaries
8. Group Care Home, Group Home for Handicapped, Halfway House
9. Academies, including dance, music, gymnastics, or martial arts, not including uses defined in Adult Establishment
10. Expansion of nonconforming uses, structures or land
5.09.04 Temporary Uses: The following temporary uses shall be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit
1. Buildings and uses incidental to construction work which shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work
2. Temporary structure for festivals or commercial events
5.09.05 Permitted Accessory Uses: The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
1. Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures in accordance with Section 4.12
2. Dish antennas/mini dishes pursuant to Section 7.11
3. Solar panels
4. Parking as required in Section 7.01 - 7.05
5. Landscaping and screening as required in Section 7.15
6. Fences as required in Section 7.12
7. Signs as required in Section 7.06 – 7.09
8. Home occupations in conformance with Section 7.10
9. Decks, gazeboes, elevated patios either attached or detached
10. Carports in conformance with Section 4.12
11. Family Child Care Home I
Zoning Districts: Section 5.09 R-3 Residential
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 59
5.09.06 Height and Lot Requirements:
1. The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows:
Uses
Lot Area
(Sq. Ft.)
Lot Width (feet)
Front Yard (feet)
Side Yard (feet)
Rear Yard (feet)
Max. Height
(feet)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Single Family Dwelling
7,500
60
25
5
255
35
35%
Other Uses
10,000
60
25
5
255
40
35%
Two Family Dwelling
3,750 per unit
35 per unit
25
5
255
35
35%
Townhouses
3,750 per unit
25 per unit
25
56
255
35
50%
Condominiums
1,500 per unit3
25 per unit
25
5
255
35
50%
Multiple Family Dwelling
1,500 per unit3
60
25
54
255
40
35%
Accessory Uses
-
-
25
5
51
20 7
10%2
1 See Section 4.12.04
2 Provide total area of accessory structure for single family on lots of 7,500 square feet does not exceed 864 sq. ft. and the total lot coverage of all buildings does not exceed 50%; accessory structures on tracts with square footage greater than 7,500 square feet shall not exceed the footprint of the primary structure in any case and shall not exceed 15% of lot coverage. Contiguous lots comprising such tracts, when their total is used for computation of accessory building size, shall be merged as one parcel by a filing with the Register of Deeds.
3 Minimum Lot Size of 7,500 Square Feet
4 10 feet side yard setback if over 30 feet in Height
5 See Section 4.22
6 The side yard along the common wall shall be 0 feet. The common wall shall be along the adjoining lot or property line
7 Maximum height for detached accessory structures shall be measured from the floor to the midpoint of a pitch roof; in no case shall the height of an accessory structure exceed the height of the primary structure.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.10 RM Mobile Home Residential
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 60
Section 5.10 RM Mobile Home Residential District
5.10.01 Intent: The intent of the Mobile Home Residential District shall be to provide for mobile home dwellings on leased or owned property in areas where a mobile home court is appropriate, where such development is recognized as being in the best interests of the citizens and taxpayers of Wahoo.
Permitted and conditional uses in this district located within the Transportation Corridor Overlay District must adhere to Design Standards.
5.10.02 Permitted Principal Uses.
1. Places of worship such as churches, synagogues and temples
2. Mobile home dwelling.
3. Multi-unit dwellings provided such use is part of a Residential/Mixed Use District.
4. Public parks, playgrounds, buildings and grounds
5. Public and private nursery, primary and secondary education structures pursuant to Section 7.19.
6. Single family dwelling.
5.10.03 Conditional Uses:
1. Family Child Care Home II
2. Child Care Center and Nursery school
3. Cemeteries, crematories, mausoleums and columbaria.
5.10.04 Permitted Accessory Uses:
1. Buildings and uses customarily incidental to the permitted uses.
2. Home occupation, pursuant to Section 7.10
3. Fences as provided for in Section 7.12.
4. Parking pursuant to Sections 7.01 - 7.05.
5. Signs pursuant to Sections 7.06 – 7.09
6. Temporary buildings and uses incidental to construction work which will be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work.
7. Decks, gazeboes, elevated patios either attached or detached.
8. Dish antennas/mini dishes in conformance with Section 7.11.
9. Carports in conformance with Section 4.12
10. Family Child Care Home I
5.10.05 Area and Lot Requirements:
1. A mobile home park shall have an area of not less than five acres. No mobile homes or other structures shall be located less than 83 feet from the road centerline when contiguous to or having frontage to a County road or state highway. The setback on all other court property lines shall be 25 feet. These areas shall be landscaped. The minimum lot width for a mobile home court shall be 200 feet.
2. Each lot provided for occupancy of a single mobile home shall have an area of not less than 5,000 square feet, excluding road R.O.W., and a width of not less than 50 feet for an interior lot, 80 feet for a corner lot, or 45 feet when facing a cul-de-sac turnaround or curve on a minor loop street. Each individual lot shall have:
a. Side yards shall not be less than eight feet on one side and not less than eight feet on the other side, except that on corner lots, the setback for all buildings shall be a minimum of 30 feet on the side abutting a street/road.
b. Front yard of not less than 30 feet.
c. A rear yard of not less than 25 feet.
d. There shall be a minimum livable floor area of 500 square feet in each mobile home.
3. Height of Buildings.
a. Maximum height for principal uses: 35 feet.
b. Maximum height for accessory uses: 20 feet.
4. Each lot shall have access to a hard surfaced drive not less than 22 feet in width excluding parking.
5. Community water and community sewage disposal facilities shall be provided with connections to each lot. The water supply shall be sufficient for domestic use and for fire protection.
6. Service buildings including adequate laundry and drying facilities, and toilet facilities for mobile homes which do not have these facilities within each unit.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.10 RM Mobile Home Residential
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 61
7. Not less than eight percent of the total court area shall be designated and used for park, playground and recreational purposes.
8. Storm shelters shall be required and shall meet the following criteria:
a. Shelter space equivalent to two persons per mobile home lot,
b. Designed in conformance with “National Performance Criteria for Tornado Shelters” by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and any other referenced material by FEMA,
c. Shelters shall be sited in order to provide maximum protection to park occupants and so that residents may reach a shelter within the maximum safe time frame as directed by FEMA.
9. All trailer pad locations shall be hard surfaced with properly reinforced Poured in Place Concrete.
10. All trailers shall have skirting which is in good repair, meets manufacturer standards, and is in conformance with the color scheme of the trailer.
5.10.06 Plan Requirements:
A complete plan of the mobile home court shall be submitted showing:
1. A development plan and grading plan of the court.
2. The area and dimensions of the tract of land.
3. The number, location, and size of all mobile home spaces.
4. The area and dimensions of the park, playground and recreation areas.
5. The location and width of roadways and walkways.
6. The location of service buildings and any other proposed structures.
7. The location of water and sewer lines and sewage disposal facilities.
8. Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home court.
9. Location and number of storm shelters proposed for the development.
10. Specifications, drawings and design calculations for all storm shelters on the park.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.11 NRC Residential Commercial
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 62
Section 5.11 NRC - Neighborhood Residential Commercial District.
5.11.01 Intent:
The Neighborhood Residential Commercial (NRC) District is intended primarily for the provision of retail and personnel service facilities and mixed residential uses.
Permitted and conditional uses in this district located within the Transportation Corridor Overlay District must adhere to Design Standards.
5.11.02 Permitted Uses: The following shall be permitted uses by right:
1. Single Family Dwellings
2. Two Family Dwellings
3. Multi-Family Dwellings
4. Townhouses pursuant to Section 7.22
5. Condominiums
6. Public and private nursery, primary and secondary education structures pursuant to Section 7.19
7. Business Offices not including those uses defined as Adult Establishments
8. Professional Offices not including those uses defined as Adult Establishments
9. Retail Stores and service providers, not including those uses defined as Adult Establishments, which provide commodities and services primarily to meet the needs of residents in one or more residential neighborhoods, including:
a. Apparel stores
b. Banks, including automatic teller machines (ATM’s)
c. Bookstores or rental libraries
d. Barber shops and beauty shops
e. Delicatessens
f. Drugstores
g. Dairy stores
h. Bakery goods stores
i. Florists
j. Gift Shops
k. Hardware Stores
l. Hobby and art supply stores
m. Dress making, altering, and repairing of wearing apparel
n. Photographer, film sales and development
o. Shoe Stores
p. Soda Fountains
q. Variety Stores not including those uses defined as “Big Box Retail”
r. Hotels/Motels
s. Restaurants, Tea rooms, Cafes, coffee houses, outdoor cafés, and sidewalk cafés
10. Private Club/Lodge not including those uses defined as Adult Establishments
11. Medical clinics and Hospitals
12. Public uses, including but not limited to recreational uses, fire stations, utilities and utility distribution systems pursuant to Section 7.20
13. Places of worship such as churches, synagogues and temples
14. Academies, including dance, music, gymnastics, or martial arts, not including uses defined in Adult Establishment
5.11.03 Conditional Uses: A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the NRC District if a special permit for such use has been obtained in accordance with Article 6 of these regulations.
1. Family Child Care Home II
2. Cleaning agencies (pickup and delivery)
3. Food Sales (Limited and General), Supermarkets
4. Taverns, Bars, Brew Pubs, and beer gardens associated with these uses subject to obtaining a Beer Garden Permit as outlined in Municipal Code, not including uses defined in Adult Establishments.
5. Coffee Kiosks
6. Garden Supply Stores, provided that all Equipment, Supplies, and Merchandise, other than plants, shall be kept completely within an enclosed structure and any fertilizer sales be in package form only
7. Self-Service Laundries and dry cleaning establishments
8. Automotive filling station, and/or convenience stores
Zoning Districts: Section 5.11 NRC Residential Commercial
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 63
9. Automobile and light truck carwash
10. Facilities that sell on- or off-sale alcoholic beverages
11. Automobile sales and service
12. Mini-Warehouses subject to the following Conditions:
a. The use must be located contiguous to an arterial street as designated in the Comprehensive Plan.
b. There shall be a minimum lot area of one acre.
c. All storage shall be within enclosed buildings.
d. Any side of the building providing doorways to storage areas shall be set back from the property line not less than 35 feet.
e. All driveways, parking, loading and vehicle circulation areas shall be paved with concrete, asphalt or asphaltic concrete. All one-way driveways that provide direct access to cubicles shall provide for one 10-foot parking lane and one travel lane 15 feet in width. All two-way driveways that provide direct access to cubicles shall provide for one 10-foot parking lane and two 12-foot travel lanes. Adequate bumper guards or fences shall be provided to prevent the extension of vehicles beyond property lines.
f. All lights shall be shielded to direct light away from adjacent properties.
g. No activities such as miscellaneous or garage sales or the servicing or repair of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawn mowers, and other similar equipment shall be conducted on the premises. Also, no manufacturing, assembly or processing of any product shall be permitted.
h. The Owner or Operator shall properly police the area for removal of trash and debris.
i. Two copies of a plot plan showing ingress and egress, widths of driveways, off-street parking, loading areas, and on-site traffic circulation shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for their consideration with the conditional use application.
j. The Planning Commission and City Council may attach such other conditions as deemed necessary to provide for compatible development.
13. Bed and Breakfast establishments
14. Semi-truck and Automotive, Fueling and Serving Establishments
15. Farm Implement Sales and Service
16. Expansion of Nonconforming Uses, Structures or Land
17. Retirement and/or nursing home, including Skilled Nursing Facilities, Nursing facilities, and Intermediate Care facilities; Assisted-Living facilities; Adult Day Services; and Intermediate Care Facilities for the Mentally Retarded (ICF/MR)
5.11.04 Temporary Uses: The following temporary uses shall be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit
1. Temporary greenhouses.
2. Fireworks stands provided the criteria are met as established by the City through separate Ordinances.
3. Buildings and uses incidental to construction work which shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work.
4. Temporary structure for festivals or commercial events.
5.11.05 Permitted Accessory Uses: The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
1. Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures.
2. Solar panels.
3. Parking as required in Section 7.01 - 7.05
4. Landscaping and screening as required in Section 7.15
5. Fences as required in Section 7.12
6. Signs as required in Section 7.06 – 7.09
7. Decks, gazeboes, elevated patios either attached or detached.
8. Home occupations in conformance with Section 7.10
7. Dish antennas/mini dishes pursuant to Section 7.11.
8. Carports in conformance with Section 4.12
9. Family Child Care Home I
5.11.07 Screening Requirements:
Zoning Districts: Section 5.11 NRC Residential Commercial
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 64
1. Where a site other than a single or two-family dwelling adjoins or is located across an alley from a single or two-family dwelling in the NRC District, a solid wall, or fence or compact evergreen hedge six feet in height may be required on the property line common to such districts, except in a required front yard.
2. Open storage of materials attendant to a permitted or special permitted use shall be permitted only within an area surrounded or screened by a solid wall or fence.
5.11.08 Landscaping Requirements:
1. Each developed parcel, lot or tract of land, except for single and two family dwellings, in the NRC District shall provide seven feet of landscaping from any designated “Major Arterial” or “Other Arterial” public street property line, into any required front yard.
a. One tree shall be planted or maintained for each 500 square feet of landscaped area required under Item No. 1 above.
b. Tree species, sizes and spacing shall be consistent with standards on file with the Building Official.
c. Upon installation or preservation of required landscape materials, appropriate measure shall be taken to insure their continued health and maintenance. Required materials that do not remain healthy shall be replaced.
5.11.09 Height and Lot Requirements:
1. The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows:
Uses
Lot Area
(Sq. Ft.)
Lot Width (feet)
Front Yard (feet)
Side Yard (feet)
Rear Yard (feet)
Max.
Height
(feet)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Single Family Dwelling
7,500
60
25
7
255
35
35%
Two Family Dwelling
3,750 per unit
35 per unit
25
5
255
35
35%
Townhouses
2,520 per unit
18 per unit
25
76
253
35
50%
Condominiums
1,500 per unit3
25 per unit
25
7
253
35
50%
Multiple Family Dwelling
1,500 per unit3
60
25
54
255
40
35%
Commercial Uses
10,000
35
25
7
10
35
35%
Other Uses
10,000
60
25
5
255
40
35%
Accessory Uses
-
-
25
5
51
20 7
10%2
1 See Section 4.12.04
2 Provide total area of accessory structure for single family on lots of 7,500 square feet does not exceed 864 sq. ft. and the total lot coverage of all buildings does not exceed 50%; accessory structures on tracts with square footage greater than 7,500 square feet shall not exceed the footprint of the primary structure in any case and shall not exceed 15% of lot coverage. Contiguous lots comprising such tracts, when their total is used for computation of accessory building size, shall be merged as one parcel by a filing with the Register of Deeds.
3 Minimum Lot Size of 7,500 Square Feet
4 10 feet on the side yard setback if over 30 feet in Height
5 See Section 4.22.
6 The side yard along the common wall shall be 0 feet. The common wall shall be along the adjoining lot or property line
7 Maximum height for detached accessory structures shall be measured from the floor to the midpoint of a pitch roof; in no case shall the height of an accessory structure exceed the height of the primary structure.
5.11.10 Additional height and area requirements are as follows:
1. Commercial and residential uses may occupy the same lot or tract of land when the total area is large enough to accommodate both uses with the above area, setback and parking requirements for each use.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.12 C-1 Downtown Commercial
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 65
Section 5.12 C-1 Downtown Commercial District.
5.12.01 Intent:
This District is designed to provide for a wide range of retail, office, amusement and service uses normally found in a Downtown Commercial District. Highest density and intensity of use are permitted in this District.
Permitted and conditional uses in this district located within the Transportation Corridor Overlay District must adhere to Design Standards.
5.12.02 Permitted Uses: The following shall be permitted as uses by right:
1. Apartments and condominiums on floors other than ground floor.
2. Bakery.
3. Barbershops, beauty parlors and shoe care shops.
4. Business services including: attorneys, banks, insurance, real estate, offices, postal stations, printing, credit services, security brokers, dealers and exchange, title abstracting, savings and loans, finance services and investment services; but not including uses defined in Adult Establishment.
5. Child care centers.
6. Commercial recreation facilities indoor.
7. Academies, including dance, music, gymnastics, or martial arts, not including uses defined in Adult Establishment
8. Meeting hall, not including uses defined in Adult Establishment
9. Retail business or service establishment supplying commodities or performing services, such as, or in compatibility with and including the following:
a. Antique store
b. Apparel Stores
c. Automobile parts and supply store
d. Bicycle shop
e. Communication services including: telegram, email, and facsimile forms of communication
f. Computer store
g. Exercise, fitness and tanning spa/salon, not including uses defined in Adult Establishment
h. Floral shop
i. Gift and curio shop not including stores defined as Adult Establishments
j. Hardware stores.
k. Hobby, craft, toy store
l. Jewelry store
m. Laundry and dry cleaning pick-up and delivery stations
n. Locksmith
o. Picture framing shop
p. Second hand stores
q. Soda fountains
r. Video store, not including uses defined in Adult Establishment
s. Variety stores selling at retail and/or wholesale
10. Detached banking facilities (ATM).
11. Laundry establishments.
12. Food service, restaurants, cafés, outdoor cafés and sidewalk cafés
13. Coffee Houses, Tea Rooms
14. Taverns not including beer gardens and stores defined as Adult Establishments.
15. Brew pubs where it is included with a restaurant facility not including stores defined as Adult Establishments.
16. Museums and art galleries.
17. Nursery, primary and secondary education pursuant to Section 7.19.
18. Personal and professional services not including stores defined as Adult Establishments.
19. Photography studios not including stores defined as Adult Establishments.
20. Public and private charitable institutions.
21. Public parks, buildings and grounds.
22. Public uses including administrative, public service, and cultural facilities, including City, County, State or Federal administrative centers, courts, libraries, police and fire stations and other public buildings, structures, and facilities.
23. Public and private utility facilities pursuant to Section 7.20.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.12 C-1 Downtown Commercial
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 66
24. Sales and showrooms, including service facilities and the rental of equipment, provided all displays and merchandise are within the walls of the buildings.
25. Medical clinics and Hospitals
26. Private Club/Lodge not including stores defined as Adult Establishments
27. Dressmaking, altering, and repairing of wearing apparel.
5.12.03 Conditional Uses: A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the C-1 Downtown Commercial District if a Conditional Use Permit for such use has been obtained in accordance with Article 6 of these regulations.
1. Expansion of Nonconforming Uses, Structures or Land.
2. Automotive filling station, convenience stores and/or service station, provided all displays, merchandise and service work are confined within the walls of the premises.
3. Funeral Homes and Mortuaries.
4. Food storage lockers including processing.
5. Bed and Breakfast
6. Recycling Center for small item drop off.
7. Food Sales (Limited and General).
8. Dry cleaners – establishments (not over 2,000 sq. ft. in floor area) with one dry cleaning unit having a capacity not to exceed 35 pounds per cycle using nonflammable or non-explosive solvents.
9. Mini-Warehouses subject to the following Conditions:
a. The use must be located contiguous to an arterial street as designated in the Comprehensive Plan.
b. There shall be a minimum lot area of one acre.
c. All storage shall be within enclosed buildings.
d. Any side of the building providing doorways to storage areas shall be set back from the property line not less than 35 feet.
e. All driveways, parking, loading and vehicle circulation areas shall be paved with concrete, asphalt or asphaltic concrete. All one-way driveways that provide direct access to cubicles shall provide for one 10-foot parking lane and one travel lane 15 feet in length. All two-way driveways that provide direct access to cubicles shall provide for one 10-foot parking lane and two 12-foot travel lanes. Adequate bumper guards or fences shall be provided to prevent the extension of vehicles beyond property lines.
f. All lights shall be shielded to direct light away from adjacent properties.
g. No activities such as miscellaneous or garage sales or the servicing or repair of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawn mowers, and other similar equipment shall be conducted on the premises. Also, no manufacturing, assembly or processing of any product shall be permitted.
h. The Owner or Operator shall properly police the area for removal of trash and debris.
i. Two copies of a plot plan showing ingress and egress, widths of driveways, off-street parking, loading areas, and on-site traffic circulation shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for their consideration with the conditional use application.
j. The Planning Commission and City Council may attach such other conditions as deemed necessary to provide for compatible development.
10. Kennels, boarding and training, subject to the following conditions:
a. The use must be located contiguous to an arterial street as designated in the Comprehensive Plan.
b. There shall be a minimum lot size of 10,000 sq. ft.
c. All activity shall be located within a completely enclosed building with soundproofing and odor control.
d. Outdoor kennels shall be prohibited.
e. The establishment shall have a minimum of two outdoor fenced dog run/exercise areas. Each outdoor dog run/exercise areas shall be a minimum of 1,200 sq. ft. and be located on a different side of the building. Animals have access to these exercise runs during the day but shall not be kenneled outside.
f. The establishment shall have an indoor dug run/exercise area with a minimum of 1,500 sq. ft.
g. No animal breeding shall be allowed.
h. A dog run/exercise area shall not be located in the front yard setback of any street. A solid wall or privacy fence six feet in height shall be required on the exterior of all dog runs.
i. Potentially dangerous dogs as defined in municipal code will not be boarded.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.12 C-1 Downtown Commercial
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 67
j. The establishment shall meet all requirements of State of Nebraska for licensing of the kennel/boarding operation.
k. The Planning Commission and City Council may attach such other conditions as deemed necessary to provide for compatible development.
11. Beer Gardens associated with taverns, subject to obtaining a Beer Garden Permit as outlined in Municipal Code.
12. Light auto body repair and paint, excluding heavy trucks and machinery.
5.12.04 Temporary Uses: The following temporary uses shall be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit
1. Temporary greenhouses.
2. Fireworks stands provided the criteria are met as established by the City through separate Ordinances.
3. Buildings and uses incidental to construction work which shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work.
4. Temporary structure for festivals or commercial events.
5.12.05 Permitted Accessory Uses: The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
1. Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures.
2. Parking as required in Section 7.01 - 7.05
3. Landscaping and screening as required in Section 7.15
4. Fences as required in Section 7.12
5. Signs as required in Section 7.06 – 7.09
6. Home occupations in conformance with Section 7.10
7. Carports behind buildings and adjacent to alleys in conformance with Section 4.12
8. Dish antennas/mini dishes pursuant to Section 7.11.
5.12.06 Height and Area Regulations:
1. No area requirements; except where a C-1 Commercial District abuts a residential district, a yard requirement shall be 20 feet and it shall be provided between the permitted structure and the district boundary.
Uses
Lot Area
(Sq. Ft.)
Lot Width (feet)
Front Yard (feet)
Side Yard (feet)
Rear Yard (feet)
Max.
Height
(feet)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Permitted Uses
-
22
-
-
-
45
-
Conditional Uses
-
22
-
-
-
45
-
5.12.07 Miscellaneous Provisions:
1. Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.
2. No outdoor storage, except the display of merchandise for sale to the public, shall be permitted.
3. Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded so that no direct light is cast upon any residential property and so that no glare is visible to any traffic on any public street.
4. Where a site adjoins or is located across an alley from a Residential District, a solid wall or fence or compact evergreen hedge six feet in height may be required on the property line common to such districts, except in a required front yard.
5. Open storage of materials attendant to a permitted use or conditionally permitted use shall be permitted only within an area surrounded or screened by a solid wall or fence.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.13 C-2 Highway Commercial
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 68
5.13 C-2 - Highway Commercial District
5.13.01 Intent:
The C-2 Highway Commercial District is intended for the purpose of servicing highway travelers and providing limited commercial services. Off-street parking is required in order to reduce possible adverse effects on adjacent properties.
Permitted and conditional uses in this district located within the Transportation Corridor Overlay District must adhere to Design Standards.
5.13.02 Permitted Uses: The following shall be permitted as uses by right:
1. Automobile sales.
2. Car washes.
3. Business services including: attorneys, banks, insurance, real estate, offices, postal stations, printing, credit services, security brokers, dealers and exchange, title abstracting, savings and loans, finance services and investment services; but not including uses defined in Adult Establishment.
4. Places of worship such as churches, synagogues and temples
5. Construction sales and services (plumbing, electrical).
6. Commercial operations and businesses, intended for the purpose of servicing travel and recreational users.
7. Commercial recreational facilities (bowling alleys, miniature golf courses and similar uses not including stores defined as Adult Establishments).
8. Academies, including dance, music, gymnastics, or martial arts, not including uses defined in Adult Establishment
9. Meeting hall, not including uses defined in Adult Establishment
10. Retail business or service establishment supplying commodities or performing services, such as, or in compatibility with and including the following:
a. Antique store
b. Automobile parts and supply store
c. Barber and Beauty shop
d. Bicycle shop
e. Communication services including: telegram, email, and facsimile forms of communication
f. Computer store
g. Exercise, fitness and tanning spa, not including uses defined in Adult Establishment
h. Floral shop
i. Gift and curio shop
j. Hobby, craft, toy store
k. Jewelry store
l. Laundry and dry cleaning pick-up and delivery stations
m. Locksmith
n. Photographer
o. Picture framing shop
p. Second hand stores
q. Soda fountains.
r. Variety stores except those defined as a “Big Box”.
s. Hardware stores except those defined as a “Big Box”.
t. Tanning salon
u. Video store, not including uses defined in Adult Establishment
v. Social club and fraternal organizations, not including uses defined in Adult Establishment
w. Telephone answering service
11. Detached banking facilities (ATM).
12. Public and private utility facilities shops and offices pursuant to Section 7.20.
13. Farm implements sales and services.
14. Garden centers and nurseries.
15. Irrigation equipment sales and services.
16. Mobile homes sales.
17. Motels, including accessory service uses, such as swimming pools and restaurants not including stores defined as Adult Establishments.
18. Restaurants including drive-ins and facilities having drive through lanes, and cafés, outdoor cafés, and sidewalk cafés.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.13 C-2 Highway Commercial
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 69
19. Liquor Stores
20. Automobile service stations.
21. Stores or shops for sale of goods at retail.
22. Medical clinics and Hospitals
23. Convenience store including fuel sales.
24. Food Sales (Limited and General)
5.13.03 Conditional Uses: A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the C-2 Highway Commercial District if a Conditional Use permit for such use has been obtained in accordance with Article 6 of these regulations.
1. Private clubs and lodges
2. Radio studios, transmitters and antenna.
3. Big Box Retail Stores
4. Shopping centers.
5. Commercial strip shopping centers.
6. Dry cleaners – establishments (not over 2,000 sq. ft. in floor area) with one dry cleaning unit having a capacity not to exceed 35 pounds per cycle using nonflammable or non-explosive solvents.
7. Semi-truck and automotive, fueling and servicing establishments including Truck Stops.
8. Expansion of nonconforming uses, structures or land.
9. Mini-Warehouses subject to the following design criteria are met:
a. The use must be located contiguous to an arterial street as designated in the Comprehensive Plan.
b. There shall be a minimum lot area of one acre.
c. All storage shall be within enclosed buildings.
d. Any side of the building providing doorways to storage areas shall be set back from the property line not less than 35 feet.
e. All driveways, parking, loading and vehicle circulation areas shall be paved with concrete, asphalt or asphaltic concrete. All one-way driveways that provide direct access to cubicles shall provide for one 10-foot parking lane and a travel lane of at least 15 feet in width. All two-way driveways that provide direct access to cubicles shall provide for one 10-foot parking lane and two 12-foot travel lanes. Adequate bumper guards or fences shall be provided to prevent the extension of vehicles beyond property lines.
f. All lights shall be shielded to direct light away from adjacent properties.
g. No activities such as miscellaneous or garage sales or the servicing or repair of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawn mowers and other similar equipment shall be conducted on the premises. Also, no manufacturing, assembly or processing of any product shall be permitted.
h. The Owner or Operator shall properly police the area for removal of trash and debris.
i. Two copies of a plot plan showing ingress and egress, widths of driveways, off-street paring, loading areas, and on-site traffic circulation shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for their consideration with the conditional use application.
j. The Planning Commission and City Council may attach such other conditions as deemed necessary to provide for compatible development.
10. Manufacture, assembly, molding or preparation of products that include the use of sheet metal, canvas, cloth/textiles, ceramics, plaster, wood, and/or concrete, provided that the following criteria are met:
a. The construction of a structure for this use shall be in a manner sensitive to the commercial structures adjacent to the property.
b. All activities involved with the manufacturing, assembly, molding and preparation with the use are performed within the confines of the structure.
c. All final products may be regulated to minimize the creation and manufacturing of the primary materials on-site.
d. Any creation and manufacturing of the primary materials on-site shall be limited to the confines of the primary structure(s).
e. Storage of raw materials outside of the primary structure(s) shall be prohibited.
f. Any outside storage of the finished product/material shall be within a fenced area. Said fenced area shall be constructed in a manner that creates an opaque screen.
g. The use shall create a minimal amount of dust, noise, vapors, and vibration.
h. The use of toxic and hazardous materials is expressly prohibited for these uses within the C-2 District.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.13 C-2 Highway Commercial
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 70
11. Taverns, bars, brew pubs, and beer gardens associated with these uses subject to obtaining a Beer Garden Permit as outlined in Municipal Code, not including uses defined in Adult Establishment.
5.13.04 Temporary Uses: The following temporary uses shall be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit
1. Temporary greenhouses.
2. Fireworks stands provided the criteria are met as established by the City through separate Ordinances.
3. Buildings and uses incidental to construction work which shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work.
4. Temporary structure for festivals or commercial events.
5.13.05 Permitted Accessory Uses: The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
1. Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures.
2. Parking as required in Section 7.01 - 7.05
3. Landscaping and screening as required in Section 7.15
4. Fences as required in Section 7.12
5. Signs as required in Section 7.06 – 7.09
6. Dish antennas/mini dishes pursuant to Section 7.11.
5.13.06 Height and Lot Requirements:
1. The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows:
Uses
Lot Area
(Sq. Ft.)
Lot Width (feet)
Front Yard (feet)
Side Yard (feet)
Rear Yard (feet)
Max.
Height
(feet)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Permitted Uses
15,000
100
25
101
20
45
50%
Conditional Uses
15,000
100
25
101
20
45
50%
Accessory Uses
-
-
25
101
20
45
10%
1 Side Yard setback shall be increased to 20 feet when adjacent to a Residential District
5.13.07 Miscellaneous Provisions:
1. Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.
2. When adjacent to residentially zoned land, no parking or drives shall be allowed in the required front yard within 15 feet of such district.
3. No outdoor storage, except the display of merchandise for sale to the public, shall be permitted.
4. Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded so that no direct light is cast upon any residential property and so that no glare is visible to any traffic on any public street.
5. Where a site adjoins or is located across an alley from a Residential District, a solid wall or fence or compact evergreen hedge six feet in height may be required on the property line common to such districts, except in a required front yard.
6. Open storage of materials attendant to a permitted use or conditionally permitted use shall be permitted only within an area surrounded or screened by a solid wall or fence.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.14 C-3 General Commercial
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 71
Section 5.14 C-3 General Commercial District
5.14.01 Intent:
The General Commercial District is intended to establish standards that will foster and maintain an area within the district boundaries that will benefit the retail trade, business, cultural, and social activities of the entire community.
Permitted and conditional uses in this district located within the Transportation Corridor Overlay District must adhere to Design Standards.
5.14.02 Permitted Uses: The following shall be permitted as uses by right:
1. Business services including: attorneys, banks, insurance, real estate, offices, postal stations, printing, credit services, security brokers, dealers and exchange, title abstracting, savings and loans, finance services and investment services; but not including uses defined in Adult Establishment.
2. Child care center.
3. Academies, including dance, music, gymnastics, or martial arts, not including uses defined in Adult Establishment
4. Meeting hall, not including uses defined in Adult Establishment
5. Retail business or service establishment supplying commodities or performing services not including those uses defined as Adult Establishments, such as, or in compatibility with and including the following:
a. Antique store
b. Automobile parts and supply store
c. Barber and Beauty shop
d. Bicycle shop
e. Communication services including: telegram, email, and facsimile forms of communication
f. Computer store
g. Exercise, fitness and tanning spa/salon, not including uses defined in Adult Establishment
h. Floral shop
i. Gift and curio shop
j. Hobby, craft, toy store
k. Jewelry store
l. Laundry and dry cleaning pick-up and delivery stations
m. Locksmith
n. Photographer
o. Picture framing shop
p. Restaurants including drive-ins and facilities having drive through lanes, outdoor cafés, and sidewalk cafés
q. Second hand stores
r. Video store, not including uses defined in Adult Establishment
s. Social club and fraternal organizations, not including uses defined in Adult Establishment
t. Telephone answering service
u. Hardware stores except those defined as a “Big Box”
v. Soda fountains.
w. Variety stores except those defined as a “Big Box”
x. Veterinarian or animal hospital, provided any such building, kennel, or exercise runway is located at least 100 feet away from any (R) District boundary
5.14.03 Conditional Uses: A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the C-3 General Commercial District if a special permit for such use has been obtained in accordance with Article 6 of these regulations.
1. Dry cleaners – establishments (not over 2,000 sq. ft. in floor area) with one dry cleaning unit having a capacity not to exceed 35 pounds per cycle using nonflammable or non-explosive solvents
2. Recreational establishments not including uses defined in Adult Establishments
3. Business or trade school
4. Garden supply, retail garden center, and commercial greenhouses
5. Liquor store
Zoning Districts: Section 5.14 C-3 General Commercial
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 72
6. Taverns, bars, brew pubs, and beer gardens associated with these uses subject to obtaining a Beer Garden Permit as outlined in Municipal Code, not including uses defined in Adult Establishment
7. Car washes
8. Outdoor Entertainment
9. Convenience store with limited fuel sales
10. Residences in conjunction with the principal use when located above the ground floor
11. Churches, temples, seminaries, and convents including residences for teachers and pastors
12. Printing and publishing
13. Retail motor vehicle sales and service
14. Multi-family dwelling units
15. Service station and minor automobile repair services
16. Tire store and minor automobile repair service
17. Public Utility offices, garages, and dispatcher centers pursuant to Section 7.20
18. Mini-Warehouses subject to the following Conditions:
a. The use must be located contiguous to an arterial street as designated in the Comprehensive Plan.
b. There shall be a minimum lot area of one acre.
c. All storage shall be within enclosed buildings.
d. Any side of the building providing doorways to storage areas shall be set back from the property line not less than 35 feet.
e. All driveways, parking, loading and vehicle circulation areas shall be paved with concrete, asphalt or asphaltic concrete. All one-way driveways that provide direct access to cubicles shall provide for one 10-foot parking lane and one travel lane 15 feet in length. All two-way driveways that provide direct access to cubicles shall provide for one 10-foot parking land and two 12-foot travel lanes. Adequate bumper guards or fences shall be provided to prevent the extension of vehicles beyond property lines.
f. All lights shall be shielded to direct light away from adjacent properties.
g. No activities such as miscellaneous or garage sales or the servicing or repair of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawn mowers, and other similar equipment shall be conducted on the premises. Also, no manufacturing, assembly or processing of any product shall be permitted.
h. The Owner or Operator shall properly police the area for removal of trash and debris.
i. Two copies of a plot plan showing ingress and egress, widths of driveways, off-street parking, loading areas, and on-site traffic circulation shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for their consideration with the conditional use application.
j. The Planning Commission and City Council may attach such other conditions as deemed necessary to provide for compatible development.
5.14.04 Temporary Uses: The following temporary uses shall be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit
1. Temporary greenhouses
2. Fireworks stands provided the criteria are met as established by the City through separate Ordinances
3. Buildings and uses incidental to construction work which shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work
4. Temporary structure for festivals or commercial events
5.14.05 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures: The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
1. Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures.
2. Parking as required in Section 7.01 - 7.05
3. Landscaping and screening as required in Section 7.15
4. Fences as required in Section 7.12
5. Signs as required in Section 7.06 – 7.09
6. Dish antennas/mini dishes pursuant to Section 7.11.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.14 C-3 General Commercial
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 73
5.14.06 Height and Lot Requirements: The height and minimum lot requirements shall be follows: The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows:
Uses
Lot Area
(Sq. Ft.)
Lot Width (feet)
Front Yard (feet)
Side Yard (feet)
Rear Yard (feet)
Max. Height
(feet)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Permitted Uses
(3)
-
25
(1)
(2)
45
40%
Multi-family Residential
1,500 per unit (3)
-
25
(1)
(2)
40%
Conditional Uses
1,500 per unit
-
25
(1)
(2)
45
40%
Accessory Uses
-
-
25
(1)
(2)
45
10%
1. None, except that when adjacent to any residential district, the side yard setback shall be 25 feet.
2. None, except that when adjacent to any residential district, the rear yard setback shall be 25 feet, unless there is an alley between the two, in which case the rear yard setback shall be five feet.
3. Minimum Lot Area to be calculated based upon Maximum Lot Coverage, Building footprint, and required ancillary uses like parking and landscaping and Section 5.10.06 unless otherwise noted.
4. A front yard setback of 25 feet is required only when no parking is present in the front yard. If parking is located in the front yard then front yard setback is a minimum of 50 feet.
5.14.07 Miscellaneous Provisions:
1. Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.
2. When adjacent to residentially zoned land, no parking or drives shall be allowed in the required front yard within 15 feet of such district.
3. No outdoor storage, except the display of merchandise for sale to the public, shall be permitted.
4. Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded so that no direct light is cast upon any residential property and so that no glare is visible to any traffic on any public street.
5. Where a site adjoins or is located across an alley from a Residential District, a solid wall or fence or compact evergreen hedge six feet in height may be required on the property line common to such districts, except in a required front yard.
6. Open storage of materials attendant to a permitted use or conditionally permitted use shall be permitted only within an area surrounded or screened by a solid wall or fence.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.15 I-1 Light Industrial
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 74
Section 5.15 I-1 - Light Industrial.
5.15.01 Intent:
This district will provide space for a wide range of industrial uses and structures which are able to meet certain performance standards to protect nearby non-commercial and non-individual uses from undesirable environmental conditions.
Permitted and conditional uses in this district located within the Transportation Corridor Overlay District must adhere to Design Standards.
Adult Entertainment Facilities are included in this Zoning District. The intent of the Wahoo Zoning Ordinance is not to prohibit these uses but to regulate the secondary effects of these uses within the community.
5.15.02Permitted Uses: The following shall be permitted as uses by right:
1. Assembly, manufacture, or preparation of articles and merchandise from the following types of previously prepared materials; bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, honey, horn, lacquer, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, shell, textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood (excluding sawmills, lumber mills, planning mills, and molding plants), yarn, or paint not employing a boiling process.
2. Assembly of electrical appliances or equipment, electronic instruments and devices, radios, phonographs, television, including the manufacture of small parts such as coils, condensers, transformers, crystal holders.
3. Assembly of metal products.
4. Manufacture of figurines, pottery, or similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay.
5. Manufacture of musical instruments, novelties, rubber or metal stamps, toys.
6. Manufacture of optical goods, scientific or precision instruments or equipment.
7. Manufacture of artificial limbs, dentures, hearing aids, surgical instruments or dressings, or other devices employed by the medical and dental professions.
8. Manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment of such products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, dairy products or meat, drugs, perfumes, pharmaceuticals, perfumed toilet soap, toiletries, except that the rendering of fat or oil; fish or meat slaughtering; and processing of fermented food such as sauerkraut, vinegar, or yeast shall be excluded.
9. Manufacture or maintenance of billboards, commercial advertising structures, or name plates.
10. Auto, truck, trailer, or boat storage; truck rental or sales.
11. Automobile painting or upholstering.
12. Building of marine pleasure craft.
13. Building materials storage or sale yard.
14. Bottling Plant.
15. Cabinet or carpenter’s shop.
16. Coin machine manufacturer or repair.
17. Contractor’s equipment storage.
18. Cold storage plant.
19. Dairy products processing.
20. Dwelling for caretaker or watchman working on the property.
21. Electroplating shop.
22. Equipment sales, rental, storage, or repair.
23. Farm machinery sales or service.
24. Fuel supply outlet or distributor, providing no dust is produced.
25. Laundry, dry cleaning, dyeing, or rug cleaning plant.
26. Railroad tracks and facilities such as switching yards, spur or holding tracks, freight depots.
27. Sheet metal shop or other metal working shop, machine shop not using drop hammer or punch press.
28. Plumbing contractor.
29. Warehousing.
30. Welding shop.
31. Wholesale distributor or outlet.
32. Truck and freight terminal or motor freight terminal
Zoning Districts: Section 5.15 I-1 Light Industrial
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 75
5.15.03 Conditional Uses: A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the I-1 Industrial District if a special permit for such use has been obtained in accordance with Article 6 of these regulations.
1. Alcohol distillation and blending plants, including Ethanol processing facilities.
2. Mini-Warehouses subject to the following Conditions:
a. The use must be located contiguous to an arterial street as designated in the Comprehensive Plan.
b. There shall be a minimum lot area of one acre.
c. All storage shall be within enclosed buildings.
d. Any side of the building providing doorways to storage areas shall be set back from the property line not less than 35 feet.
e. All driveways, parking, loading and vehicle circulation areas shall be paved with concrete, asphalt or asphaltic concrete. All one-way driveways that provide direct access to cubicles shall provide for one 10-foot parking lane and one travel lane 15 feet in length. All two-way driveways that provide direct access to cubicles shall provide for one 10-foot parking land and two 12-foot travel lanes. Adequate bumper guards or fences shall be provided to prevent the extension of vehicles beyond property lines.
f. All lights shall be shielded to direct light away from adjacent properties.
g. No activities such as miscellaneous or garage sales or the servicing or repair of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawn mowers, and other similar equipment shall be conducted on the premises. Also, no manufacturing, assembly or processing of any product shall be permitted.
h. The Owner or Operator shall properly police the area for removal of trash and debris.
i. Two copies of a plot plan showing ingress and egress, widths of driveways, off-street parking, loading areas, and on-site traffic circulation shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for their consideration with the conditional use application.
j. The Planning Commission and City Council may attach such other conditions as deemed necessary to provide for compatible development.
3. Expansion of nonconforming uses, structures or land.
4. Child Care Center as a secondary use within the primary Industrial use.
5. Storage of Fireworks as defined by Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-1241 (Reissue of 1997)
6. Adult Entertainment establishments per Section 7.26
7. Recycling and reloading small caliber ammunition for commercial use, subject to the following:
a. Ammunition will not exceed .50 caliber
b. Smokeless powder storage will not exceed 600 lbs. and shall be in ATF approved storage
c. All storage shall be within enclosed buildings
5.15.04 Temporary Uses: The following temporary uses shall be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit
1. Temporary greenhouses.
2. Fireworks stands provided the criteria are met as established by the City through separate Ordinances.
3. Buildings and uses incidental to construction work which shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work.
4. Temporary structure for festivals or commercial events.
5.15.05 Permitted Accessory Uses: The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
1. Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures.
2. Parking as required in Section 7.01 - 7.05
3. Landscaping and screening as required in Section 7.15
4. Fences as required in Section 7.12
5. Signs as required in Section 7.06 – 7.09
6. Dish antennas/mini dishes pursuant to Section 7.11.
5.15.06 Height and Lot Requirements:
1. The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows:
Uses
Lot Area
(Sq. Ft.)
Lot Width (feet)
Front Yard (feet)
Side Yard (feet)
Rear Yard (feet)
Max.
Height
(feet)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Permitted Uses
-
-
25
101
101
45
50%
Conditional Uses
-
-
25
10
20
45
50%
Zoning Districts: Section 5.15 I-1 Light Industrial
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 76
1 Setback shall be increased to 20 feet when adjacent to a Residential District
5.15.07 Miscellaneous Provisions:
1. Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.
2. When adjacent to residentially zoned land, no parking or drives shall be allowed in the required front yard within 15 feet of such district.
3. All waste material shall be screened from view with a solid fence.
4. Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded so that no direct light is cast upon any residential property and so that no glare is visible to any traffic on any public street.
5. Where a site adjoins or is located across an alley from a Residential District, a solid wall or fence eight feet in height may be required on the property line common to such districts, except in a required front yard.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.16 I-2 Heavy Industrial
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 77
Section 5.16 I-2 - Heavy Industrial.
5.16.01 Intent: The intent of this District space for some commercial and a wide range of industrial uses.
Permitted and conditional uses in this district located within the Transportation Corridor Overlay District must adhere to Design Standards.
Adult Entertainment Facilities are included in this Zoning District. The intent of the Wahoo Zoning Ordinance is not to prohibit these uses, but to regulate the secondary effects of these uses within the community.
5.16.02 Permitted Uses: The following shall be permitted as uses by right:
1. Assembly, manufacture, or preparation of articles and merchandise from the following types of previously prepared materials; bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, honey, horn, lacquer, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, shell, textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood (excluding sawmills, lumber mills, planning mills, and molding plants), yarn, or paint not employing a boiling process.
2. Assembly of electrical appliances or equipment, electronic instruments and devices, radios, phonographs, television, including the manufacture of small parts such as coils, condensers, transformers, crystal holders.
3. Assembly of metal products.
4. Manufacture of figurines, pottery, or similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay.
5. Manufacture of musical instruments, novelties, rubber or metal stamps, toys.
6. Manufacture of optical goods, scientific or precision instruments or equipment.
7. Manufacture of artificial limbs, dentures, hearing aids, surgical instruments or dressings, or other devices employed by the medical and dental professions.
8. Manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment of such products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, dairy products or meat, drugs, perfumes, pharmaceuticals, perfumed toilet soap, toiletries.
9. Rendering of fat or oil; fish or meat slaughtering; and processing of fermented food such as sauerkraut, vinegar, or yeast.
10. Manufacture or maintenance of billboards, commercial advertising structures, or name plates.
11. Auto, truck, trailer, or boat storage; truck rental or sales.
12. Automobile painting or upholstering.
13. Building of marine pleasure craft.
14. Building materials storage or sale yard.
15. Bottling Plant.
16. Cabinet or carpenter’s shop.
17. Coin machine manufacturer or repair.
18. Contractor’s equipment storage.
19. Cold storage plant.
20. Dairy products processing.
21. Dwelling for caretaker or watchman working on the property.
22. Electroplating shop.
23. Ethanol Plants.
24. Equipment sales, rental, storage, or repair.
25. Farm machinery sales or service.
26. Fuel supply outlet or distributor, providing no dust is produced.
27. Laundry, dry cleaning, dyeing, or rug cleaning plant.
28. Railroad tracks and facilities such as switching yards, spur or holding tracks, freight depots.
29. Sheet metal shop or other metal working shop, machine shop not using drop hammer or punch press.
30. Plumbing contractor.
31. Warehousing.
32. Welding shop.
33. Wholesale distributor or outlet.
34. Truck and freight terminal or motor freight terminal
35. Aircraft manufacture.
36. Alcoholic beverage manufacture.
37. Asphalt or concrete mixing plant.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.16 I-2 Heavy Industrial
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 78
38. Automobile manufacture.
39. Brick, tile, terra cotta or clay products manufacture.
40. Coal and petroleum products, refining or wholesale storage of petroleum.
41. Concrete, cinder, pumice block manufacture.
42. Emery cloth or sand paper manufacture.
43. Flour and feed milling and storage.
44. Forge plant.
45. Gas (illuminating or heating).
46. Glucose or starch manufacture.
47. Iron, steel, brass or copper foundry, fabrication or works.
48. Nitrating process.
49. Oilcloth or linoleum manufacture.
50. Oiled rubber or leather goods manufacture.
51. Rock crushers.
52. Rolling mills.
53. Rubber, natural or synthetic, or treatment from crude or scrap materials or the manufacture of articles therefrom.
54. Sawmills.
55. Soap manufacture.
56. Stone mill.
57. Sugar manufacture.
58. Tar or asphalt roofing or waterproofing manufacture.
59. Adult Establishments per Section 7.26
5.16.03 Conditional Uses: A building or premise may be used for the following purposes in an I-2 District if a special permit for such a use has been obtained in accordance with Article 6 of these regulations.
1. Abattoirs or slaughter houses, including meat packing plants.
2. Automobile or machine wrecking and salvage yards.
3. Crematory.
4. Dyestuff manufacture.
5. Fat rendering or tallow, grease or lard refining or manufacturing of products from fats.
6. Fertilizer and industrial chemical manufacture.
7. Fireworks or explosive manufacture or storage or the handling or explosives.
8. Gas manufacture or storage (other than illuminating or heating).
9. Gelatin, glue or size manufacture or process involving recovery from animal material.
10. Incineration of other reduction of garbage.
11. Junk yards, including the handling and bailing of paper, rags, or junk of other description pursuant to Section 7.21.
12. The manufacture of cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris.
13. Pulp mills.
14. Pyroxylin or celluloid manufacture, or explosives or inflammable cellulose or pyroxylin products manufacture.
15. Stock yards.
16. Tanning, curing, or storage of raw hides or skins.
17. Paper Manufacturing
18. Mini-Warehouses subject to the following Conditions:
a. The use must be located contiguous to an arterial street as designated in the Comprehensive Plan.
b. There shall be a minimum lot area of one acre.
c. All storage shall be within enclosed buildings.
d. Any side of the building providing doorways to storage areas shall be set back from the property line not less than 35 feet.
e. All driveways, parking, loading and vehicle circulation areas shall be paved with concrete, asphalt or asphaltic concrete. All one-way driveways that provide direct access to cubicles shall provide for one 10-foot parking lane and one travel lane 15 feet in length. All two-way driveways that provide direct access to cubicles shall provide for one 10-foot parking land and two 12-foot travel lanes. Adequate bumper guards or fences shall be provided to prevent the extension of vehicles beyond property lines.
f. All lights shall be shielded to direct light away from adjacent properties.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.16 I-2 Heavy Industrial
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 79
g. No activities such as miscellaneous or garage sales or the servicing or repair of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawn mowers, and other similar equipment shall be conducted on the premises. Also, no manufacturing, assembly or processing of any product shall be permitted.
h. The Owner or Operator shall properly police the area for removal of trash and debris.
i. Two copies of a plot plan showing ingress and egress, widths of driveways, off-street parking, loading areas, and on-site traffic circulation shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for their consideration with the conditional use application.
j. The Planning Commission and City Council may attach such other conditions as deemed necessary to provide for compatible development.
19. Expansion of nonconforming uses, structures or land.
5.16.04 Temporary Uses: The following temporary uses shall be permitted provided a Temporary Use Permit is obtained and said temporary use is eliminated at the expiration of the permit
1. Temporary greenhouses.
2. Fireworks stands provided the criteria are met as established by the City through separate Ordinances.
3. Buildings and uses incidental to construction work which shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work.
4. Temporary structure for festivals or commercial events.
5.16.05 Permitted Accessory Uses: The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
1. Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures.
2. Parking as required in Section 7.01 - 7.05
3. Landscaping and screening as required in Section 7.15
4. Fences as required in Section 7.12
5. Signs as required in Section 7.06 – 7.09
6. Dish antennas/mini dishes pursuant to Section 7.11.
5.16.06 Height and Lot Requirements:
1. The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows:
Uses
Lot Area
(Sq. Ft.)
Lot Width (feet)
Front Yard (feet)
Side Yard (feet)
Rear Yard (feet)
Max.
Height
(feet)
Max. Lot
Coverage
Permitted Uses
-
-
25
101
101
45
50%
Conditional Uses
-
-
25
10
20
45
50%
1 Setback shall be increased to 20 feet when adjacent to a Residential District
5.16.07 Miscellaneous Provisions:
1. Supplementary regulations shall be complied with as defined herein.
2. When adjacent to residentially zoned land, no parking or drives shall be allowed in the required front yard within 15 feet of such district.
3. All waste material shall be screened from view with a solid fence.
4. Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded so that no direct light is cast upon any residential property and so that no glare is visible to any traffic on any public street.
5. Where a site adjoins or is located across an alley from a Residential District, a solid wall or fence eight feet in height may be required on the property line common to such districts, except in a required front yard.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.17 FF?FW Flood Plain
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 80
SECTION 5.17 FF/FW FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICTS
5.17.01 Statutory Authorization
The legislature of the State of Nebraska has in Sec. 19-901 R.R.S. 1943 delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt zoning regulations designed to protect the health, safety and general welfare. The Legislature, in Section 31-1001 to 31-1022, R.R.S. 1943 (as amended) has further assigned the responsibility to adopt, administer, and enforce floodplain management regulations to the county, city or village with zoning jurisdiction over the flood-prone area. Therefore, the Mayor and City Council of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska, ordains as follows:
5.17.02 Findings of Fact
1. Flood Losses Resulting from Periodic Inundation
The flood hazard areas of Wahoo, Nebraska, are subject to inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
2. General Causes of the Flood Losses
These flood losses are caused by: (1) The cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, (2) The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to others, which are inadequately elevated or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.
5.17.03 Methods Used To Analyze Flood Hazards. This ordinance uses a reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which consists of a series of interrelated steps.
1. Selection of a regulatory flood which is based upon engineering calculations which permit a consideration of such flood factors as its expected frequency of occurrence, the area inundated, and the depth of inundation. The base flood is selected for this ordinance. It is representative of large floods which are reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on the particular streams subject to this ordinance. It is in the general order of a flood which could be expected to have a one percent (1%) chance of occurrence in any one year, as delineated on the Federal Insurance Administration’s Flood Insurance Study, Saunders County, Nebraska and Incorporated Areas, and illustrative materials dated August 3, 2016 as amended.
2. Calculation of water surface profiles based on a hydraulic engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream channel and overbank areas to convey the base flood.
3. Computation of the floodway required to convey this flood without increasing flood heights more than 1 foot at any point.
4. Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no obstruction is permitted which would cause any water surface increase along the floodway profile.
5. Delineation of floodway fringe, i.e. that area outside the floodway encroachment lines, but which still is subject to inundation by the base flood.
5.17.04 Statement of Purpose
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize those losses described in Section 5.17.02 (2) by applying the provisions of this ordinance to:
1. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood heights or velocities.
2. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities which serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of initial construction.
3. Protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazard.
4. Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the community to purchase flood insurance in the National Flood Insurance Program.
5.17.05 Zoning Administrator Responsibilities
1. The Zoning Administrator hereby has these added responsibilities and is authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this Ordinance and all other Ordinances of the City of Wahoo now in force or hereafter adopted, related to zoning, subdivision or building codes.
2. The Zoning Administrator shall be appointed to these additional responsibilities by of the City Council and his/her appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service. During
Zoning Districts: Section 5.17 FF?FW Flood Plain
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 81
temporary absence or disability of the Zoning Administrator, the City Council of the City shall designate an acting administrator.
5.17.06 Designation of Current FHBM/FIRM
The City Council of the City of Wahoo hereby designates the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) Index # 331155CINDOB Saunders County, Nebraska and Incorporated Areas, dated August 3, 2016, as well as all associated panels, and any revisions thereto, as the official map to be used in determining those areas of special flood hazard.
This ordinance shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Wahoo identified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) Index # 31155CINDOB dated August 3, 2016, as well as all associated panels, as numbered and unnumbered A Zones (including AE, AO and AH Zones) and within the FF/FW Zoning District established in this ordinance. In all areas covered by this ordinance no development shall be permitted except upon the issuance of a floodplain permit to develop, granted by the City of Wahoo or its duly designated representative under such safeguards and restrictions as the City of Wahoo or the designated representative may reasonably impose for the promotion and maintenance of the general welfare, health of the inhabitants of the community and where specifically noted in Sections 5.17.09, 5.17.06.1.b and 5.17.06.2.b.
The boundaries of the floodway and flood fringe overlay districts shall be determined by scaling distances on the official zoning map or on the Flood Insurance Rate Map or Floodway Map. Where interpretation is needed to the exact location of the boundaries of the districts as shown on the official zoning map, as for example where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the Zoning Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. In such cases where the interpretation is contested, the Board of Adjustments will resolve the dispute. The regulatory flood elevation for the point in question shall be the governing factor in locating the district boundary on the land. The person contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to the Board of Adjustments and to submit his own technical evidence, if he so desires.
Along watercourses where a floodway has been established, the mapped floodplain areas are hereby divided into the two following districts: A floodway overlay district (FW) and a flood fringe overlay district (FF) as identified in the Flood Insurance Study and accompanying maps. Within these districts all uses not meeting the standards of this ordinance and those standards of the underlying zoning district shall be prohibited.
1. FLOODWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT
a. Permitted Uses. Only uses having a low flood-damage potential and not obstructing flood flows shall be permitted within the Floodway District to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance. The following are recommended uses for the Floodway District:
i. Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, nurseries, forestry.
ii. Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking and play areas.
iii. Non-residential areas such as loading areas, parking and airport landing strips.
iv. Public and private recreational uses such as golf courses, archery ranges, picnic grounds, parks, wildlife and nature preserves.
b. Standards for the Floodway Overlay District. New structures for human habitation are prohibited. All encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development must be prohibited unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that the development shall not result in any increase in water surface elevations along the floodway profile during occurrence of the base flood discharge. These uses are subject to the standards of Section 5.17.09.
2. FLOOD FRINGE OVERLAY DISTRICT (INCLUDING AO AND AH ZONES)
a. Permitted Uses. Any use permitted in the Floodway Overlay District shall be permitted in the Flood Fringe Overlay District. No use shall be permitted in the District unless the standards of Section 5.17.09 are met.
b. Standards for Flood Fringe Overlay District.
i. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above one foot above the base flood elevation.
ii. New construction or substantial improvement of non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above one foot above the base flood
Zoning Districts: Section 5.17 FF?FW Flood Plain
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 82
elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed and floodproofed so that below the level one foot above the base flood level, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator.
iii. All new construction and substantial improvements that have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
iv. Appurtenant structures, such as detached garages and storage sheds that are no greater than 400 square feet in area, used exclusively for storage of motor vehicles, and storage of other items readily removable in the event of a flood warning may have their lowest floor below one foot above the base flood elevation, provided the structure is capable of withstanding hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces caused by the base flood and provided that no utilities are installed in the structure except elevated or flood proofed electrical fixtures. If the structure is converted to another use, it must be brought into full compliance with the minimum standards governing such use.
v. Within AH zones adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be required in order to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
vi. Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Section 5.17.03 are areas designated as AO zones. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore the following provisions apply within AO zones:
1. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as one foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community’s FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified).
2. All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall:
a. Have the lowest floor elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as one foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community’s FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified), or
b. Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Such certification shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator.
3. Adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be required in order to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
5.17.07 Permits Required
Permits Required: No person, firm or corporation shall initiate any floodplain development or substantial improvement or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate permit for development as defined in this ordinance.
1. Within special flood hazard areas on the official map, separate floodplain development permits are required for all new construction, substantial improvements and other developments, including the placement of manufactured homes.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.17 FF?FW Flood Plain
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 83
2. Application: To obtain a floodplain development permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefore in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every such application shall:
a. Identify and describe the development to be covered by the floodplain development permit for which application is made.
b. Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be done by lot, block, tract and house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or development.
c. Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed development is intended.
d. Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed construction.
e. Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority.
f. Within designated floodplain areas, be accompanied by elevations of the lowest floor, including basement, or in the case of floodproofed non-residential structures, the elevation to which it shall be floodproofed. Documentation or certification of such elevations will be maintained by the Zoning Administrator.
g. Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the Zoning Administrator (i.e., require a statement from the applicant that they are aware that elevating or floodproofing structures above the minimum levels will result in premium reduction, especially in the case of non-residential floodproofing when a minus one foot penalty is assessed at the time of rating the structure for the policy premium.)
5.17.08 Development Permit Application Review
The Zoning Administrator shall review all development permit applications to determine if the site of the proposed development is reasonably safe from flooding and that all necessary permits have been received as required by Federal or State Law. No permit for development shall be granted for new construction, substantial improvements and other development(s) including the placement of manufactured homes within all numbered and unnumbered zones (including AE, AO, and AH zones) unless the conditions of Section 5.17.09 are satisfied.
5.17.09 All Applications Review
The Zoning Administrator, in reviewing all applications for new construction, substantial improvements, prefabricated buildings, placement of manufactured homes and other development(s) (as defined in Section 5.17.23 of this Ordinance) will:
1. Obtain, review and reasonably utilize, if available, any regulatory flood elevation data and floodway data available from Federal, State or other sources, until such other data is provided by the Federal Insurance Administration in a Flood Insurance Study; and require within special flood hazard areas (A Zones) on the official map that the following performance standards be met:
a. That until a floodway has been designated - No development or substantial improvement may be permitted within special flood hazard areas unless the applicant has demonstrated that the proposed development or substantial improvement, when combined with all other existing and reasonably anticipated developments or substantial improvements, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any location shown on the Flood Insurance Study.
b. Residential Construction - New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation.
c. Non-residential Construction - New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other non-residential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below such a level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator.
d. Require for all new construction and substantial improvements - That fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
Zoning Districts: Section 5.17 FF?FW Flood Plain
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 84
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
2. Require the use of construction materials that are resistant to flood damage.
3. Require the use of construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.
4. Require that new structures be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
5. New structures to be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
6. Assure that all manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Manufactured homes must be anchored in accordance with State laws, local building codes and FEMA guidelines. In the event that over-the-top frame ties to ground anchors are used, the following specific requirements (or their equivalent) shall be met:
a. Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the manufactured home with two additional ties per side at the intermediate locations and manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side.
b. Frame ties to be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points and manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side.
c. All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds.
d. Any additions to manufactured homes be similarly anchored.
7. Assure that all manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within special flood hazard areas on the community's official map on sites:
a. Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
b. In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
c. In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
d. In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.17.09 (6).
8. Assure that manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within special flood hazard areas on the community's official map that are not subject to the provisions of Section 5.17.09 (7). be elevated so that either:
a. The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation, or
b. The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.19.09 (6).
9. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within the identified special flood hazard areas on the community's official map either (i) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit requirements and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" of this ordinance. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.17 FF?FW Flood Plain
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 85
5.17.10 Subdivision Applications
The Zoning Administrator shall review all subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding.
The City Council of the City shall review all subdivision applications and other proposed new developments (including manufactured home parks or subdivisions) and shall make findings of fact and assure that:
1. All such proposed developments are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
2. Subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions), greater than five acres or 50 lots, whichever is lesser, include within such proposals regulatory flood elevation data in special flood hazard areas.
3. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
4. All public utilities and facilities are located so as to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
5.17.11 Water and Sewage Systems
New and replacement water and sewage systems shall be constructed to eliminate or minimize infiltration by, or discharge into floodwaters. Moreover, on-site waste disposal systems will be designed to avoid impairment or contamination during flooding.
5.17.12 Storage of Material and Equipment
The storage or processing of materials that are in time of flooding buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.
5.17.13 Flood Carrying Capacity Within any Water Course
The City Council of the City will ensure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. The City will notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State Coordinating Office (Nebraska Natural Resources Commission) prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Moreover, the City will work with appropriate State and Federal agencies in every way possible in complying with the National Flood Insurance Program in accordance with the National Disaster Protection Act of 1973.
5.17.14 Variance Procedures
1. The Board of Adjustment as established by City Council shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance.
2. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance.
3. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the District Court as provided in Section 19-912, R.R.S. 1943.
4. In passing upon such applications, the Board of Adjustment shall consider all technical evaluation, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, and;
the danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
a. the danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
b. the susceptibility of proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
c. the importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
d. the necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
e. the availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
f. the compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
Zoning Districts: Section 5.17 FF?FW Flood Plain
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 86
g. the relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;
h. the safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
I. the expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and,
II. the costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.
5. Conditions for Variances
a. Generally variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items (5.17.14 (5) (b-e below) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
b. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
c. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
d. Variances shall only be issued upon (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
e. The applicant shall be given a written notice over the signature of a community official that (1) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage and (2) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required by this ordinance.
5.17.15 Non-Conforming Use
1. A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the passage or amendment of the ordinance, but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance may be continued subject to the following conditions:
a. If such use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to this ordinance. The Utility Department shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of instances of nonconforming uses where utility services have been discontinued for a period of 12 months.
b. Uses or adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances shall not be entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
2. If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred except that if it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. This limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, building, or safety codes or regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
5.17.16 Penalties for Violation
Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $500.00, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.17 FF?FW Flood Plain
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 87
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City Council or other appropriate authority from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
5.17.17 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
It is not intended by this ordinance to repeal, abrogate or impair any existent easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provision of this ordinance shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
5.17.18 Interpretation
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the City Council and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal, of any other powers granted by state statutes.
5.17.19 Warning and Disclaimer or Liability
The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood height may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This ordinance does not imply that areas outside floodplain district boundaries or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damage. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of The City of Wahoo or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that may result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
5.17.20 Severability
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this ordinance is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
5.17.21 Appeal
Where a request for a permit to develop or a variance is denied by the Zoning Administrator the applicant may apply for such permit or variance directly to the Board of Appeals.
5.17.22 Conflicting Ordinances
This ordinance shall take precedence over conflicting Ordinances or parts of Ordinances. The City Council of the City of Wahoo may, from time to time, amend this Ordinance to reflect any and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973. The regulations of this Ordinance are in compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations as published in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations and the 1983 Nebraska Floodplain Management Act.
5.17.23 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.
“Appeal” means a request for a review of the Zoning Administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a variance.
“Appurtenant Structure” shall mean a structure on the same parcel of property as the principal structure, the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
“Area of Shallow Flooding” means a designated AO or AH zone on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
"Base Flood" means the flood having one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
"Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
"Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.17 FF?FW Flood Plain
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 88
“Existing Construction” means (for the purpose of determining rates) structures for which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1l, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. “Existing Construction” may also be referred to as “existing structures.”
"Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is complete before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
"Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
"Flood" or Flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: (1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters. (2) The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
“Flood Fringe” is that area of the floodplain, outside of the floodway, that on the average is likely to be flooded once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one percent chance of flood occurrence in any one year).
"Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means an official map of a community, on which the Flood Insurance Study has delineated the Flood Hazard Boundaries and the zones establishing insurance rates applicable to the community.
“Flood Insurance Study” is the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary Floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
“Floodplain” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of “flooding”).
"Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
"Floodway" or “Regulatory Floodway” means the channel of the river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
“Freeboard” means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. “Freeboard” tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, clogged bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
“Highest Adjacent Grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
"Historic Structure" means any structure that is: (a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: (1) By an approved state
Zoning Districts: Section 5.17 FF?FW Flood Plain
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 89
program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
"Lowest Floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance.
"Manufactured Home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
"Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
"New Construction" For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
"New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
“Obstruction” shall mean any wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation (including the alteration or relocation of a watercourse or drainway), channel, rectification, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, stored equipment or material, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, or other analogous structure or matter which may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either by itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or that is placed where the natural flow of the water would carry such structure or natter downstream to the damage or detriment of either life or property. Dams designed to store or divert water are not obstructions if permission for the construction thereof is obtained from the Nebraska Department of Natural Resources pursuant to the Safety of Dams and Reservoirs Act (Section 46-1601 to 46-1670 R.R.S., 1943 as amended.)
"100-Year Flood" means the condition of flooding having a one percent chance of annual occurrence.
“Overlay District” is a district in which additional requirements act in conjunction with the underlying zoning district(s). The original zoning district designation does not change.
"Principally Above Ground" means that at least 51 percent of the actual cash value of the structure is above ground.
"Recreational Vehicle" means a vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
"Regulatory Flood Elevation" means the water surface elevation of the 100-year flood.
"Special Flood Hazard Area" is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
"Start of Construction" [for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)] includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
Zoning Districts: Section 5.17 FF?FW Flood Plain
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 90
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
"Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home, and a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
"Substantial Damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
"Substantial Improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure."
"Variance" means a grant of relief to a person from the terms of a floodplain management ordinance which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
"Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.18 RMD Residential/ Mixed Use Development
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 91
Section 5.18 Residential / Mixed use Development District (RMD).
5.18.01 Intent:
The Residential / Mixed use Development District (RMD) is to encourage the creative design of new living and retail areas, as distinguished from subdivisions of standard lot sizes, in order to permit such creative design in buildings, open space, while promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of existing and future residents of surrounding neighborhoods.
Permitted and conditional uses in this district located within the Transportation Corridor Overlay District must adhere to Design Standards.
5.18.02 Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted in the Residential / Mixed use Development District provided the requirements of this Article are met.
1. Single-family dwellings
2. Townhouses pursuant to Section 7.22 and Condominiums containing three or fewer dwellings
5.18.03 Conditional Uses: The following uses may be allowed through the approval of a Conditional Use Permit, as established by this Ordinance, provided all noted, as well as any special conditions required by the City Council are met.
1. Churches, temples, seminaries, and convents, including residences for pastors and teachers.
2. Private recreation areas and facilities, including lakes, ponds, country clubs, golf courses, and swimming pools.
3. Overhead and underground utility main transmission lines including but not limited to power, telephone, gas, fuel, or fertilizer lines, substations, terminal facilities, and reservoirs.
4. Commercial uses provided the following are met as a minimum:
a. Established as part of a mixed use development
b. That the commercial use is consistent with the residential uses of the development
c. The commercial use does not create any secondary effects that impact the health, safety, general welfare and morals of the other uses
d. The residential density exceeds the density of the commercial uses
e. The commercial uses provide ordinary services associated with residential uses
f. The commercial uses provide solid and/or natural buffering when adjacent to residential lots as required in Sections 7.15 of this Ordinance.
g. Proper access shall be provided to all commercial uses
5. Multi-family structures containing more than three dwelling units provided the following are met as a minimum:
a. Established as part of a mixed use development
b. The multi-family density does not exceed the density of the single family density
c. The multi-family dwellings provide solid and/or natural buffering when adjacent to single-family lots as required in Sections 7.15 of this Ordinance.
d. Proper access shall be provided to all multi-family units
6. Community centers and/or clubhouses provided the Development Plan required under Section 5.18.06(3) below reflects the location of such use and the structure is compatible with other structures within the development.
7. Townhouses pursuant to Section 7.22 and Condominiums containing more than three dwellings.
5.18.04 Permitted Accessory Uses:
1. Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures and to uses and structures permitted as conditional uses in accordance with Section 4.12 of this Ordinance.
2. Private swimming pools, tennis courts, and other recreational facilities in conjunction with a residence.
3. Temporary building(s) or structure(s) incidental to construction work may exist on said lot no longer than 60 days from date of expiration of building permit.
4. Signs as required in Section 7.06 – 7.09.
5. Parking as required in Section 7.01 - 7.05.
6. Home Occupations as required in Section 7.10.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.18 RMD Residential/ Mixed Use Development
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 92
5.18.05 Height and Lot Requirements:
1. The height and minimum lot requirements shall be as follows (the requirements of this district shall override any underlying district):
Uses
Lot Area
(Square feet)
Lot
Width
(feet)
Front
Yard
(feet)
Side
Yard
(feet)
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Max. Lot
Coverage
(percent)
Single Family
4,000
40
*
*
*
35
*
Multi-Family
1,500 per unit**
60
25
7 or 10 if over 30’ in height
25
40
Townhouses, Condominiums
2,520
25
*
*
*
*
*
Other Permitted Uses
*
*
*
*
*
40
*
Accessory Buildings
---
---
*
*
*
15
*
* lot and yard requirements are dependent upon the development and may vary depending upon areas being conserved or special amenities being used or established and will be reviewed upon submittal of the Development Plan
** Minimum Lot size is 7,500 square feet.
5.18.06 Supplemental Requirements
1. The Planning Commission, in its minutes, shall set forth its reasons for recommendation of approval or denial of the application for a RMD plan approval, along with specific evidence and facts showing that the proposal meets or does not meet the following conditions.
a. Said RMD shall be in general conformity with the provisions of the Wahoo Comprehensive Plan.
b. Said RMD shall not have a substantially adverse effect on the development of the neighboring area.
c. The minimum size allowed for a RMD District by type of use shall be as follows:
Residential (only), three acres;
Residential - Commercial (combination), five acres.
d. Height, bulk, and yard requirements shall be reflected on the Development Plan and shall promote an efficient and creative use of land.
2. Use Limitations:
In District RMD no building, structure, land, or premises shall be used, and no building shall be erected, constructed, or altered, except for any use permitted in this District. All uses must be approved as shown on the Development Plan as specified in this division.
3. Standards and conditions for development:
A development proposed for land classified as the RMD district shall be consistent with the following general standards for use of land, and the use, type, bulk, and location of buildings, the density or intensity of use, open space, public facilities, and the Development Plan shall, where applicable, reflect compliance.
a. The applicant shall satisfy the Planning Commission and City Council that there is the ability to carry out the proposed plan, including financial assurances and the phasing of the project, and shall prepare and submit a schedule of construction, if necessary. The proposed construction shall begin within a period of 12 months following the approval of the final application by the City Council. A minimum of 50 percent of the total planned construction shown on the final plan shall be completed within a period of five years following such approval or the approval shall expire. If the approval expires under this section, the applicant shall show good cause to the Planning Commission to extend the plan approval.
b. The developer shall provide and record easements and covenants, shall make such other arrangements, and shall furnish such performance bonds, escrow deposit, or other financial guarantees for public improvements as may be determined by the City Council to be reasonably required to assure performance in accordance with the Development Plan and to protect the public interest in the event of abandonment of said plan before completion.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.18 RMD Residential/ Mixed Use Development
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 93
c. The site shall be accessible from public roads that are adequate to carry the traffic that will be imposed upon them by the proposed development. The streets and driveways on the site of the proposed development shall be adequate to serve the residents or occupants of the proposed development.
d. The development shall not impose an undue burden on public services and facilities, such as fire and police protection.
e. The entire tract or parcel of land to be occupied by the RMD development shall be held in single ownership or control, or if there are two or more owners, the application for such RMD development shall be filed jointly by all owners. This provision may be waived provided that the land contains existing improvements.
f. The location and arrangement of structures, parking areas, walks, lighting, and appurtenant facilities shall be compatible with the surrounding land uses, and any part of a RMD development not used for structures, parking and loading areas, or access ways shall be landscaped or otherwise improved as shown on the Development Plan.
g. Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the parking and loading regulations of the City of Wahoo.
h. When a commercial use within a RMD District abuts a residential district, the Development Plan shall reflect screening consisting of landscaping and/or fencing provided adjacent to any adjoining residential district; except in the event the adjacent residential use and the commercial use are separated by a street right-of-way.
i. All residential and commercial buildings shall set back not less than 25 feet from the perimeter of the land zoned RMD. Additional setback from a heavily traveled thoroughfare may be required, when found reasonable by the planning commission for protection of health, safety, and general welfare.
j. Building coverage area shall not exceed the following percentages of the net developable area of each individual parcel of the total development:
Residential: 60 percent maximum;
Commercial: 50 percent maximum.
NOTE: Building coverage area, is the area covered by building(s) or structure(s) on each individual lot or parcel (not including such impervious improvements such as but not limited to walkways, driveways, patios etc). The net developable area shall be the area of each parcel and the net of any required yard required under the Development Plan. The Development Plan shall reflect the calculations used to demonstrate compliance with this requirement.
k. A minimum of 20 percent of the net area of that part of a RMD development reserved for residential use shall be provided for Common Areas as defined by these regulations under subsection (p) below. The term “net area” shall be the gross area, measured in square feet, of the Development Plan devoted to residential use less the area dedicated for public streets. Common Areas shall be defined as playgrounds, street medians, landscaped green space, or other similar areas designed to be used by the residents of the development in common with each other. Common Areas for the leisure and recreation of development residents shall be owned and maintained in common by them, through a homeowner's association.
l. The RMD District shall include such provisions for the ownership and maintenance of the Common Areas as are reasonably necessary to insure its continuity, care, conservation, and maintenance, and to insure that remedial measures will be available to the City Council if the common open space is permitted to deteriorate, or is not maintained in a condition consistent with the best interests of the planned unit development or of the entire community. The applicant shall submit any protective covenants and organizational documents of the homeowner’s association with the Development Plan.
m. No residential use shall have direct access onto an arterial street unless approved by the City Council in the Development Plan.
n. Any commercial use must reflect its traffic flow on the Development Plan. All commercial areas must have indirect access via a collector or arterial street; however, no individual commercial use may have direct access onto collector or arterial streets.
o. Sidewalks shall be built to City specifications along all public and private streets; however, an alternative pedestrian and sidewalk plan may be developed which provides pedestrian access between each use in the RMD development.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.18 RMD Residential/ Mixed Use Development
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 94
p. Common Areas as defined under this zoning district shall mean land area of the site not covered by buildings, parking, structures, community buildings, or accessory structures, except recreational structures. Common Areas shall include open space that is accessible and available to all owners or residents in common pursuant to an Owner’s Association.
5.18.07 Application for approval of Residential / Mixed Use Development:
1. An application for a RMD shall be handled in the same manner prescribed for amending this Ordinance. The same requirements for notice, advertisement of public hearing, protests, and adoption shall be required as zoning changes.
2. The applicant shall prepare and submit 6 copies, plus an electronic file in a “.pdf” format, of the development plan (the “Development Plan”) of the proposed development in the RMD District for review and approval by the Planning Commission. The Development Plan shall include:
a. A site plan showing:
 Contours at intervals of two feet or spot elevations on a one hundred foot grid shall be required on flat land;
 Location, size, height, and use of all proposed structures and proposed yards on each lot;
 All points of ingress and egress, driveways, circulation aisles, parking lots, parking spaces, and service areas;
 All streets adjoining subject property and the width of the existing right-of-way;
 Areas set aside for Common Areas with the type of use or recreational facilities planned for each;
 Designation of individual parcels if the proposed development is to be set up in separate construction phases;
 Designation of individual lots if such lots are proposed to be sold to individual owners;
 Location of required screening;
 Location of natural features such as ponds, tree clusters, and rock outcropping;
 Existing development on adjacent properties within 200 feet.
b The above-described site plan shall also include a section designated as "general provisions," and said section shall include the following when, said items are applicable:
 Net area in square feet of the development. (Note: Net area shall be computed as the gross area less the land dedicated or necessary to be dedicated for public street right-of-way.
 Density of dwelling units per acre of the total dwelling units for the entire plan.
 Building coverage of the net area of the development by individual parcel or total development.
 The percentage of the Development Plan provided for common open space as defined by this regulation. (Note: 20 percent is the minimum).
 If more than one parcel is proposed, a statement relating to the sequence of development shall be included.
 Required number of parking spaces and location.
 Gross floor area proposed for commercial buildings.
 All proposed land uses shall be listed by parcel.
c. A statement or adequate drawings shall be included describing the manner for the disposition of sanitary waste and storm water.
d. The full legal description of the boundaries of the property or properties to be included in the RMD development.
e. A vicinity map showing the general arrangement of streets within an area of 1,000 feet from the boundaries of the proposed RMD development.
f. An elevation drawing of the general characteristics of the proposed buildings may be submitted if the applicant desires.
g. When a RMD development includes provisions for common space and/or recreational facilities, a statement describing how such open space and/or facility be owned and maintained when not under the ownership of a governmental entity. A homeowner association or other controlling entity shall provide the City of Wahoo with copies of the proposed articles of incorporation and bylaws of such entity.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.18 RMD Residential/ Mixed Use Development
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 95
3. The Planning Commission shall meet within 45 business days of an application being filed. Plans shall be filed with the City at least four weeks prior to a scheduled Planning Commission meeting in accordance with Appendix “A”. After the application for an RMD development is filed, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on said development after giving required notice for hearings in amendments. Said public hearing may be adjourned from time to time and, within a reasonable period of time after the conclusion of said public hearing, the planning commission shall prepare and transmit to the City Council and the applicant specific findings of fact with respect to the extent which the Development Plan complies with those regulations, together with its recommendations in respect to the action to be taken on the Development Plan and RMD requirements. The planning commission may recommend disapproval, approval, or approval with amendments, conditions or restrictions.
4. The City Council shall or shall not approve the Development Plan and authorize the submitting of the final Development Plan.
5. Substantial or significant changes in the preliminary plat and RMD design shall only be made after rehearing and reapproval unless the changes were otherwise required by the Planning Commission or the City Council.
5.18.08 Final approval:
1. After approval of a Development Plan and prior to the issuance of any building permit or zoning permit, the applicant shall submit an application for final approval with the RMD development compliance review committee. The RMD development compliance committee shall consist of members of the Wahoo Planning Commission, Wahoo City Council, the Zoning Administrator, the Wahoo City Attorney, and/ or the Wahoo City Engineer; this committee will be assembled only on an as needed basis. Said final application may include the entire RMD District or may be for a unit or section thereof as set forth in the approval of the preliminary plan. The application shall include 11 copies of such drawings, specifications, covenants, easements, conditions, and any other conditions including but not limited to performance bonds as set forth in the approval of the Development Plan preliminary plan and in accordance with the conditions established in this chapter for a RMD District. The final plan shall include the same information, as the preliminary plan except the following shall also be provided:
a. A surveyor's certificate certifying to the accuracy of the boundary surveys shown.
b. Location, names, tangent lengths, centerline radius of each curve and its interior width and angle of all proposed public right-of-way;
c. All easements and appropriate building setback lines;
d. All lot lines, and lot dimensions including chord distances for curvilinear lot lines;
e. Lot and/or parcel numbers;
f. Location, size, height, and use of all proposed or present buildings;
g. Dedication of all streets, public highways, or other land intended for public use, signed by the owner and by all other parties who have a mortgage or lien interest in the property, together with any restrictions or covenants which apply to the property.
h. A waiver of claim by the applicant for damages occasioned by the establishment of grades or the alteration of the surface of any portion of streets and alleys to conform to grades established.
2. A plan submitted for final approval shall be deemed to be in substantial compliance with the plan previously given tentative approval, provided any modification of the Development Plan does not:
a. Vary the proposed gross residential density or intensity of use by more than five percent or involve a reduction in the area set aside for common open space, nor the substantial relocation of such area; nor
b. Increase by more than 10 percent the floor area proposed for non-residential use; nor
c. Increase by more than five percent the total ground area covered by buildings nor involve a substantial change in the height of buildings.
d. Substantially change the design of the plan so as to significantly alter:
 Pedestrian or vehicular traffic flow.
 The juxtaposition of different land uses.
 The relation of open space to residential development.
 The proposed phasing of construction.
 Proposed use of one or more buildings to a more intensive use category as delineated in this chapter.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.18 RMD Residential/ Mixed Use Development
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 96
3. A public hearing need not be held for the approval of a final plan if it is in substantial compliance with the approved preliminary plan. The planning commission shall, within 45 business days of the time of filing, review the final plan for compliance with the approved preliminary plan. Upon review approval, said final plan shall be filed with the City Council for final approval and acceptance.
4. In the event that the final plan submitted contains changes in excess of those permitted under Subparagraph (2) above, applicant shall resubmit the original plan. The Development Plan shall be modified in the same manner prescribed in this division as for original approval.
5.18.09 Enforcement and modification of plan:
1. To further the mutual interest of the residents and owners of the RMD development and of the public in the preservation of the integrity of the RMD plan, as finally approved, and to insure that modifications, if any, in the plan shall not impair the reasonable reliance of the said residents and owners upon the provisions of the plan, nor result in changes that would adversely affect the public interest, the enforcement and modification of the provisions of the plan as finally approved, whether recorded by plan, covenant, easement or otherwise, shall be subject to the following provisions:
a. The use of land and the use, bulk, and location of buildings and structures; and
b. The quality and location of common space; and
c. The intensity of use or the density of residential units shall run in favor of the City and
d. Shall be enforceable in law or in equity, by the City, without limitation on any powers or regulation otherwise granted by law. The development of any land pursuant to an approved Development Plan shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of Section 10 and the approved Development Plan.
5.18.10 Amendments:
The RMD District agreement or an approved Development Plan may be amended in the same manner prescribed in this division for approval of a preliminary or final plan. Application for amendment maybe made by the homeowner's association or 51 percent of the owners of the property within the RMD District.
5.18.11 Platting.
For unplatted tracts or tracts being replatted, the approval of the Development Plan shall be considered as the approval of a preliminary plan. To complete the platting process, the applicant need only submit a final plat. Said final plat shall be in accordance with the subdivision regulations, except the scale shall be either 100 feet, 50 feet, or 20 feet to the inch.
5.18.12 Fees.
For the following applications, fees shall be paid to the City:
1. Development Plan , filing fee shall be set by the City Council by separate ordinance;
2. Final plan , filing fee shall be set by the City Council by separate ordinance.
These fees are separate and do not include any Preliminary and Final Plat Fees and/or any Change of Zone Fees required by the City of Wahoo.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.19 LWC Lake Wanahoo Conservation District
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (rev. 06/06/2019) 97
Section 5.19 LWC – Lake Wanahoo Conservation District
5.19.01 Intent:
The intent of this district is to establish development standards that will allow for the continuation of existing land uses while protecting the publics’ interest. This District shall provide for the possible construction of a flood control and flood mitigation structure on Sand Creek and provide for public outdoor recreation and open space opportunities adjacent to said project. As the primary purpose of this district is the conservation of the area encompassed within this District, as it presently exists, with the addition thereto of a flood control and flood mitigation structure, it is intended that all requests to rezone any of the area within this District shall be permitted only if such requested change or rezoning preserves and/or protects the integrity and character of said District.
5.19.02 Permitted Uses: The following shall be permitted as uses by right:
1. Agricultural uses, excluding the expansion of existing or development of new intensive livestock facility operations exceeding one animal unit per acre.
2. Flood control and flood mitigation projects.
3. Public parks and recreational areas.
4. Community buildings and/or facilities owned and/or occupied by public agencies.
5. Signs in accordance with Section 7.06 – 7.09
5.19.03 Conditional Uses: A building or premises may be used for the following purposes in the LWC Lake Wanahoo Conservation District if a Conditional Use Permit for such use has been obtained in accordance with Article 6 of these regulations.
1. Single family farm dwellings
2. Accessory structures
5.19.04 Minimum Area Requirements
1. Same as TA - Transitional Agriculture District
Zoning Districts: Section 5.20 HPD: Historic Preservation District
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 98
Section 5.20 (HPD) Historic Preservation District (Overlay District)
5.20.01 Intent:
This Overlay District is to designate, preserve, protect, enhance, and perpetuate those structures and districts which are elements of the city’s historical, cultural, archaeological, or architectural heritage; to stabilize and improve property values in such districts; to foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past; to protect and enhance the city’s attractions to tourists and visitors and the support and stimulus to business and industry thereby provided; to strengthen the economy of the city; to promote the use of preservation and historic districts and landmarks for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the people of the city; and to promote and encourage continued private ownership and utilization of such buildings and other structures now so owned and used so that the objectives listed above can be attained while the owner can receive a reasonable economic return on the property.
Permitted and conditional uses in this district located within the Transportation Corridor Overlay District must adhere to Design Standards.
5.20.02 Preservation Commission
A Preservation Commission will have an advisory role to the Planning Commission regarding review of alterations, modifications, new construction, signage, and other issues involving the buildings and historic districts in order to preserve area’s character. The Preservation Commission shall consist of five members on three year terms. Provided that of those members first taking office, one shall be appointed for one year, two for two years, and two for three years. Members may serve for more than one term and each member shall serve until the appointment of a successor. In the event of a vacancy, an appointment shall be made to fill the vacancy in the same manner as if at the beginning of the term, and the person appointed to fill the vacancy shall hold such office for the unexpired term.
There is hereby created the preservation commission (hereinafter, the “Preservation Commission”. The Preservation Commission shall consist of five members appointed by the Mayor with confirmation by a majority of the City Council.
The Preservation Commission might be made up of the following individuals; One member of the City Council or Planning Commission, one historian qualified in the field of American History, one member from the local or county Historical Society, one local real estate agent, and one citizen-at-large.
5.20.03 Organization.
The Preservation Commission shall elect from among its own members a chairman and such other officers as it may deem necessary. The Preservation Commission shall make such rules and regulations as it may deem advisable and necessary for the conduct of its affairs, for the purpose of carrying out the intent of this section, which are not inconsistent with the laws of the city and the state. Three members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and three affirmative votes shall be required for final action on any matter acted upon by the Preservation Commission. Members of the Preservation Commission shall serve without compensation. The Preservation Commission shall meet as necessary.
5.20.04 Powers and Duties.
The powers and duties of the Preservation Commission shall be as follows:
a. Initiate and maintain an inventory of all sites, structures, and districts potentially eligible for designation as landmarks or landmark districts.
b. Consult with and consider the ideas and recommendations of civic groups including neighborhood and business organizations, public agencies, and citizens interested in historical preservation;
c. Inspect and investigate structures, sites, and areas which are believed worthy of preservation;
d. Disseminate information to the public concerning those structures, sites, and areas deemed worthy of preservation and encourage and advise property owners in the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of landmarks and property of interests;
e. Solicit gifts and contributions to be made to the city and assist in the preparation of applications for grant funds to be made to the city for the purpose of preservation;
f. For every building or district designated for preservation, maintain a guideline for preservation of the property;
Zoning Districts: Section 5.20 HPD: Historic Preservation District
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 99
g. Upon request of the property owner, render advice and guidance with respect to any proposed work on a landmark or in a landmark district;
h. Prepare and deliver an annual report of the Preservation Commission’s past actions and future goals to the City Council;
5.20.05. Requirement of Certificate for Certain Work.
No person shall carry out or cause to be carried out on a landmark or in a preservation district any change in the appearance of a landmark or historic district for which a building permit or demolition permit is required, as specified in the Wahoo Building Code for the city, or any change restricted by the particular designating ordinance without a certificate issued by the Preservation Commission or the Planning Commission as described below. Ordinary maintenance and repair not otherwise subject to a building permit regulation or restricted by the designated ordinance may be carried out without a certificate issued by the Preservation Commission.
5.20.06 Procedure for Certificate.
The application for such certificate shall be filed with the City of Wahoo and shall be accompanied by plans for the proposed work to be done and such other information as the Building Inspector shall require. The Building Inspector shall review the application and plans for compliance with the existing building code ordinances and regulations. The application and plans shall be referred to the Planning Commission.
The Planning Commission may issue a certificate of “no material effect” if the application is for work which is not restricted by the designating ordinance and if the work contemplated in the application will have no effect on any architectural features of the landmark or landmark district as detailed in the particular designating ordinance and will be in harmony therewith.
Other applications shall be transmitted by the Planning Commission to the Preservation Commission along with any recommendations by the Building Inspector and the Planning Commission. Within sixty days of receipt of the application by the Building Inspector, the Preservation Commission shall hold a public hearing on the applications received by the Preservation Commission. Notice of the time, place, and purpose of such hearing shall be published by the City of Wahoo in a newspaper having a general circulation in the City of Wahoo and shall be mailed to the certificate applicant not less than eight days prior to the date of hearing. The Preservation Commission may also give such other notice as may be deemed necessary, including posting of the property affected.
During the public hearing, the Preservation Commission shall review the application and plans in light of the guideline for preservation, see Section 7.19 for review guidelines (Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings), of the property contained in the particular preservation designation ordinance for that landmark or historic district.
5.20.07 Certificate Approval or Denial.
Within thirty days of the hearing, the Preservation Commission shall approve or deny the application for the certificate for certain work on the landmark or in a preservation district.
The Preservation Commission:
1. May issue a certificate of “appropriateness” if, after focusing upon aesthetic, historical, and architectural values, it finds that the proposed work would not unduly hinder the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of the landmark or preservation district;
2. May issue a certificate of “exception on the ground of insufficient return or hardship” if it finds that the landmark or property within the preservation district cannot yield a reasonable return if the proposed work is not permitted, that the plight of the applicant is due to unique circumstances, and that the hardship is the result of the application of the ordinance and is not the result of any act or omission by the applicant; or
(c.) May refuse to issue a certificate, if it finds that the application does not meet any of the above criteria.
The Preservation Commission’s decision must be accompanied by written findings of fact. No change shall be made in the application for any building permit after issuance of a certificate by the Preservation Commission or the Planning Commission without resubmittal to the Preservation Commission or the Planning Commission and approval in the same manner as provided above.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.20 HPD: Historic Preservation District
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 100
5.20.08 Procedure Following Certificate Denial
If no certificate is issued, the applicant and the Preservation Commission shall enter into negotiations to develop a plan whereby modifications in the application would enable the Preservation Commission to issue a certificate under the criteria listed above and compatible with the guideline for preservation in the particular designation ordinance. If the proposed work involves demolition of all or a significant portion of a landmark or property within a preservation district or involves construction upon open areas of a landmark or with a preservation district and no acceptable plan is negotiated and approved by the applicant within three months of the Preservation Commission’s decision not to issue a certificate, the city may proceed by eminent domain proceedings to acquire the landmark or the affected property within the preservation district. But if the city does not initiate proceedings within ninety days, the Planning Commission shall issue a certificate of “allowance”, permitting the applicant to proceed with the work as proposed in the application. If the proposed work on a landmark or in a preservation district is other than the above and no acceptable plan is negotiated and approved by the applicant within three months of the Preservation Commission’s decision not to issue a certificate, the Planning Commission shall issue a certificate of “allowance”, permitting the applicant to proceed with the work as proposed in the application.
5.20.09 Hazardous Structures.
The Planning Commission shall issue a certificate of “allowance on the ground of hazardous conditions” for razing a structure or other work if the Building Inspector has determined that the landmark or structure within the preservation district poses an immediate hazard to human health and safety. However, no owner shall by deliberate acts or deliberate neglect allow a landmark or property within a preservation district to become hazardous to human health and safety with the intent of then obtaining such permit.
5.20.10 Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by any order, approval, disapproval, or other decision issued by the Preservation Commission, or the Planning Commission, may appeal such order, approval, disapproval, or other decision to the City Council by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk within thirty days of such order. Such appeal shall fully state the order, approval, disapproval, or other decision appealed from, the date thereof, and the facts of the matter.
The City Clerk shall refer the appeal to the City Council, which shall fix within thirty days a reasonable time for the hearing. Notice of time, place, and purpose of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the City of Wahoo by the City Clerk and shall be mailed by certified or registered mail to the appealing party not less that eight days prior to the date of hearing. The City Council shall review the appeal and may in conformance with the provisions of this title reverse or affirm, wholly or partially, or may modify the order, approval, disapproval or other decision appealed from. In making a determination, the Council may request information and recommendations from any department of the City of Wahoo. Every decision by the City Council shall be accompanied by a written finding of fact based on testimony and other evidence, specifying the reason for granting or denying the appeal.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.21 TC – Transportation Corridor District (Overlay)
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 101
Section 5.21 (TC) TRANSPORTATION CORRIDOR DISTRICT (OVERLAY DISTRICT)
5.21.01 Intent:
The City of Wahoo has established Design Standards, basic site and building development criteria to be implemented within the boundaries of this overlay district. The Transportation Corridor District has been established in order to provide for quality development along the new U.S. Highway 77 corridor. These criteria include, but are not limited to the following: landscaping, building material selection, lighting, and interior street development. The purpose for regulating these issues is to provide for a cohesive and properly developed corridor and entrance to the City of Wahoo. Guiding development in this manner promotes the general health, safety and welfare of the residents within the zoning jurisdiction of the City, by providing quality design and construction which will also aid in the protection of past and future investment in the corridor.
5.21.02 Purpose:
The purpose of these criteria is to establish a checklist of those items that affect the physical aspect of Wahoo’s environment. Pertinent to appearance is the design of the site, building and structures, planting, signs, street hardware, and miscellaneous other objects that are observed by the public.
The criteria contained herein are not intended to restrict imagination, innovation or variety, but rather to assist in focusing on design principles that can result in creative solutions that will develop a satisfactory visual appearance within the city, preserve taxable values, and promote the public health, safety and welfare.
5.21.03 Geographic Area:
The Transportation Corridor Overlay District includes the following geographic areas:
1. An area which extends generally one-quarter of a mile either side of the Highway 77 Expressway alignment, more or less, within the prescribed jurisdiction of Wahoo;
2. An area including properties adjacent to First Street, from the Highway 92 intersection with the Highway 77 Expressway, extending east to Chestnut Street;
3. An area including properties adjacent to Chestnut Street from 12th Street north to the Highway 77 Expressway right-of-way;
4. An area including properties adjacent to Chestnut Street from 12th Street south to the railroad tracks south of A Street;
5. An area including properties adjacent to 15th Street from Chestnut Street west to the Highway 77 Expressway;
as depicted in the Transportation Corridor Design Standards, Section 1.2 Corridor Map, and defined in Section 1.4 Area Standards, as Area A (In Town), Area B (Outskirts), and Area C (Hwy 77).
If a site is partially covered by said overlay district, then the entire portion of the site facing the Transportation Corridor is to be covered by these regulations. For a graphically defined area, see the Official Zoning Map.
5.21.04 Criteria for Application:
1. All developments within the Transportation Corridor Overlay shall adhere to the Design Standards.
2. All developments consisting of more than one principal building, mixed-uses, multiple-pad development and/or similar shall be required to meet the zoning requirements for a Residential/Mixed Use District (RMD). The RMD process and rezoning shall be in conjunction with Preliminary and Final Plat review and approval.
3. All developments consisting of one principal building with single or mixed uses shall comply with the design criteria of this section.
5.21.05 Criteria for Appearance
1. The Design Standards shall be used to evaluate project design elements including: relationship of building to site, building architecture, parking, site lighting, landscaping, signs, and outdoor element.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.21 TC – Transportation Corridor District (Overlay)
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 102
5.21.06 Process
1. Residential Mixed Use Residential Application
All developments within the Transportation Corridor District shall be required to apply for rezoning under the criteria in this Ordinance.
2. Subdivision Approval
All Commercial Building projects within the city of Wahoo need to receive Subdivision approval. As a condition of its subdivision approval, all commercial building projects within the required geographic region will have to comply with the Transportation Corridor District regulations. The Developer shall place maintenance provisions required by this Section within all restrictive covenants
3. Pre-application Conference:
A pre-application conference with city staff is recommended to give the applicant an opportunity to discuss plans before a great deal of time or money is expended.
4. Application for Design Review:
The applicant needs to fill out the "Application for Certificate of Approval" and submit it along with the required submittals. See Administrative Forms for a listing of required submittals.
5. Design Review:
The City of Wahoo Zoning Administrator will review each site plan and score the design in accordance with the Design Standards Section 1.5 Design Evaluation Calculator.
6. Certificate of Approval:
Upon a successful review the City of Wahoo will issue to the applicant a Certificate of Approval. A copy of this will need to be included with the Building Permit documents in order to receive a Building Permit.
7. Appeals:
In the event where the Applicant, City staff and City design review architect cannot come to an agreement the applicant may appeal the decision by requesting an amendment to the Subdivision Agreement from the Wahoo City Council.
8. Certificate of Occupancy Permit:
After the building permit is issued, all design requirements must be completed as approved in order for a Certificate of Occupancy to be issued.
9. Maintenance of Design requirements:
The Applicant needs to maintain the Design Requirements for the life of the project. In the event that they fail to do so the City may revoke the Occupancy Permit.
10. Fees:
Fees may apply to each individual step as established in the Master Fee Schedule.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.2 Residential Acreage Overlay District
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 103
Section 5.22 RESIDENTIAL ACREAGE OVERLAY DISTRICT (RAO)
5.22.01 Intent:
The intent of the Residential Acreage Overlay District is to provide within this Overlay District a procedure for the implementation of infrastructure maintenance and improvements to those areas within the District which were previously developed for residential purposes outside of the corporate limits of the City of Wahoo pursuant to infrastructure standards of the City of Wahoo less stringent than for areas within the corporate limits of the City of Wahoo and for which now said areas, through annexation, are to be incorporated into the corporate limits of the City of Wahoo. This Overlay District includes residential lots greater than one-half (1/2) acre in area, but less than three (3) acres in area, except for one (1) commercial area, and which are currently zoned for residential uses, except for the one (1) commercial tract which is zoned for commercial uses. This Overlay District shall not change the current or future zoning of the areas included in this Overlay District.
5.22.02 Purpose:
The purpose of this Overlay District is to provide a procedure for the orderly incorporation, through annexation, of areas into the corporate limits of the City of Wahoo and the maintenance and development of City of Wahoo infrastructure within said areas.
5.22.03 Geographic Area:
The Residential Acreage Overlay District shall include the following areas, to wit:
1. Janecek’s Area; (Lots 1 through 5, Janecek Subdivision Replat, Saunders County, NE)
2. County Club Area; (Lots 1 through 21 and Lots 23 through 31, Country Club Acres, Saunders County, NE)
3. Cook’s Area; (Lots 1 through 6, Cook’s Subdivision in Section 16-14-7, Saunders County, NE, and a one (1) acre Parcel located adjacent to the East end of Cook’s Subdivision [Little], Saunders County, NE)
4. Arbor Lodge Area; (Lots 1 through 7, Arbor Lodge Estates, Saunders County, NE)
5. East Continental Area; (Lots 1 through 6, East Continental Estates, Saunders County, NE)
6. West Continental Area; (Lots 1 through 19, West Continental Estates, Saunders County, NE, and a tract of land located West of West Continental Estates and East of County Road 17 [Bass], Saunders County, NE)
7. City View Area; Lots 1 through 21, City View Acres Subdivision, Saunders County, NE, and a four (4) acre Parcel located directory East of County Road 17 and directly South of West Continental Estates [Green Acres], Saunders County, NE)
For the outer boundaries of each Area, see Exhibit “A” attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. Also, each lot and the Little, Bass, and Green Acres acreages shall hereinafter be referred to as lot or lots.
5.22.04 Existing infrastructure within each Area of the Residential Acreage Overlay District.
1. Streets/Street Signage/Street Lighting:
a. Except as noted, the streets in all of the aforenoted Areas are “Local Streets” which meet all of the minimum requirements as set forth the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Wahoo, except “Pavement”. The exception is County Road J adjacent to the West Continental, East Continental, and a portion of the Arbor Lodge Areas, which is a “Collector Street” as set forth in the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Wahoo
Zoning Districts: Section 5.2 Residential Acreage Overlay District
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 104
and meets the minimum requirements of the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Wahoo pertaining to streets.
b. Street maintenance for each area, except for County Road J, is provided by either Stocking Township, Saunders, and/or private contractors.
c. Currently, no street signage and/or street lighting is provided to any of the areas by the City of Wahoo, except street signage is provided by the City of Wahoo along County Road J.
2. Sanitary Sewer:
a. Each developed lot in each of the aforenoted Areas is serviced by a private septic system, except for the following lot, to wit:
Lot 3, West Continental Estates,
which is served by the City of Wahoo Sewer Department.
b. The following lots are undeveloped, not having thereon any sewage system, to wit:
1) Information unavailable at time of printing;
3. Potable Water:
a. Each developed lot in each of the aforenoted Areas is serviced by a private domestic water well, except for the following lot, to wit:
. Lot 3, West Continental Estates,
which is serviced by the City of Wahoo Water Department.
b. The following lots are undeveloped, not having thereon any potable water system, to wit:
1) Information unavailable;
4. Non-potable Water:
a. In addition to the aforenoted domestic water wells, the following lots utilize a well-to-well ground source heat pump system, to wit:
(1) Information unavailable;
b. In addition to the aforenoted domestic water wells, the following lots utilize a closed-loop ground source heat pump system, to wit:
(1) Information unavailable;
Zoning Districts: Section 5.2 Residential Acreage Overlay District
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 105
5. Electrical Service:
All of the aforenoted Areas are serviced by the City of Wahoo Electric Department.
6. Natural Gas and Propane:
The City of Wahoo Natural Gas Department has laid gas mains in portions of the Areas. Residences in the Areas utilize as a heating source either natural gas from the City of Wahoo, propane, electricity from the City of Wahoo, or ground to ground or closed loop heating systems, or combinations thereof.
7. Storm Sewers, Storm Water Drainage:
All Areas use open street ditches for storm water drainage purposes.
5.22.05 Existing Governmental Services within Residential Acreage Overlay District:
1. Fire Protection:
All Areas in the Overlay District are furnished fire protection by Wahoo Rural Fire District No. 13.
2. Police Protection:
All Areas in the Overlay District are furnished police protection by the Saunders County Sheriff’s Department and the Nebraska State Patrol. In addition thereto, the City of Wahoo Police Department does have jurisdiction in each Area.
5.22.06 Infrastructure maintenance within the Residential Acreage Overlay District after annexation:
1. Streets, Street Signs, Street Lighting and Sidewalks.
a. The City of Wahoo shall maintain the existing streets in the annexed Areas as follows:
1) For gravel/rock streets, the City of Wahoo shall continue to maintain the streets with gravel and rock;
2) For streets which are surfaced with armor coating, the City of Wahoo shall maintain the armor coating surfacing with patching.
b. The City of Wahoo shall provide all snow removal on publicly dedicated streets.
c. The City of Wahoo shall erect and maintain all street locator signs, shall determine the best location of traffic control signs, and shall have the authority to regulate and enforce all traffic laws as set forth in the Nebraska Rules of the Road in all of the annexed Areas.
d. The City of Wahoo shall prepare a plan within one (1) year of the completion of annexation of the Areas regarding installation of street lighting in the annexed Areas. Costs of street lighting installation shall be paid by the City of Wahoo. Street lighting, when installed by the City of Wahoo, shall be for public safety purposes.
e. Sidewalks shall not be required by the City of Wahoo in any of the Areas except if requested by majority of the lot owners in a portion of an Area.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.2 Residential Acreage Overlay District
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 106
2. Sanitary Sewer:
a. The City of Wahoo shall prepare detailed plans and specifications, to include one (1) or more lift stations, if necessary, within one (1) year of the completion of annexation of the Areas to extend the City of Wahoo’s sanitary sewer mains to provide sanitary sewer service to each lot in each of the Areas.
b. The City of Wahoo shall not assume nor shall it be responsible for the maintenance of any existing private septic system in the Areas. Each lot owner in the Areas shall be responsible for each lot’s private septic system being in compliance with all applicable rules or regulations of the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality as they now exist, and as they may be amended from time to time hereafter.
c. If a Building Permit for the construction of a residence is issued by the City of Wahoo for any undeveloped lot in any of the Areas, a private septic system may be installed only if permitted by the Board of Public Works of the City of Wahoo.
3. Water, Potable and Non-Potable:
a. The City of Wahoo shall prepare detailed plans and specifications within one (1) year of the completion of annexation of the Areas to extend the City of Wahoo’s water system to provide domestic water service to each lot in each of the Areas.
b. The City of Wahoo shall not assume nor shall it be responsible for the maintenance of any present domestic water well in the Areas. Each lot owner in the Areas shall be responsible for each Lot’s domestic water well being in compliance with all applicable rules and regulations of the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services, as they now exist, and as they may be amended from time to time hereafter.
c. If a Building Permit for the construction of a residence is issued by the City of Wahoo for an undeveloped lot in any of the Areas, a domestic potable water well may be installed only if permitted by the Board of Public Works of the City of Wahoo.
d. Any existing water wells which are being used for a well-to-well ground source heat pump system will be allowed to remain in service until said system is not permitted by the State of Nebraska, said water to be used for non-potable purposes only.
e. In the event the lot owner owns 0.5 acres or more, and if upon said lot there exists a closed-loop ground source heat pump system, it will be allowed to remain and be maintained in accordance with the City of Wahoo’s Building Regulations and/or the rules and regulations of the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services, as they now exist, and as they may be amended from time to time hereafter, said water to be used for non-potable purposes only.
4. Storm Water Drainage:
a. The City of Wahoo shall maintain the existing storm water drainage system that is in place at the time of annexation in the annexed Areas. Maintenance of these channels and ditches will need to be performed from time to time by the City of Wahoo. Currently, lot owners have yards and other landscaping in the drainage channels and ditches. The City of Wahoo shall work with lot owners individually to determine how the yards and landscaping will be handled at the time of the maintenance of the channels and ditches by the City of Wahoo.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.2 Residential Acreage Overlay District
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 107
5. Electricity:
a. The City of Wahoo Electric Department will continue to provide electrical service to all areas after annexation.
6. Natural Gas and Propane:
a. The City of Wahoo shall prepare plans and specifications within one (1) year of the completion of annexation of the Areas to extend the City of Wahoo’s natural gas mains to provide natural gas service to each lot in the annexed Areas.
b. The costs of the installation of the natural gas mains shall be paid by the City of Wahoo.
a. Propane fueled heating systems in service at the time of annexation may continue to be used by the lot owners until the heating system fails and must be replaced. Within one (1) year of the date of failure of the heating system, the lot owner shall be required to remove the propane tank from the lot and replace the heating system with a system that does not use a propane tank or require storage of combustible materials which cause a threat to the health and safety of the citizens of the City of Wahoo.
5.22.07 Governmental Services After Annexation:
1. Fire Protection:
a. Fire protection to the annexed Areas shall be provided by the Wahoo Volunteer Fire Department.
2. Police Protection:
a. Police protection shall be provided primarily by the Wahoo Police Department and secondarily by the Saunders County Sheriff’s Department and the Nebraska State Patrol.
5.22.08 Infrastructure Development in the Residential Acreage Overlay District After Annexation:
1. Streets:
a. Lot owners may, at any time, submit a petition which has been signed by abutting lot owners representing sixty percent (60%) of the front footage directly abutting the street to be improved requesting the street to be improved. Upon receipt of the petition, the City of Wahoo shall create a Street Improvement District, complete the improvements, and assess the costs to the all abutting lot owners as determined by the City of Wahoo’s Board of Equalization.
b. Street lights may be required by the City of Wahoo in any of the Areas after a street has been improved, for public safety purposes.
c. Sidewalks will not be required unless requested by the requisite number of petitioners to create a Sidewalk Improvement District pursuant to applicable Statutes of the State of Nebraska.
2. Sanitary Sewer:
a. The extension of sanitary sewer mains shall be done through one or more Sanitary Sewer Extension Districts (Sewer District) as is authorized and allowed by Nebraska Revised Statutes, §19-2402 through §19-2407 pursuant to an Ordinance of the City of
Zoning Districts: Section 5.2 Residential Acreage Overlay District
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 108
Wahoo adopted by an affirmative vote of not less than three fourths (3/4ths) of the governing body of the City of Wahoo. The City of Wahoo thereafter shall complete the improvements and assess the costs to all of the abutting lot owners as determined by the City of Wahoo’s Board of Equalization.
b. Costs associated with the over-sizing of any portion of the sanitary sewer mains in the Sewer District shall be determined to be costs which benefit the entire sanitary sewer system and shall be paid by the City of Wahoo and not assessed to the lot owners within each Sewer District.
c.
(1) When the sanitary sewer system is installed and accepted by the City of Wahoo, the City of Wahoo shall waive the mandatory hookup requirement of §53.26 of the Wahoo Board of Public Works Code as to each lot upon which there is an existing sanitary sewer system in place at the time of annexation which is in compliance with the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality Rules and Regulations. However, the City of Wahoo agrees to waive its service connection fees at the time of connection if the connection is made within one year of the date the City of Wahoo’s Board of Equalization determines the assessed costs of the Sewer District to the respective adjoining lots benefited by said Sewer District. Once the lot is connected to the City of Wahoo’s sanitary sewer system, the existing sanitary sewer system on said lot must be properly abandoned in compliance with Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality Rules and Regulations. Further, if the existing sanitary sewer system on a lot fails, failure to mean, but shall not be limited to, either failure of the leaching field or failure of the septic tank, the sanitary sewer system must then be properly abandoned pursuant to Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality Rules and Regulations and the lot must be connected to the City of Wahoo’s Sanitary Sewer system pursuant to §53.26 of the Wahoo Board of Public Works Code.
(2) If at any time the City of Wahoo is made aware or knows that an existing sanitary sewer system has failed and been replaced with a like system, or that an unsanitary sewer system is in use, the City of Wahoo shall provide notice to the lot owner of mandatory connection, and shall, after providing the statutorily required notice, connect the lot to the City of Wahoo’s sanitary sewer system and shall assess the costs of said connection to the lot owner pursuant to §53.26 of the Wahoo Board of Public Works Code.
(2) The City of Wahoo reserves the right to, at any time, in order to preserve the health and safety of the City of Wahoo and surrounding lots, require connection to the City of Wahoo’s sanitary sewer system pursuant to §53.26 of the Wahoo Board of Public Works Code. This would be a decision by the City of Wahoo supported by either State mandates or evidence that unsanitary and unsafe conditions exist pursuant to Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality rules and regulations.
3. Water, Potable and Non-Potable:
a. The extension of water mains shall be done through one or more Water Main Extension Districts (Water District) as is authorized and allowed by Nebraska Revised Statutes, §19-2402 through §19-2407 pursuant to an Ordinance of the City of Wahoo adopted by an affirmative vote of not less than three fourths (3/4ths) of the governing body of the City of Wahoo. The City of Wahoo shall thereafter complete the improvements and assess the costs to all of the abutting lot owners as determined by the City of Wahoo’s Board of Equalization.
Zoning Districts: Section 5.2 Residential Acreage Overlay District
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 109
b. Costs associated with the over-sizing of any portion of the water mains in the Water District shall be determined to be costs which benefit the entire water system and shall be paid by the City of Wahoo and not assessed to the lot owners within each Water District.
c.
(1) When the water main system is installed and accepted by the City of Wahoo, the City of Wahoo shall waive the mandatory hookup requirement as to each lot upon which there is an existing water system in place at the time of annexation. However, the City of Wahoo agrees to waive its service connection fees at the time of connection if the connection is made within one year of the date the City of Wahoo’s Board of Equalization determines the assessed costs of the Water District to the respective adjoining lots benefited by said Water District.
(2) Once the water main system is installed and accepted by the City of Wahoo, the existing water well on the lot now serviced may continue to be used by the lot owner for potable and non-potable purposes for so long as said well meets State of Nebraska requirements for potable water.
(3) The City of Wahoo reserves the right to, at any time, in order to preserve the health and safety of the City of Wahoo and surrounding lots, require connection to the City of Wahoo’s water main system. This would be a decision by the City of Wahoo supported by either State mandates or evidence that unsanitary and unsafe conditions exist.
4. Storm Water Drainage:
a. Storm water drainage improvements may be made at the time a Street Improvement District is created, pursuant to subparagraph 1 hereof, and the costs thereof shall be paid either by the City of Wahoo or the abutting lot owners, or a combination thereof, as determined by the City of Wahoo’s Board of Equalization.
3. That the Official Zoning Map of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska, be amended with the inclusion of the Residential Acreage Overlay District, as to the following-described real estate, to wit:
COUNTRY CLUB ACRES
WEST CONTINENTAL ESTATES
EAST CONTINENTAL ESTATES
ARBOR LODGE ACRES
COOK’S ADDITION
JANECEK SUBDIVISION AND ALL REPLATS
CITY VIEW ACRES
Zoning Districts: Section 5.24 Airport Hazard Overlay District
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 110
Section 5.23 (this section intentionally left blank)
Section 5.24 AHO AIRPORT HAZARD OVERLAY DISTRICT
(Ordinance No. 2170, 12-23-2014)
5.24.01 INTENT
This district is established as an overlay district for application over any primary zoning district in order to protect the safe use, public investment, and utility of public airports and their Airport Hazard Area, within the city of Wahoo, NE and its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction, by limiting the location and height of structures within the operation, approach, transition and turning zones around airports which are licensed by the Nebraska Department of Aeronautics, as designated on the Airport Zoning Map prepared by the Nebraska Department of Aeronautics for the Wahoo Municipal Airport (Dwg. No. ZN-AHQ-09 dated December 18, 2013)
5.24.02 DESIGNATED PUBLIC AIRPORT
The designated public airport for which these regulations have been prepared is the Wahoo Municipal Airport located in Section 26, Township 15 North, Range 7 East of the 6th P.M., in Saunders County which is within the planning and zoning jurisdictional area of Wahoo, Nebraska. Information on the Wahoo Municipal Airport can be obtained from the Nebraska Department of Aeronautics at www.aero.nebraska.gov or at www.airnav.com/airports/ .
5.24.03 DEFINITIONS
For purposes of the Airport Hazard Overlay, the following terms are defined:
Airport means an area of land or water that is used or intended to be used for the landing and takeoff of aircraft and includes any related buildings and facilities. Airport includes only public-use airports with state or federally approved airport layout plans and military airports with military service-approved military layout plans.
Airport Hazard means any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off of aircraft; or penetrates any approach, operation, transition, or turning zone.
Airport Hazard Area means any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard might be established if not prevented as provided in the Nebraska Airport Zoning Act, but such area shall not extend in any direction a distance in excess of the limits provided for approach, operation, transition, and turning zones.
Airport Layout Plan means a scaled drawing of existing and proposed land, buildings, and facilities necessary for the operation and development of an airport prepared in accordance with state rules and regulations and federal regulations and guidelines.
Approach Zone means a zone that extends from the end of each operation zone and is centered along the extended runway centerlines.
Electric Facility means an overhead electrical line, including poles or other supporting structures, owned or operated by an electric supplier as defined in Section 70-1001.01, R.R.S. 1943, for the transmission or distribution of electrical power to the electric supplier’s customers.
Existing Runway means an instrument runway or a visual runway that is paved or made of turf that has been constructed or in under construction.
Height of Structure means the height of any building, structure or object measured from its highest point to the nearest existing or proposed runway end elevation.
Instrument Runway means an existing runway with precision or nonprecision instrument approaches as developed and published by the Federal Aviation Administration or an existing or proposed runway with future precision or non-precision instrument approaches reflected on the airport layout plan. After the effective date of this zoning regulation, an airport shall not designate an existing or proposed runway as an instrument runway if
Zoning Districts: Section 5.24 (AHO) Airport Hazard Overlay District
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 111
the runway was not previously designated as such without the approval of the airport’s governing body after a public hearing on such designation.
Operation Zone means a zone that is longitudinally centered on each existing or proposed runway.
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, company, association, joint-stock association, or body politic and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar representative thereof.
Political Subdivision means any city, village, or county.
Proposed Runway means an instrument runway or a visual runway that has not been constructed and is not under construction but that is depicted on the airport layout plan that has been conditionally or unconditionally approved by, or has been submitted for approval to, the Federal Aviation Administration.
Runway means a defined area at an airport that is prepared for the landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length.
Structure means any object constructed or installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks, and overhead transmission or distribution lines.
Transition Zone means a zone that extends outward at a right angle to the runway centerline and upward at a rate of one (1) foot vertically for every seven feet horizontally (7:1). The height limit of a transition zone begins at the height limit of the adjacent approach zone or operation zone and ends at a height of 150 feet above the highest elevation on the existing or proposed runway.
Tree means any object of natural growth.
Turning Zone shall comprise all portions of the hazard area not contained in the Operation Zones, Approach Zones and in the Transitional Zones.
Turning Zone’s Outer Limit means the area located at a distance of three (3) miles as a radius from the corners of the operation zone of each runway and connecting adjacent arcs with tangent lines, excluding any area within the approach zone, operation zone, or transition zone. The height limit of the turning zone is 150 feet above the highest elevation on the existing or proposed runway.
Visual Runway means a runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures, with no straight-in instrument approach procedure and no instrument designation indicated on an airport layout plan approved by the Federal Aviation Administration, a military service-approved military layout plan, or any planning documents submitted to the Federal Aviation Administration by a competent authority.
5.24.04 HAZARD AREA DESCRIPTION
In accordance with Neb. Rev. Stat. §3-303, every political subdivision that has adopted an airport hazard area within the area of its zoning jurisdiction, must adopt, administer, and enforce the regulations in this section for such airport hazard area.
The airport hazard area consists of Operation Zones, Approach Zones, Turning Zones and Transitional Zones. The outer boundary of the hazard area is composed of a series of connected tangents and simple curves which also constitute the outer boundaries of the Approach and Turning Zones. The inner boundary of the hazard area is a boundary line consisting of a series of intersecting tangents five hundred (500) feet from and parallel to the centerline of the instrument runway or landing strip and two hundred fifty (250) feet from and parallel to the respective centerlines of all other runways or landing strips and connecting the inner boundaries of adjacent Approach Zones at the ends of the runways, landing strips or proposed runways or landing strips.
5.24.05 ZONE DESCRIPTIONS AND REGULATIONS
The following are intended for use with this overlay district.
1. Operation Zones are longitudinally centered on each existing or proposed runway:
Zoning Districts: Section 5.24 (AHO) Airport Hazard Overlay District
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 112
a. Length. For existing and proposed paved runways, the operation zone extends two hundred (200) feet beyond the ends of each runway. For existing and proposed turf runways, the operation zone begins and ends at the same points as the runway begins and ends;
b. Width. For existing and proposed instrument runways, the operation zone is 1,000 feet wide, with 500 feet on either side of the runway centerline. For all other existing and proposed runways, the operation zone is 500 feet wide, with 250 feet on either side of the runway centerline; and
c. Height. The height limit of the operation zone is the same as the height of the runway centerline elevation on an existing or proposed runway or the surface of the ground, whichever is higher.
2. Approach Zones extend from the end of each operation zone and are centered along the extended runway centerlines. The dimensions of the zones are as follows:
a. For an existing or proposed instrument runway:
(1) Length and Width. An approach zone extends ten miles from the operation zone, measured along the extended runway centerline. The approach zone is 1,000 feet wide at the end of the zone nearest the runway and expands uniformly to 16,840 feet wide at the farthest end of the zone; and
(2) Height Limit. The height limit of an approach zone begins at the elevation of the runway end for which it is the approach and rises one (1) foot vertically for every 50 feet horizontally, except that the height limit shall not exceed 150 feet above the nearest existing or proposed runway end elevation within three (3) miles of the end of the operation zone at that runway end. At three miles from such operation zone, the height limit resumes sloping one foot vertically for every 50 feet horizontally and continues to the ten-mile limit.
b. For an existing or proposed visual runway:
(1) Length and Width. An approach zone extends from the operation zone to the limits of the turning zone, measured along the extended runway centerline. The approach zone is 500 feet wide at the end of the zone nearest the runway and expands uniformly so that at a point on the extended runway centerline three miles from the operation zone, the approach zone is 3,700 feet wide; and
(2) Height. The height limit of an approach zone begins at the elevation of the runway end for which it is the approach and rises one (1) foot vertically for every 40 feet horizontally, except that the height limit shall not exceed 150 feet above the nearest existing or proposed runway end elevation within three (3) miles of the end of the operation zone at that runway end.
3. Transition Zones extend outward at right angles to the runway centerline and upward at a rate of one foot vertically for every seven feet horizontally (7:1). The height limit of these zones begins at the height limit of the adjacent operation zones or approach zones. The transition zones end at a height of 150 feet above the nearest existing or proposed runway end.
4. Turning Zones extend three miles as a radius from the corners of the operation zone of each runway and connecting adjacent arcs with tangent lines, excluding any area within the approach zone, operation zone, or transition zone. The height limit of the turning zones is 150 feet above the nearest existing or proposed runway end.
5.24.06 HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
No building, transmission line, communication line, pole, tree, smokestack, chimney, wires, tower or other structure or appurtenance thereto of any kind or character shall hereafter be erected, constructed, repaired or established, nor shall any tree or other object of natural growth be allowed to grow, above the heights described in Section 5.24.05 above:
Zoning Districts: Section 5.24 (AHO) Airport Hazard Overlay District
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 113
5.24.07 LOCATION SKETCH AND ZONING MAP
Zoning Districts: Section 5.24 (AHO) Airport Hazard Overlay District
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 114
The boundaries, Operation Zones, Approach Zones, Transition Zones and Turning Zones of the Wahoo Municipal Airport are as indicated on the maps identified in Section 5.24.01, which accompany and are hereby made a part of these regulations, copies of which shall at all times be on file in the office of the City Clerk of Wahoo, Nebraska.
5.24.08 PERMIT REQUIRED, EXCEPTIONS, APPLICATION FORMS AND PERMIT FEES
1. Permit Required: It shall hereafter be unlawful to erect, construct, reconstruct, repair or establish any building, transmission line, communication line, pole, tree, smokestack, chimney, wires, tower or other structure or appurtenance thereto of any kind or character or to plant or replant any tree or other object of natural growth within the boundary of the zoned airport hazard area of the Wahoo Municipal Airport without first obtaining a zoning permit from the City Zoning Administrator and review of the Wahoo Airport Authority.
2. Exceptions: In the outer area of Approach Zones and within Turning Zones, no such permit shall be required for construction of planting which is no higher than seventy-five (75) feet above the elevation of the end of the nearest runway or landing strip, except for any permits required by other sections of these Regulations.
3. Application Forms: Application for a zoning permit as required under these regulations shall be made upon a form or forms to be available in the office of the Zoning Administrator and shall indicate the approximate location, ground elevation with reference to the elevation at the end of the nearest runway or landing strip and height of the proposed structure or planting (Mean Sea Level Elevation).
4. Permit Fees: The fee for each zoning permit shall be the normal fee charged by the City plus any other additional fees determined by the City and/or the Wahoo Airport Authority.
5.24.09 NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
1. Within the zoned airport hazard area as hereinbefore defined, no non-conforming building, transmission line, communication line, pole, tree, smokestack, chimney, wires, tower or other structure or appurtenance thereto of any kind or character or object of natural growth shall hereafter be replaced, substantially reconstructed, repaired, altered, replanted or allowed to grow, as the case may be, to a height which constitutes a greater hazard to air navigation than existed before these regulations where adopted; nor above the heights permitted by these regulations if such structures or objects of natural growth have been torn down, destroyed, have deteriorated or decayed to an extent of eighty (80) percent or more of their original condition, or abandoned for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months or more. Transmission lines and communication lines as referred to in these regulations shall be interpreted to mean all poles, wires, guys and all other equipment necessary for the operation and maintenance of same within the airport hazard zone.
2. Except as provided in subsection (3) of this section for certain electric facilities, all such airport zoning regulations adopted under the act shall provide that before any nonconforming structure or tree may be replaced, substantially altered or repaired, rebuilt, allowed to grow higher, or replanted, a permit authorizing any replacement, alteration, repair, reconstruction, growth, or replanting must be secured from the administrative agency authorized to administer and enforce the regulations. A permit shall be granted under this subsection if the applicant shows that the replacement, alteration, repair, reconstruction, growth, or replanting of the nonconforming structure, tree, or nonconforming use would not result in an increase in height or a greater hazard to air navigation than the condition that existed when the applicable regulation was adopted. For nonconforming structures other than electric facilities, no permit under this subsection shall be required for repairs necessitated by fire, explosion, act of God, or the common enemy or for repairs which do not involve expenditures exceeding more than sixty percent of the fair market value of the nonconforming structure, so long as the height of the nonconforming structure is not increased over its preexisting height.
3. An electric supplier owning or operating an electric facility made nonconforming by the adoption of airport zoning regulations under the Airport Zoning Act may, without a permit or other approval by the political subdivision adopting such regulations, repair, reconstruct, or replace such electric facility if the
Zoning Districts: Section 5.24 (AHO) Airport Hazard Overlay District
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 115
height of such electric facility is not increased over its preexisting height. Any construction, repair, reconstruction, or replacement of an electric facility, the height of which will exceed the preexisting height of such electric facility, shall require a permit from the political subdivision adopting such regulations. The permit shall be granted only upon a showing that the excess height of the electric facility will not establish or create an airport hazard or become a greater hazard to air navigation than the electric facility that previously existed.
5.24.10 MARKING OF NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES
Whenever the Zoning Administrator shall determine, or shall be notified by the Nebraska Department of Aeronautics or the Wahoo Airport Authority, that a specific non-conforming structure or object exists and has existed prior to the passage of these regulations and within the airport hazard zoned area herein before described at such a height or in such a position as to constitute a hazard to the safe operation of aircraft landing at or taking off from said airport, the owner or owners and the lessor or lessors of the premises on which such structure or object is located shall be notified in writing by the Zoning Administrator and shall, within a reasonable time, permit the marking thereof by suitable lights or other signals designated by the Zoning Administrator as is based on recommendations of the Nebraska Department of Aeronautics and/or Wahoo Airport Authority. The cost of such marking shall not be assessed against the owner or lesser of said premise.
5.24.11 ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCY
The Zoning Administrator of Wahoo, Nebraska shall administer and enforce these regulations, and Wahoo Airport Authority shall be the administrative agency provided for in Neb. Rev. Stat. Section 3-319 (Reissued 2007), and shall have all the powers and perform all the duties of the administrative agency as provided by the Airport Zoning Act within the zoning jurisdictional area of the City.
5.24.12 VARIANCE FROM REGULATIONS
1. Any person desiring to erect any structure, increase the height of any structure, permit the growth of any tree, or otherwise use his or her property in a manner inconsistent with the airport zoning regulations adopted under this regulation may apply to the board of adjustment for a variance from the zoning regulations in question. Such variances shall be allowed only if the board of adjustment makes the same findings for the granting of variances generally as set forth in subsection section 19-907 through 19-912.01, except that if the applicant demonstrates that the proposed structure or alteration of a structure does not require any modification or revision to any approach or approach procedure as approved or written by the Federal Aviation Administration on either an existing or proposed runway and the applicant provides signed documentation from the Federal Aviation Administration that the proposed structure or alteration of the structure will not require any modification or revision of any airport minimums, such documentation may constitute evidence of undue hardship and the board of adjustment may grant the requested variance without such findings. Any variance may be allowed subject to any reasonable conditions that the board of adjustment may deem necessary to effectuate the purposes of this regulation.
2. In granting any permit under or variance from any airport zoning regulation adopted under this regulation, the administrative agency or board of adjustment may, if it deems such action is advisable to effectuate the purposes of the regulation and reasonable in the circumstances, so condition such permit or variance as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to permit the political subdivision, at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence of an airport hazard.
5.24.13 BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT
The Board of Adjustment of Wahoo, Nebraska shall be the Board of Zoning Adjustment with respect to these regulations, to have and to exercise the powers conferred by Neb. Rev. Stat. Section 3-320, et. Seq. (Reissued 2007), and duties as are conferred and imposed by law.
5.24.14 CONFLICTS
In the event of any conflict between these airport hazard regulations and any other regulations established by these or other regulations, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees, the use of land or any other matter, the more stringent or restrictive limitation shall govern and prevail.
Article 6 Conditional Use Permits
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 116
ARTICLE 6: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
Section 6.01 General Provisions.
The City Council may, by conditional use permit after a Public Hearing and referral to and recommendation from the Planning Commission, authorize and permit conditional uses as designated in the district use regulations. Approval shall be based on findings that the location and characteristics of the use will not be detrimental to the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the area.
Allowable uses may be permitted, enlarged, or altered upon application for a conditional use permit in accordance with the rules and procedures of this ordinance. The Council may grant or deny a conditional use permit in accordance with the intent and purpose of this ordinance. In granting a conditional use permit, the Council will authorize the issuance of a conditional use permit and shall prescribe and impose appropriate conditions, safeguards, and a specified time limit for the applicant to commence the activity as provided in the conditional use permit.
Section 6.02 Application for Conditional Use Permits.
A request for a conditional use permit or modification of a conditional use permit may be initiated by a property owner or his or her authorized agent by filing an application with the City upon forms prescribed for the purpose. The application shall be accompanied by a drawing or site plan and other such plans and data showing the dimensions, arrangements, descriptions data, and other materials constituting a record essential to an understanding of the proposed use and proposed modifications in relation to the provisions set forth herein. A plan as to the operation and maintenance of the proposed use shall also be submitted. The application shall be accompanied with a non-refundable fee.
Section 6.03 Public Hearing.
Before issuance of any conditional use permit, the Council will consider the application for the conditional use permit together with the recommendations of the Planning Commission at a public hearing after prior notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing has been given by publication in a legal paper of general circulation in the City of Wahoo, one time at least 10 days prior to such hearing, as well as any additional notice requirements as prescribed by the Revised State Statutes of Nebraska.
Section 6.04 Decisions.
All decisions by the City Council and the recommendations of the Planning Commission shall be required to provide findings of fact for their decision for either approval or denial. A majority vote of the Council shall be necessary to grant a conditional use permit.
The applicant shall have twelve months from the date of approval of the conditional use permit to commence the use, unless the Council specifically grants a longer period of time upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission. If the use stated within the Conditional Use Permit has not commenced within twelve months, or the approved time period if otherwise specified, said permit shall become invalid.
Section 6.05 Standards.
No conditional use permit shall be granted unless the Planning Commission or City Council has found:
6.05.01 That the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the conditional use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, moral, comfort, or general welfare of the community.
6.05.02 That the conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purpose already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood.
6.05.03 That the establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly development of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the district.
6.05.04 That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and/or necessary facilities have been or are being provided.
Article 6 Conditional Use Permits
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 117
6.05.05 Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
6.05.06 The use shall not include noise, which is objectionable due to volume, frequency, or beat unless muffled or otherwise controlled as defined and enforced per City Ordinance 1766.
6.05.07 The use shall not involve any pollution of the air by fly-ash, dust, vapors or other substance which is harmful to health, animals, vegetation or other property or which can cause soiling, discomfort, or irritation.
6.05.08 The use shall not involve any malodorous gas or matter, which is discernible on any adjoining lot or property.
6.05.09 The use shall not involve any direct or reflected glare, which is visible from any adjoining property or from any public street, road, or highway.
6.05.10 The use shall not involve any activity substantially increasing the movement of traffic on public streets unless procedures are instituted to limit traffic hazards and congestion.
6.05.11 The use shall not involve any activity substantially increasing the burden on any public utilities or facilities unless provisions are made for any necessary adjustments.
6.05.12 Conditional Uses shall adhere to Design Standards when located within the Transportation Corridor Overlay district.
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 118
ARTICLE 7: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
Section 7.01 Off-Street Automobile Storage and Stacking
7.01.01 Off-street automobile storage or standing space shall be provided on any lot on which any of the following uses are hereafter established; such space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or an alley. For purposes of computing the number of parking spaces available in a given area, the ratio of 250 square feet per parking space shall be used.
7.01.02 If vehicle storage space or standing space required in section 7.02 cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, the City Council, upon application and approval through a Conditional Use Permit, may permit such space to be provided on other off-street property, provided such space lies within 400 feet of an entrance to such principal use. Such vehicle standing space shall be deemed to be required open space associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner.
No parking is to be allowed within the city right-of-way to meet parking requirements unless application is made and approved through Conditional Use, with percent of required spaces allowed within right-of-way determined by the Council.
7.01.03 All parking spaces for Single-family, Rooming houses, convalescent homes, Apartments, Townhouses, and two or more unit multi-family dwellings, and Mobile Homes may be required to be paved with asphalt or concrete or other suitable surface.
7.01.04 Where calculations in accordance with the foregoing list results in requiring a fractional space, any fraction less than one-half shall be disregarded and any fraction of one-half or more shall require one space.
7.01.05 In Districts LLR, R-1, R-2, R-3, RM and NRC, required off-street parking shall be provided on the same lot on which the use is located. In other Districts, such parking may be provided either on the same lot or an adjacent or other lot provided the lot on which the use requiring them is located is not separated by more than 300 feet at closest points, measured along a street or streets.
7.01.06 Where off-street parking is located on a lot other than the lot occupied by the use, which requires it, site plan approval for both lots is required.
7.01.07 Some uses may require two different use types to be calculated together in order to determine the total parking requirement (Example: Primary schools may require a tabulation for classrooms and assembly areas)
7.01.08 The required off-street parking requirements shall not apply in the C-1 Downtown Commercial District only when on-street parking spaces within the right-of-way are provided and maintained by the City of Wahoo adjacent to the principal use and adjoining properties for use by the public. If such parking is not available, parking requirements must be met as required in 7.01.05, unless otherwise approved by Conditional Use Permit as stated in 7.01.902.
7.01.09 Commercial establishments providing drive-in or drive-through services shall provide minimum on-site stacking distances as provided below:
TYPES OF OPERATION
MINIMUM STACKING SPACE
Financial Institution – Electronic Teller
Two vehicles per lane*
Financial Institution – Personal Teller
Three vehicles per window or kiosk*
Car Wash – Self Service
Two vehicles per bay at entrance*
One vehicle per bay at exit
Car Wash – Automatic / Conveyor
200 feet per bay at entrance*
One vehicle per bay at exit
Drive-through Restaurant
Four vehicles per window*
Coffee Kiosk
- Drive side service
- Passenger side service
Four vehicles per lane*
Two vehicles per lane*
Drive-through Pharmacy
Two vehicles per lane*
Service Stations
- Service Islands
- Service bay
- Quick lube / Oil change “starting gate design”
- (4 or more pump islands side by side, 18 feet apart
Two vehicles per pump lane*
One vehicle per bay*
Two vehicles per bay*
One vehicle per lane*
Gated parking lot entrance
One vehicle per gate
Garage Unit or Overhead door (Major streets only)
One vehicle per door
Other uses
Two vehicles per lane being serviced
* Stacking requirements are in addition to vehicle being served.
Required vehicle stacking shall not block driveways or required parking stalls and shall not be located in side, front, or rear yards where parking stalls are prohibited. Each vehicle stacking unit shall be 22 feet long. Required stacking may be reduced by approval of the City Council following site plan review by the Planning Commission. Site plan review must demonstrate that circulation and loading patterns accommodate adequate space for queuing and temporary parking by users during peak hours of operation.
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 119
7.01.10 Requirements for types of buildings and uses not specifically listed herein shall be determined by the City Council, after receiving a report and recommendation from the Planning Commission, based upon comparable uses listed.
7.01.11 Required parking spaces for dwellings shall be located on the same lot with the dwelling. Other required parking spaces shall be located not more than 300 feet from the building or use they are required to serve, measured in a straight line from the building.
7.01.12 Unless otherwise provided, required parking and loading spaces shall not be located in a required front yard but may be located within a required side yard or rear yard.
7.01.13 A plan, drawn to scale, indicating how the off-street parking and loading requirements are to be fulfilled shall accompany an application for a building permit. The plan shall show all elements necessary to indicate that the requirement is being fulfilled, including the following:
1. Delineation of individual parking and loading spaces.
2. Circulation area necessary to serve spaces.
3. Access to streets and property to be served.
4. Curb cuts.
5. Dimensions, continuity, and substance screening.
6. Grading, drainage, surfacing and subgrade details.
7. Delineation of obstacles to parking and circulation in finished parking area.
8. Specifications as to signs and bumper guards.
9. Other pertinent details.
7.01.14 Design Requirements for parking lots
1. Areas used for standing and maneuvering of vehicles shall be composed of a suitable surface material, to be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission and City Council.
2. Said surfacing shall be maintained adequately for all weather use and drained in a manner to avoid the flow of water across sidewalks.
3. The structural load capacity of the surfacing should be analyzed and designed accordingly. In some instances, thicker or reinforced sections may be desirable.
4. Artificial lighting, when provided, shall be deflected so the light does not create a shine or glare in any residential district or adjacent residential use.
5. Access aisles shall be a sufficient width for all vehicles to turn and maneuver.
6. Except for dwelling units, parking spaces shall be located and served by a driveway that will not require any backing movements or other maneuvering within a street right-of-way other than an alley.
7. Drainage of all parking lots shall be designed to develop proper site drainage. Proper site drainage is required to dispose of all storm water that is accumulated on the site.
8. The completion schedule for constructing the parking lot shall be provided to the City as part of the application. The schedule must be reviewed and agreed to by the City prior to construction. Said schedule shall be reasonable for all parties and the completion time shall be followed by the applicant. Variations to the schedule may be granted only in the case of inclement weather delays.
9. All parking lots within the Transportation Corridor Overlay District are to be surfaced with asphalt and/or concrete and have curbed edging.
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 120
Section 7.02 Schedule of Minimum Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
7.02.01 The following table indicates the formulas necessary to calculate the needed parking spaces for a specific use.
Uses
Parking Requirements
Loading Requirements
Adult entertainment establishments
One space per two persons of licensed capacity
None required
Bowling Alleys
Four spaces per alley plus one per every two employees
One space per establishment
Churches, Synagogues, and Temples
One space per four seats in main worship area
None required
Clubs, including fraternal organizations
One space per 500 s.f. of gross floor area
One space per establishment
College/University
40% of student capacity
Two spaces per structure
Commercial Uses
Agricultural Sales / Service
One space per 500 s.f. of gross floor area
One per establishment
Automotive Rental / Sales
One space per 500 s.f. of gross floor area
One per establishment
Automotive Servicing
Three spaces per repair stall
None required
Bars, Taverns, Nightclubs
Parking equal to 30% of licensed capacity
Two spaces per establishment
Body Repair
Four spaces per repair stall
None required
Equipment Rental / Sales
One space per 500 s.f. of gross floor area
One Space
Campground
One space per camping unit
None required
Commercial Recreation
One space per four persons of licensed capacity
One per establishment
Communication Services
One space per 500 s.f. of gross floor area
One per establishment
Construction Sales / Service
One space per 500 s.f. of gross floor area
One per establishment
Food Sales (limited)
One space per 300 s.f. of gross floor area
One per establishment
Food Sales (general)
One space per 200 s.f. of gross floor area
Two per establishment
General Retail Sales establishments
One space per 200 s.f. of gross floor area
One per establishment
Laundry Services
One space per 200 s.f. of gross floor area
None required
Restaurants w/ drive-thru
One space per 150 s.f. of gross floor area
One per establishment
Restaurants (General)
Parking equal to 30% of licensed capacity
Two spaces per establishment
Convalescent and Nursing Home Services
One space per three beds plus one per employee on the largest shift
Two space per structure
Day Care
One space per employee plus one space or loading stall per each 10 persons of licensed capacity
None required
Educational Uses, Primary facilities
Two spaces per classroom
Two spaces per structure
Educational Uses, Secondary facilities
Eight spaces per classroom plus two spaces per employee on largest shift
Two spaces per structure
Funeral Homes and Chapels
Eight spaces per reposing room
Two spaces per establishment
Group Care Facility
One space per four persons of licensed capacity
Two space per structure
Group Home
One space per four persons of licensed capacity
Two space per structure
Guidance Services
One space per 300 s.f. of gross floor area
None required
Hospitals
One space per two licensed beds
Three spaces per structure
Hotels and Motels
One space per rental unit plus one per employee during the largest shift
One space per establishment
Housing (Congregate)
Assisted-living facilities
One space per dwelling unit plus one space per employee on the largest shift
One per structure
Duplex
Two spaces per dwelling unit
None required
Multi-family / Apartments
One space per sleeping unit – spaces to be sited in the general proximity of where the sleeping units are located
None required
Industrial Uses
One per every employees during the largest shift
Two spaces per establishment
Libraries
One space 500 s.f. of gross floor area
One per structure
Boarding Houses / Bed and Breakfasts
One space per rental units plus one per managing resident
None required
Medical Clinics
Five spaces per staff doctor, dentist, chiropractor
None required
Mobile Home Park
Two per dwelling unit
None required
Offices and Office Buildings
One space per 200 s.f. of gross floor area
None required
Residential (Single-family, attached and detached)
Two spaces per dwelling unit
None required
Roadside stands
Four spaces per establishment
None required
Service Oriented Establishments
One space per 200 s.f. of gross floor area
One per establishment
Theaters, Auditoriums, and Places of Assembly
One space per four persons of licensed capacity
One space per establishment
Veterinary Establishments
Three spaces per staff doctor
None required
Wholesaling / Distribution Operations
One space for every employee on the largest shift
Two spaces per establishment
2.03.522Bicycle Parking Requirements:
Each parking facility proving 50 spaces or more shall provide accommodations for bicycles as follows:
50-100 parking stalls
Five bicycle spaces
100 -150 parking stalls
Eight bicycle spaces
150 – 200 parking stalls
10 bicycle spaces
Over 200 parking stalls
Two additional for each 50 parking stalls
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 121
Section 7.03 Off-street Parking: Shared Parking requirements
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 7.02, in cases where parking and building patterns are such that overlapping uses of a majority of the total number of parking spaces in the center is likely to occur, compliance with the standard retail parking ratios may be decreased by the Planning Commission and City Council.
Section 7.04 Off-Street Parking: Parking for Individuals with Disabilities
7.04.01 In conformance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and the Nebraska Accessibility Guidelines, if parking spaces are provided for self-parking by employees or visitors, or both, then accessible spaces shall be provided in each parking area in conformance with the table in this section. Spaces required by the table need not be provided in the particular lot. They may be provided in a different, if equivalent or greater accessibility, in terms of distance from an accessible entrance, cost and convenience, is ensured.
7.04.02 Except as provided to Section 7.04.02 (1) of this Ordinance, access aisles adjacent to accessible spaces shall be 60 inches (1525 mm) wide minimum.
1. One in every eight accessible spaces, but not less than one, shall be served by an access aisle 96 inches (2440 mm) wide minimum and shall be designated “van accessible” as required by Section 7.04.04 of this Ordinance. The vertical clearance at such spaces shall comply with 7.04.05 of this Ordinance. All such spaces may be grouped on one level of a parking structure.
Parking access aisles shall be part of an accessible route to the building or facility entrance. Two (2) accessible parking spaces may share a common access aisle.
Parked vehicle overhangs shall not reduce the clear width of an accessible route. Parking spaces and access aisles shall be level with slopes not exceeding 1:50 (2%) in all directions.
2. If passenger-loading zones are provided, then at least one passenger loading zone shall comply with 7.04.06 of this Ordinance.
3. At facilities providing medical care and other services for persons with mobility impairments, parking spaces complying with 7.04 of this Ordinance shall be provided in accordance with 7.04.01 of this Ordinance; except as follows:
4. Outpatient units and facilities: 10 percent of total number of parking spaces provided serving each such outpatient unit or facility;
5. Units and facilities that specialize in treatment or services for persons with mobility impairments: 20 percent of the total number of parking spaces provided serving each such unit or facility.
6. Valet parking: valet parking facilities shall provide a passenger loading zone complying with 7.04.06 of this Ordinance located on an accessible route to the entrance of the facility. Sections 7.04.01, 7.04.02 (1), and 7.04.02 (3) of this Ordinance do not apply to valet parking.
a. Location of accessible parking spaces serving a particular building shall be located on the shortest accessible route of travel from adjacent parking to an accessible entrance.
i. In parking facilities that do not serve a particular building, accessible parking shall be located on the shortest accessible route of travel to an accessible pedestrian entrance of the parking facility.
ii. In buildings with multiple accessible entrances with adjacent parking, accessible parking spaces shall be dispersed and located closet to the accessible entrances.
b. Signage of accessible parking spaces shall be designated as reserved by a sign showing the symbol of accessibility. Spaces complying 7.04.02 (1) shall have an additional sign “Van Accessible” mounted below the symbol of accessibility. Such signs shall be located so they cannot be obscured by a vehicle parked in the space.
Total Parking Spaces
Required Minimum Number of Accessible Spaces
1 to 25
1
26 to 50
2
51 to 75
3
76 to 100
4
101 to 150
5
151 to 200
6
201 to 300
7
301 to 400
8
401 to 500
9
501 to 1,000
2 percent of the total
1,001 and over
20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 122
c. Minimum vertical clearance of 114 inches (2895mm) at accessible passenger loading zones and along at least one vehicle access route to such areas from site entrance(s) and exit(s). At parking spaces complying with 7.04.02 (1), provide minimum vertical clearance of 98 inches (2490mm) at the parking space and along at least one vehicle access route to such spaces from site entrance(s) and exit(s).
d. Passenger Loading Zones shall provide an access aisle at least 60 inches (1525mm) wide and 20 feet (240inches) (6100mm) long adjacent and parallel to the vehicle pull-up space. If there are curbs between the access aisle and the vehicle pull-up space, then a curb ramp complying with accessibility standards shall be provided. Vehicle standing spaces and access aisles shall be level with surface slopes not exceeding 1:50 (2%) in all directions.
Section 7.05 Off-Street Parking Design Criteria
7.05.01 Standard parking stall dimensions shall not be less than nine feet by 18 feet, plus the necessary space for maneuvering into and out of the space. Where the end of the parking space abuts a curbed area at least five feet in width (with landscaping or sidewalk), an overhang may be permitted which would reduce the length of the parking space by two feet. Such overhang shall be measured from the face of the curb. For standard parking lots, minimum dimensions shall be as follows:
Parking Configuration
90-degree
60-degree
45-degree
Aisle Width (A)
One-way traffic
-----
18 feet
14 feet
Two-way traffic
24 feet
20 feet
20 feet
End Parking Bay Width (B)
Without overhang
18 feet
20 feet
19 feet
With overhang
16 feet
18 feet
17 feet
Center Parking Bay Width (C)
18 feet
18 feet
16 feet
7.05.02 Minimum dimensions for a parallel parking space shall be nine feet by 23 feet
7.05.03 Minimum parking dimensions for other configurations or for parking lots with compact car spaces shall be determined by the Planning Commission and City Council upon recommendation of the City Engineer
7.05.04 All sites located within the Transportation Corridor Overlay shall comply with Design Standards.
Section 7.06 Sign Regulations
7.06.01 Purpose
The purpose of these sign regulations are: to encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the city; to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the city’s ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property; and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations. These sign regulations are adopted under the zoning authority of the city in furtherance of the more general purposes set forth in the zoning ordinance.
7.06.02 Applicability
A sign may be erected, placed, established, painted, created, or maintained within the city and the city’s extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction only in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions and other requirements of these sign regulations.
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 123
7.06.03 Definitions and Interpretation
Words and phrases used in this ordinance shall have the meanings set forth in Section 2. Principles for computing sign area and sign height are contained in Section 7.06.04.
7.06.04 Computations
1. Computation of Area of Individual Signs
The area of a sign face (which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face) shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets zoning ordinance regulations and is clearly identical to the display itself.
2. Computation of Area of Multi-faced Signs
The sign area for a sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical sign faces are placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are not more than 42 inches apart, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces.
3. Computation of Height
The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the grade at the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be from finished grade. Any berms shall be construed to be a part of the sign base and added to the overall height of the sign.
7.06.05 Permitted Signs and Limitations
1. Sign type, District Permitted
a. Signs shall be permitted in the various districts according to the following schedule:
Zoning District
FW
TA
LLR
R-1
R-2
R-3
NRC
C-1
C-2
C-3
I-1
I-2
LWC
RMD
HO
TC
Area C
Sign Type
Building Marker
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
S
+
Identification
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
S
+
Subdivision Entrance
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
+
+
+
-
+
-
+
Construction
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
S
+
Informational
-
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
-
C
S
C
Community or Civic
-
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
-
C
-
C
Center Identification
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
C
C
C
C
-
C
-
C
Temporary
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
S
+
Incidental
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
S
+
Real Estate
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
+
+
Wall
-
+
C
C
C
C
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
C
S
+
Canopy
-
+
C
C
C
C
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
C
S
+
Window
-
+
C
C
C
C
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
C
S
+
Projecting
-
+
C
C
C
C
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
S
+
Name Plate
C
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
S
+
Ground Monument*
-
C
C
C
C
C
+
C**
+
+
+
+
-
C
-
+
Billboard
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Pole*
-
C*
-
-
-
-
-
-
C*
C*
C*
C*
-
-
-
C***
+: permitted -: not permitted C: Conditional Use S: Special Review Required
* See Sec.07.08.07 Off-Premise Signs, for regulations governing off-premise pole and monument signs.
** Breakaway ground monument signs, meeting MUTCD standards for breakaway supports, in C-1 District on lot frontage adjacent to a major arterial route, subject to requirements of conditional use permit.
See Section 7.10 Home Occupations, for regulations on signs related to home occupations.
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 124
*** On-premise pole signs may be permitted through Conditional Use process in Transportation Corridor Overlay District, Area C, along Highway 77 Expressway as outlined in 7.08.08. Off-premise pole signs are prohibited in the Transportation Corridor Overlay District, Area C.
2. Signs, as designated in 7.06.05 Sec. 8 and subject to requirements for Conditional Use Permit, shall be permitted in the various districts at the listed square footage and heights according to the following schedule:
Zoning District
FW
TA
LLR
R-1
R-2
R-3
NRC
C-1
C-2
C-3
I-1
I-2
LWC
RMD
HO
TC
Area C
Sign Type
Identification
Max. Size (Square Ft.)
Max. Height (Ft.)
Number Allowed per building
-
-
-
21
NA
1
21
NA
1
21
NA
1
21
NA
1
21
NA
1
21
NA
1
21
NA
1
21
NA
1
21
NA
1
21
NA
1
21
NA
1
-
-
-
21
NA
1
21
NA
1
21
NA
1
Real Estate
Max. Size (Square Ft.)
Max. Height (Ft.)
Number Allowed per lot
-
-
32
6
2
6
-
2
6
-
2
6
-
2
6
-
2
6
-
2
32
6
2
32
6
2
32
6
2
32
6
2
32
6
2
-
-
-
6
-
2
6
-
2
6
-
2
Subdivision Entrance
Max. Size (Square Ft.)
Max. Lot Coverage (sq. Ft)
Max. Height (Ft.)
Number Allowed per lot
-
-
-
32
2,5004
10
15
32
2,500
10
15
32
2,5004
10
15
32
2,500
10
15
32
2,5004
10
15
32
2,5004
10
15
-
-
-
-
32
2,5004
10
15
32
2,5004
10
15
32
2,5004
10
15
32
2,5004
10
15
-
-
-
-
32
2,5004
10
15
32
2,5004
10
15
Community or Civic Signs
Max. Size (Square Ft.)
Max. Height (Ft)
Number per Interchange
Setback (from R.O.W.)
-
-
-
-
640
28
2
30
640
28
2
30
640
28
2
30
640
28
2
30
640
28
2
30
640
28
2
30
640
28
2
30
640
28
2
30
640
28
2
30
640
28
2
30
640
28
2
30
-
-
-
-
640
28
2
30
640
28
2
30
Construction Signs
Max. Size (Square Ft.)
Max. Height (Ft.)
Number Allowed per lot
-
-
-
32
8
46
32
8
46
32
8
46
32
8
46
32
8
46
32
8
46
32
8
46
32
8
46
32
8
46
32
8
46
32
8
46
-
-
-
32
8
46
32
8
46
32
8
46
Informational Signs7
Max. Size (Square Ft.)
Max. Height (Ft.)
Number per Intersection
Setback (from R.O.W.)
-
-
-
-
640
28
2
30
640
28
2
30
640
28
2
30
640
28
2
30
640
28
2
30
640
28
2
30
20
10
2
30
640
28
2
30
640
28
2
30
640
28
2
30
640
28
2
30
-
-
-
-
640
28
2
30
640
28
2
30
640
28
2
30
Canopy
Max. Size
Max. Height (Ft.)
Number Allowed per building
-
-
-
25%2
NA
1
25%2
NA
1
25%2
NA
1
25%2
NA
1
25%2
NA
1
25%2
NA
1
25%2
NA
1
25%2
NA
1
25%2
NA
1
25%2
NA
1
25%2
NA
1
-
-
-
-
25%2
NA
1
25%2
NA
1
25%2
NA
1
Window
Max. Size
Max. Height (Ft.)
Number Allowed per building/ storefront
-
-
-
25%3
NA
2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
25%3
NA
2
25%3
NA
2
25%3
NA
2
25%3
NA
2
25%3
NA
2
25%3
NA
2
-
-
-
-
25%3
NA
2
Projecting
Max. Size (Square Ft.)
Max. Height (Ft.)
Number Allowed per building
-
-
-
12
NA
1
12
NA
1
12
NA
1
12
NA
1
12
NA
1
12
NA
1
12
NA
1
12
NA
1
12
NA
1
12
NA
1
12
NA
1
-
-
-
-
12
NA
1
Name Plate
Max. Size (Square Ft.)
Max. Height (Ft.)
Number Allowed per building
-
-
-
2
NA
1
2
NA
1
2
NA
1
2
NA
1
2
NA
1
2
NA
1
2
NA
1
2
NA
1
2
NA
1
2
NA
1
2
NA
1
-
-
-
-
2
NA
1
-: not permitted NA: Not Applicable
1: Maximum letter height is equal to 12 inches
2: percentage of total Canopy area
3: percentage of total window area
4: When constructed as a landscaping element on an outlot or plat lot
5: Per Entrance
6: Maximum number equal to four when every sign equals the maximum size, no maximum number when using six square foot signs
7: All criteria shall apply unless the signs are controlled through the Nebraska Department of Roads or their agent(s)
Note: All signs shall have a Vertical Clearance of nine feet above any sidewalk, private drive, or parking.
All signs shall have a Vertical Clearance of 12 feet above any Public Street.
See Section 7.10 Home Occupations, for regulations on signs related to home occupations.
3. Ground Monument
a. Monument signs shall be located along the frontage of the zoned lot. All signs shall be of permanent construction and are subject to the provisions of local codes and ordinances. On corner lots, the monument sign may be place on either frontage.
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 125
b. All ground monument signs shall be located on the same lot as the advertised use, except as provided in Section 07.08.07.
c. Change panels may include advertised gasoline prices and any other service provided in the principal building / structure. Electronic message displays may be incorporated into the ground monument sign, provided a Conditional Use Permit has been obtained in accordance with Article 6 of these regulations.
d. Setbacks for all ground monument signs are 10 feet.
e. The following criteria apply to Ground Monument signs as designated in 7.06.05 Sec. 8 and subject to requirements for Conditional Use Permit:
District
Design Limitations for Ground Monuments
Max. Size
Max. Height
Max. Number
TA
50 square feet
10 feet
One per lot frontage.1
LLR
32 square feet
10 feet
One per lot frontage. 1
R-1
32 square feet
10 feet
One per lot frontage. 1
R-2
32 square feet
10 feet
One per lot frontage. 1
R-3
32 square feet
10 feet
One per lot frontage. 1
NRC
32 square feet
10 feet
One per lot frontage. 1
C-1
32 square feet²
6 feet²
One per lot frontage.²
C-2
32 square feet
10 feet
One per lot frontage. 1
C-3
32 square feet
10 feet
One per lot frontage. 1
I-1
32 square feet
10 feet
One per lot frontage. 1
I-2
32 square feet
10 feet
One per lot frontage. 1
RMD
The maximum allowed within the underlying zoning district
The maximum allowed within the underlying zoning district
The maximum allowed within the underlying zoning district
LWC
HO
The maximum allowed within the underlying zoning district
The maximum allowed within the underlying zoning district
The maximum allowed within the underlying zoning district
TC
Area C
32 square feet
10 feet
One per lot frontage. 1
1 On a corner lot that adjoins two Arterials or one Arterial and one Collector, the total number of signs may be increased to two with one on each frontage.
² Breakaway ground monument signs meeting MUTCD standards for breakaway supports, in C-1 District on lot frontage adjacent to a major arterial route, subject to requirements of conditional use permit.
4. Center Identification Signs
a. All Center Identification signs shall be a ground monument style sign.
b. All Center Identification signs shall be located on an outlot within the development.
c. All Center Identification signs shall be constructed in a manner that is permanent and permeable.
d. Acceptable materials include:
 Exterior Insulation Finish System (EIFS)
 Brick, Split face Concrete Masonry Units, Stone
 Metal
 Simulated Acrylic, or
 Other materials provided said design is reflective of the character of the use.
e. All Center Identification signs shall advertise only the name of the development, unless in compliance with Subsection g below.
f. Setbacks for all Center Identification Signs shall be 20 feet along a street designated as an arterial or collector and 10 feet along any street designated as a local, minor or private street.
g. Change panels and/or changeable copy may be allowed and have the following provisions:
 Panel may be translucent and / or backlit
 Panels may be opaque
 Fonts shall be similar to that of the development name
 Said panels and / or copy match in color and material to the overall sign when created in an opaque style.
h. The following criteria apply to Center Identification signs as designated in 7.06.05 Sec. 8 and subject to requirements for Conditional Use Permit:
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 126
District
Design Limitations for Center Identification Signs
Max. Size
Max. Height
Max. Number
TA
LLR
R-1
R-2
R-3
NRC
C-1
C-2
100 square feet
20 feet
One per street frontage of the development
C-3
100 square feet
20 feet
One per street frontage of the development
I-1
100 square feet
20 feet
One per main entrance but not more than three.
I-2
100 square feet
20 feet
One per main entrance but not more than three.
LWC
RMD
The maximum allowed within the underlying zoning district
The maximum allowed within the underlying zoning district
The maximum allowed within the underlying zoning district
HO
The maximum allowed within the underlying zoning district
The maximum allowed within the underlying zoning district
The maximum allowed within the underlying zoning district
TC Area C
120 square feet
20 feet
One per main entrance but not more than three.
5. Wall Signs
a. All wall signs shall be mounted to the primary face of the use. Electronic message displays may be incorporated into the wall sign, provided a Conditional Use Permit has been obtained in accordance with Article 6 of these regulations.
b. The following criteria apply to Wall Signs as designated in 7.06.05 Sec. 8 and subject to requirements for Conditional Use Permit:
District
Design Limitations for Wall Signs
Max. Size
Max. Height
Max. Number
TA
1.5 square feet per lineal foot of building / storefront to a
Max. of 400 sq. ft.
45 feet above grade
One per storefront -- Dual Frontage = one additionalWall Sign may be used provided the combined total area does not exceed 150% of the initial allowable area.
LLR
R-1
R-2
R-3
NRC
1.5 square feet per lineal foot of building / storefront to a Max. of 200 sq. ft.
45 feet above grade
One per storefront -- Dual Frontage = one additional Wall Sign may be used provided the combined total area does not exceed 150% of the initial allowable area.
C-1
1.5 square feet per lineal foot of building / storefront to a Max. of 200 sq. ft
45 feet above grade
One per storefront -- Dual Frontage = one additional Wall Sign may be used provided the combined total area does not exceed 150% of the initial allowable area.
C-2
1.5 square feet per lineal foot of building / storefront to a Max. of 600 sq. ft.
45 feet above grade
One per storefront -- Dual Frontage = one additional Wall Sign may be used provided the combined total area does not exceed 150% of the initial allowable area.
C-3
1.5 square feet per lineal foot of building / storefront to a Max. of 400 sq. ft.
45 feet above grade
One per storefront -- Dual Frontage = one additional Wall Sign may be used provided the combined total area does not exceed 150% of the initial allowable area.
I-1
1.5 square feet per lineal foot of building / storefront to a Max. of 400 sq. ft.
45 feet above grade
One per main frontage -- Dual Frontage = one additional Wall Sign may be used provided the combined total area does not exceed 150% of the initial allowable area.
I-2
1.5 square feet per lineal foot of building / storefront to a Max. of 400 sq. ft.
45 feet above grade
One per main frontage -- Dual Frontage = one additional Wall Sign may be used provided the combined total area does not exceed 150% of the initial allowable area.
LWC
RMD
The maximum allowed within the underlying zoning district
The maximum allowed within the underlying zoning district
The maximum allowed within the underlying zoning district
HO
The maximum allowed within the underlying zoning district
The maximum allowed within the underlying zoning district
The maximum allowed within the underlying zoning district
TC
Area C
1.5 square feet per lineal foot of building / storefront to a Max. of 600 sq. ft.
45 feet above grade
One per storefront -- Dual Frontage = one additional Wall Sign may be used provided the combined total area does not exceed 150% of the initial allowable area.
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 127
6. Incidental Signs
a. Incidental signs shall be placed in locations along the primary face of the building.
b. Incidental signs may be placed on a second building face, when the building has dual frontage.
c. The following criteria apply to Incidental Signs as designated in 7.06.05 Sec. 8 and subject to requirements for Conditional Use Permit:
District
Design Limitations for Incidental Signs
Max. Size
Max. Height
Max. Number
TA
10 sq. ft. of area each
25 feet above grade
One per 40 lineal feet of storefront
LLR
--
--
--
R-1
--
--
--
R-2
--
--
--
R-3
--
--
--
NRC
10 sq. ft of area each
25 feet above grade
One per 40 lineal feet of storefront
C-1
10 sq. ft. of area each
25 feet above grade
One per 40 lineal feet of storefront
C-2
10 sq. ft. of area each
25 feet above grade
One per 40 lineal feet of storefront
C-3
10 sq. ft. of area each
25 feet above grade
One per 40 lineal feet of storefront
I-1
10 sq. ft. of area each
25 feet above grade
One per 40 lineal feet of storefront
I-2
10 sq. ft. of area each
25 feet above grade
One per 40 lineal feet of storefront
LWC
--
--
--
RMD
The maximum allowed within the underlying zoning district
The maximum allowed within the underlying zoning district
The maximum allowed within the underlying zoning district
HO
See Section ****
See Section 5.21
One per 40 lineal feet of storefront
TC
Area C
The maximum allowed within the underlying zoning district
The maximum allowed within the underlying zoning district
The maximum allowed within the underlying zoning district
7. Other Permitted Signs as designated in 7.06.05 Sec. 8 and subject to requirements for Conditional Use Permit
i. Canopy
ii. Identification
iii. Projecting
iv. Subdivision Entrance Signs
v. Construction Signs
vi. Community or Civic Signs
vii. Informational Signs
viii. Real Estate
ix. Nameplate
x. Temporary (see Section 7.06.21)
xi. Window
8. Informational and Community or Civic Signs
Informational and Community or Civic Signs shall be located near the major interchanges of a Primary Highway unless the sign is considered to be a Logo Sign and/or other sign controlled by the Nebraska Department of Roads or their agent(s). Community or Civic Signs shall dedicate a minimum of 25% of the square footage to community or civic activities.
9, Electronic Message Display Signs
In all zoning districts, on-premises electronic message display signs may be allowed if a Conditional Use Permit has been obtained in accordance with Article 6 of these regulations. All electronic message display signs shall be constructed as an integral part of a permanent sign (monument, wall, projecting) constructed on site. Integral shall be considered to be incorporated into the framework and architectural design of the permanent sign. The sign area displaying electronic changeable messages shall be included as a part of the permitted signage for the premises on which it is located. The maximum sign area for an electronic message display portion of a sign shall be no greater than thirty-five percent of the maximum total allowable sign area.
No message on an electronic message display sign shall be animated, have movement, or the appearance or optical illusion of movement, of any part of the sign structure, design, or pictorial segment of the sign, including the movement of any illumination or the flashing, scintillating or
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 128
varying of light intensity. Such displays shall contain static messages only. Transition between messages are permitted, but such transitions may only fade, dissolve, scroll, or travel, and not have the appearance of moving text or images. The transition shall not exceed a duration of two (2) seconds. On electronic message displays of 60 square feet or less, each advertisement displayed must remain fixed for at least five (5) seconds; if there is more than one advertisement per face, then when any advertisement changes, the entire face shall remain fixed for five (5) seconds. Electronic message displays greater than 60 square feet must remain fixed for at least ten (10) seconds; if there is more than one advertisement per face, then when any advertisement changes, the entire face shall remain fixed for ten (10) seconds. Such signs must contain a default mechanism that will freeze the sign in one position if a malfunction occurs. Electronic message display signs shall include internal ambient light monitors that automatically adjust the brightness level of the electronic display.
10. Special Signage Conditions
The following special conditions apply to stand-alone ATM’s, Coffee Kiosks and other Kiosks.
A. Stand-alone ATM’s may have the following:
 One wall sign on each exterior wall provided each wall sign does not exceed 10 percent of the applicable exterior wall and the total shall not exceed 40 square feet in size.
 Where a canopy in integrated into the ATM, a canopy sign may be placed on each face of the ATM, provided the overall height of the canopy and sign do not exceed 24 inches. In addition, the overall size of all canopy signs shall not exceed 40 square feet.
 Directional signage shall be contained on the ATM, painted within a drive lane or in any curbing defining a drive lane.
 All signs are subject to the required permitting process of this Ordinance.
 Said signage may be incorporated with lighting plan and backlit in order to provide for greater security on the premises.
B. Coffee Kiosks and other Kiosks may have the following:
 One wall sign on each exterior wall not used for drive-up service provided each wall sign does not exceed 10 percent of the applicable exterior wall and the total shall not exceed 40 square feet in size.
 Where a canopy in integrated into the Coffee Kiosks / Kiosks, a canopy sign may be placed on each face of the Coffee Kiosk / Kiosks, provided the overall height of the canopy and sign do not exceed 24 inches. In addition, the overall size of all canopy signs shall not exceed 40 square feet.
 Directional signage shall be contained on the Coffee Kiosk /Kiosk, painted within a drive lane or in any curbing defining a drive lane
 Window signs limited to menu boards and daily specials shall not require a sign permit.
 All signs are subject to the required permitting process of this Ordinance, unless otherwise noted.
7.06.06 Permits Required
1. If a sign requiring a permit under the provision of the ordinance is to be placed, constructed, erected, or modified on a zone lot, the owner of the lot shall secure a sign permit prior to the construction, placement, erection, or modification of such a sign in accordance with the requirements of Section 7.09.
2. Furthermore, the property owner shall maintain in force, at all times, a sign permit for such sign in accordance with Section 7.09
3. No signs shall be erected or placed in the public right-of-way except in accordance with Section 7.08.01.
4. Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, no sign permit of any kind shall be issued for an existing or proposed sign unless such sign is consistent with the requirements of this ordinance (including those protecting existing signs) in every respect and with the Common Signage Plan in effect for the property. Any existing sign that does not meet the requirements of this Chapter shall be deemed a nonconforming sign and shall either be removed or brought into compliance with the City’s Zoning Regulations when a substantial alteration to the sign is made. For purposes of this Section, a “substantial alteration” shall be defined as repair or refurbishing of any sign that alters its
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 129
physical dimensions or height, or replaces any integral component of the sign including, but not limited to, alterations to exterior cabinets, bases, or poles. No such sign may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity; however customary maintenance may be permitted. “Customary maintenance” shall be defined as any activity or work performed for the purpose of actively maintaining the sign in the existing approved physical configuration and size dimensions at the specific location approved by the City and includes the following:
a. Repainting the sign text, cabinet, or other component of the sign; or
b. Changing the advertising message; or
c. Routine maintenance with substantially the same materials.
Furthermore, a nonconforming sign may remain in use provided no additions or enlargements are made thereto and no structural alterations are made therein, except as permitted for “customary maintenance” as described above. If said nonconforming sign is destroyed or removed, every future sign at the same location must be in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter.
7.06.07 Design, Construction, Maintenance
All signs shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards:
1. All signs shall comply with applicable provisions of the Uniform Building Code and the National Electrical Code.
2. Except for flags, temporary signs, real estate signs, political signs, and window signs conforming in all respects with the requirements of this ordinance, all signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a building or another structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame or structure.
3. All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition, in compliance with all building and electrical codes and in conformance with this code, at all times.
Section 7.07 Signage Plans
7.07.01 General Provisions
1. No permit shall be issued for an individual sign requiring a permit unless and until an Individual Signage Plan or Master Signage Plan for the zoned lot on which the sign will be erected has been submitted to the City and approved by the Building Inspector as conforming to this section.
2. All signage plans and permits shall include the following minimum information:
a. Color scheme;
b. Lettering or graphic style;
c. Lighting;
d. Location of each sign on the buildings;
e. Material;
f. Sign proportions; and
g. Any other criteria required by the appropriate signage plan.
7.07.02 Master Signage Plan.
For any zoned lot on which the owner proposes to erect more than one sign requiring a permit, the owner shall submit to the Building Inspector a Master Signage Plan containing the following:
1. An accurate plot plan of the zone lot, at such a scale as the Building Inspector may require;
2. Location of buildings, parking lots, driveways, and landscaped areas on such zone lot;
3. Computation of the maximum total sign area, the maximum area for individual signs, the height of signs and the number of freestanding signs allowed on the zone lot(s) included in the plan under this ordinance and
4. An accurate indication on the plot plan of the proposed location of each present and future sign of any type, whether requiring a permit or not, except that incidental signs need not be shown.
7.07.03 Individual Signage Plan
1. For any zoned lot on which a Master Signage Plan has been submitted and approved, an applicant shall submit a permit request to the City of Wahoo for the installation of any individual sign.
2. For any zoned lot and / or storefront where an individual tenant is moving into an established lease space, the new tenant or said agent for new tenant shall submit an Individual Signage Plan to the City of Wahoo for review, comment and approval.
7.07.04 Showing Window Signs on Individual, or Master Signage Plan.
An Individual Signage Plan or Master Signage Plan including window signs may simply indicate the areas of the windows to be covered by window signs and the general type of the window (e.g., paper affixed to window, painted, etched on glass, or some other material hung inside window) and need not specify the exact dimension or nature of every window sign.
7.07.05 Other Provisions of Master Signage Plans.
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 130
The Master or Individual Signage Plan may contain such other restrictions as the owners of the zone lots may reasonably determine.
7.07.06 Consent.
The Master or Individual Signage Plan shall be signed by all owners or their authorized agents in such form as required by the City.
7.07.07 Procedures.
A Master or Individual Signage Plan shall be included in any development plan, site plan, or other official plan required by the city for the proposed development and shall be processed simultaneously with such other plan.
7.07.08 Amendment.
A Master or Individual Signage Plan may be amended by filing a new Master Signage Plan that conforms to all requirements of the ordinance then in effect.
7.07.09 Binding Effect.
After approval of a Master or Individual Signage Plan, no sign shall be erected, placed, painted, or maintained, except in conformance with such plan, and such plan may be enforced in the same way as any provision of this ordinance. In case of any conflict between the provisions of such a plan and any other provision of this ordinance, the ordinance shall control.
Section 7.08 Other Signage Provisions
7.08.01 Signs in the Public Right-of-Way
No signs shall be allowed in the public right-of-way, except for the following:
1. Permanent Signs. Permanent signs, including:
a. Public signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to post legal notices, identify public property, convey public information, advertise community events, and direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
b. Informational signs of a public utility regarding its poles, lines, pipes, or facilities; and
c. Awning, projecting, and suspended signs projecting over a public right-of-way in conformity with the conditions of Section 7.06.05.
2. No signs shall be erected in any Nebraska State Highway right of way without the written approval of the Nebraska Department of Roads.
3. Temporary signs placed within the City of Wahoo street right of way may not exceed 432 square inches (3 square feet) in area, and shall not create an obstruction to vision as per Section 4.08 of this Ordinance and/or a collision hazard to the public. Temporary signs shall not be placed on trees or utility structures, including poles, cabinets, fire hydrants, and streetlights. Temporary signs shall not be placed in the right of way without permission of the abutting property owner.
7.08.02 Temporary Signs
Temporary signs shall meet the following criteria:
1. No temporary sign shall be of such size, message, or character so to harm the public, health, safety or general welfare. No sign in this provision shall create an obstruction to vision, as per Section 4.08 of this Ordinance and/or a collision hazard to the public.
2. Temporary signs may be for a continual period that has a limited amount of time not to exceed thirty (30) days except that Real Estate signs may be in place until the property sale is finalized.
3. Temporary signs may be allowed in a manner where they are put in place during certain periods of time (set up in the morning and taken down in the evening) without a specific end date and these signs may advertise an off-premises business and/or organization.
4. Real Estate signs shall be on the property being advertised unless there is an “Open House” Real Estate sign located elsewhere for not more than two days.
5. Temporary signs advertising or referencing a specific event shall be removed within ten days after the event.
6. Portable or mobile signs as defined in these regulations shall not be placed in any street right of way. The face of a portable sign may not be larger than 4 feet by 8 feet, and must first obtain a Portable Sign Permit from the building inspector/zoning administrator. Such permit is limited to a period of thirty (30) days, and may be renewed. These signs may advertise an off-premises business and/or organizations.
7.08.03 Emergency Signs (Permitted)
Emergency warning signs erected by a governmental agency, public utility company, or a contractor doing authorized or permitted work within the public right-of-way.
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 131
7.08.04 Other Signs Forfeited
Any sign installed or placed on public property, except in conformance with the requirements of this section, shall be forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation. In addition, to other remedies hereunder, the city shall have the right to recover from the owner or person placing such a sign the full costs of removal and disposal of such sign.
7.08.05 Signs Exempt from Regulation Under this Ordinance
The following signs shall be exempt from regulation under this ordinance, except no sign in this provision shall create an obstruction to vision, as per Section 4.08 of this Ordinance and / or a collision hazard to the public:
Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable federal, state, or local law, regulation or ordinance;
Any religious symbol;
Construction signs when equal to six square feet or less;
Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door, that is not legible from a distance of more than three feet beyond the lot line of the zone lot or parcel on which such sign is located
Holiday lights and decorations with no commercial message;
Traffic control signs on private property, such as Stop, Yield, and similar signs, the face of which meets the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices standards and which contain no commercial message of any sort; and
A political campaign sign, on private property, exhibited in conjunction with a public election.
7.08.06 Signs Prohibited Under These Regulations
All signs not expressly permitted in these regulations or exempt from regulation hereunder in accordance with the previous section are prohibited in the city. Such signs include, but are not limited to:
1. Beacons;
2. Marquee signs;
3. Roof signs;
4. Suspended signs;
5. Strings of lights not permanently mounted to a rigid background, except those exempt under the previous section;
6. Permanent off-premises signs, except as stipulated in 07.08.07, if a Conditional Use Permit for such has been obtained in accordance with Article 6 of these Regulations;
7. Animated signs;
8. Audible Signs.
07.08.07 Off-Premise Signs may be allowed if a Conditional Use Permit has been obtained in accordance with Article 6 of these regulations, subject to the following conditions:
1. Districts Allowed. Off-premise signs shall only be permitted in the C-2, C-3, T-A, I-1 & I-2 districts established under this Ordinance.
2. Types of Signs. Off-premise signs shall be limited to pole and/or monument signs.
3. Sign Surface Area for Off-Premise Signs.
a. Limited Access Highways – The maximum sign surface area for off-premise signs oriented toward a limited access highway shall be six-hundred and seventy-two (672) square feet.
b. All Other Streets – The maximum sign surface area for off-premise signs oriented toward any street not classified as a limited access highway shall be three hundred (300) square feet.
c. Number of Displays – An off-premise sign shall not contain more than two (2) displays or messages per sign surface.
d. Concealment of Sign Supports – The backs of off-premise signs shall be: concealed by another sign surface; screened by suitable architectural treatment; or, painted to blend with the surrounding (and maintained as such), so that the supports, tie rods, bracing or framework which supports the sign surface is screened from view.
e. Empty Displays Prohibited – Empty sign surfaces, or signs without a display or message covering the entire sign surface, shall be prohibited. This regulation shall apply individually to each display surface.
4. Distance Between Off-Premise Signs.
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 132
a. Linear Spacing / Limited Access Highways – The minimum separation between off-premise signs located along and oriented toward the same limited access highway shall be two-thousand five hundred (2,500) feet.
b. Linear Spacing / All Other Streets – The minimum separation between off-premise signs located along and oriented toward the same street shall be seven-hundred and fifty (750) feet.
c. Measurement of Linear Spacing – The method of measurement of the spacing between off-premise signs oriented toward the same limited access highway or street shall be along the centerline of the limited access highway or street to which the off-premise sign is oriented, from the point in the centerline closest to the leading edge of the off-premise sign.
d. Radial Spacing – In no event shall an off-premise sign be located closer than three hundred (300) feet from any other off-premise sign regardless of location or orientation.
5. Placement Limitations Along Limited Access Highways.
a. Location Restrictions – No off-premise sign shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of an interchange, at-grade intersection or rest area on any limited access highway.
b. Measurement – The method of measurement of the location restrictions along a limited access highway shall be along the centerline of the limited access highway or street, measured from the nearest point of the intersection of the centerline of the exit / entrance ramp or intersecting street and the right hand lane of the main traveled way of the limited access highway closest to the off-premise sign.
6. Maximum Height of Off-Premise Signs.
The maximum height of an off-premise pole sign shall conform to all applicable regulations from appropriate authorities. Ground monument signs shall be in accordance with conditions set forth in 7.06.05.
7. Minimum Front Yard Setback, Side Yard Setback and Rear Yard Setback of Off-Premise Signs.
The minimum front, rear, or side yard setback for an off-premise sign shall be the
same as required for any building or structure within the zoning district.
8. Construction of Off-Premise Signs.
The supports, uprights, bracing and framework of an off-premise pole sign shall be of metal construction.
07.08.08 Signs in Transportation Corridor Overlay District, Area
The Transportation Corridor Overlay District, Area C, extends one-quarter of a mile either side of the U. S. Highway 77 corridor. Signs located within the Transportation Corridor Overlay District, Area C, shall comply with all applicable Nebraska Department of Roads and/or Federal Highway Administration Regulations and requirements, and obtain any necessary permits and approval through those agencies, in addition to compliance with Section 7.06.05 and any other applicable sections of the Wahoo Zoning Ordinance.
Pole signs located within the Transportation Corridor Overlay District, Area C, may be allowed if a Conditional Use Permit has been obtained in accordance with Article 6 of these regulations, and shall be limited to:
1. A maximum size of 200 square feet (see 7.06.04 Computations)
2. A maximum height of 35 feet (see 7.06.04 Computations)
3. On premise signs only
4. One pole sign per parcel
5. Setbacks for pole signs shall be the same as required for any building or structure within the zoning district
6. Signs shall be internally lighted
Section 7.09 Permit Procedures
7.09.01 General Permit Procedures
The following procedures shall govern the application for, and issuance of, all sign permits under this ordinance, and the submission and review of Master Signage Plans.
7.09.02 Applications
All applications for sign permits of any kind and for approval of a Master Signage Plan shall be submitted to the City on an application form or in accordance with application specifications published by the City.
7.09.03 Fees
Each application for a sign permit or for approval of a Master Signage Plan shall be accompanied by the applicable fees, which shall be established in the Master Fee Schedule.
7.09.04 Completeness
Upon receiving an application for a sign permit or for a Master Signage Plan, the Building Inspector shall review it for completeness. If the Building Inspector finds that it is complete, the application shall then be
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 133
processed. If the Building Inspector finds that it is incomplete, the Building Inspector shall, send to the applicant a notice of the specific ways in which the application is deficient, with appropriate references to the applicable sections of this ordinance.
7.09.05 Action
Within fourteen working days of the submission of a complete application for a sign permit, the Building Inspector shall either:
1. Issue the sign permit, if the sign(s) that is the subject of the application conforms in every respect with the requirements of this ordinance and applicable Master Signage Plan; or
2. Reject the sign permit if the sign(s) that is the subject of the application fails in any way to conform with the requirements of this ordinance and the applicable Master Signage Plan. In case of a rejection, the Building Inspector shall specify in the rejection the section or sections of the ordinance or applicable plan with which the sign(s) is inconsistent.
7.09.06 Permits to Construct or Modify Signs
All signs shall be erected, installed, or created only in accordance with a duly issued and valid sign construction permit from the Building Inspector. Such permits shall be issued only in accordance with the following requirements and procedures.
7.09.07 Permit for New Sign or for Sign Modification
An application for construction, creation, or installation of a new sign or for modification of an existing sign shall be accompanied by detailed drawings to show the dimensions, design, structure, and location of each particular sign, to the extent that such details are not contained on a Master Signage Plan then in effect for the zone lot.
7.09.08 Inspection
The Building Inspector shall cause an inspection of the zoned lot for which each permit for a new sign or for modification of an existing sign is issued during the sixth month after the issuance of such permit or at such earlier date as the owner may request. If the construction is not substantially complete at the time of inspection, the permit shall lapse and become void. If the construction is substantially complete but not in full compliance with this ordinance and applicable codes, the Building Inspector shall give the owner or applicant notice of the deficiencies and shall allow an additional 30 days from the date of inspection for the deficiencies to be corrected. If the deficiencies are not corrected by such date, the permit shall lapse.
7.09.09 Sign Permits  Continuing
The owner of a zone lot containing signs requiring a permit under this ordinance shall at all times maintain in force a sign permit for such property. Sign permits shall be issued for individual zone lots, notwithstanding the fact that a particular zone lot may be included with other zone lots in a Common Signage Plan.
7.09.10 Initial Sign Permit
An initial sign permit shall be automatically issued by the Building Inspector covering the period from the date of inspection of the completed sign installation, construction, or modification through the last day of that calendar year.
7.09.11 Lapse of Sign Permit
A sign permit shall lapse automatically if the business license for the premises lapses, is revoked, or is not renewed. A sign permit shall also lapse if the business activity on the premises is discontinued for a period of 180 days or more and is not renewed within 30 days of a notice from the city to the last permittee, sent to the premises, that the sign permit will lapse if such activity is not renewed.
7.09.12 Assignment of Sign Permits
A current and valid sign permit shall be freely assignable to a successor as owner of the property or holder of a business license for the same premises, subject only to filing such application as the Building Inspector may require and paying any applicable fee. The assignment shall be accomplished by filing and shall not require approval.
7.09.13 Sign Removal Required
A sign that was constructed, painted, installed, or maintained in conformance with a permit under this ordinance, but for which the permit has lapsed or not been renewed or for which the time allowed for the
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 134
continuance of a nonconforming sign has expired, shall be forthwith removed without notice or action from the city.
7.09.14 Violations
1. Any of the following shall be a violation of these regulations and shall be subject to the enforcement remedies and penalties provided by the Wahoo Zoning Ordinance, and by state law:
a. To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign in a way that is inconsistent with any plan or permit governing such sign or the zone lot on which the sign is located;
b. To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign requiring a permit without such permit;
c. To fail to remove any sign that is installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of this ordinance, or for which the sign permit has lapsed.
d. To continue any such violation. Each day of a continued violation shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty portions of this ordinance.
e. Each sign installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of this ordinance shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty portions of this ordinance.
7.09.15 Fee Schedule
The fees for sign permits and plans are contained within the Master Fee Schedule.
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 135
Section 7.10 Home Occupations
Home Occupations shall be permitted as accessory uses in the TA, LLR, R-1, R-2, R-3, RM, C-1, and NRC Districts, subject to the following:
7.10.01 A home occupation shall be permitted when said occupation conducted on residentially used premises is considered customary and traditional, incidental to the primary use of the premises as a residence.
7.10.02 Permitted home occupations shall be of a personal service nature limited to domestic crafts and professional service, including, but not limited to:
1. Such domestic crafts as dressmaking, millinery, sewing, weaving, tailoring, ironing, washing, custom home furnishings work, carpentry work, and furniture repair.
2. Such professions as law, medicine, architecture, engineering, planning, real estate, insurance, notary public, manufacturer’s agent, clergy, writing, painting, photography, and tutoring.
3. Family Child Care Home I licensed in accordance with Nebr. Rev. Stat. §§71-1901 et. seq. and 71-908 et. Seq. (R.R.S. 1996).
4. Barber and Beauty Shops.
a. Limited to one chair.
5. Distribution and sales of products such as cosmetics, home/health care products, mail order, internet-based businesses, telecommuting, and other similar uses.
6. Services provided outside the home such as lawn care, snow removal, and other similar uses.
7.10.03 Performance Standards for Home Occupations
1. Permitted home occupations shall be subject to all the regulations of the applicable zone district.
2. Permitted home occupations shall not affect adversely the residential character of the zone district or interfere with the reasonable enjoyment of adjoining properties.
3. Prohibited uses are those uses that are deemed to be in violation of the Performance Standards of this Ordinance.
4. The primary use of the structure or dwelling unit shall remain residential and the operator of the home occupation shall remain a resident in the dwelling unit.
5. The operator conducting the home occupation shall be the sole entrepreneur, and he shall not employ any other person other than a member of the immediate family residing on the premises. This standard applies only when the primary service is conducted within the confines of the residence.
6. No structural additions, enlargements, or exterior alterations changing the residential appearance to a business appearance shall be permitted.
7. No more than 25 percent of the floor area of any one story of the dwelling unit shall be devoted to such home occupation.
8. Such home occupations shall be conducted entirely within the primary building or dwelling unit used as a residence.
9. Home occupations conducted within an Accessory Building shall be confined to the structure of the said Accessory Building.
10. No additional and separate entrance incongruent with the residential structural design shall be constructed for the purpose of conducting the home occupation.
11. No provision for extra off-street parking or loading facilities, other than the requirements and permitted facilities, and no additional driveway to serve such home occupations shall be permitted. Parking shall not impede or hinder traffic on any public right-of-way.
12. No display of goods or external evidence of the home occupation shall be permitted, except for one non-animated, non-illuminated, non-flashing announcement plate, indicating not more than the name and address of the resident. Said plate shall be attached flat against the wall of the residence and shall not exceed two sq. ft. in total surface area.
13. No electrical or mechanical equipment shall interfere with local radio communications and television reception, or cause fluctuation in line voltage off the premises.
7.10.04 Violations:
1. Violation of these regulations shall be subject to the enforcement remedies and penalties provided by the Wahoo Zoning Ordinance, and by state law. A home occupation in accordance with the provisions of this section may be terminated if the Zoning Administrator makes any of the following findings:
a. That any condition of the home occupation performance standards has been violated;
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 136
b. That the use has become detrimental to the public health or safety or is deemed to constitute a nuisance;
c. That the condition of the premises, or the district of which it is a part, has changed so that the use may no longer be justified under the purpose and intent of this section.
Section 7.11 TOWER REGULATIONS.
7.11.01 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply strictly to this Section and any conflict with other definitions within this other portions of this Ordinance shall not exist.
1. ABANDONMENT shall mean: (1) to cease operation for a period of 60 or more consecutive days; (2) to reduce the affected radiated power of an antenna by 75 percent for 60 or more consecutive days; (3) to relocate an antenna at a point less than 80 percent of the height of an antenna support structure; or (4) to reduce the number of transmissions from an antenna by 75 percent for 60 or more consecutive days.
2. ANTENNA shall mean any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, data, Internet or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves including equipment attached to a tower, pole, light standard or building for the purpose of providing personal wireless services including, for example, unlicensed wireless telecommunications services, wireless telecommunications services utilizing frequencies authorized by the Federal Communications Commission for “cellular,” “paging,” “enhanced specialized mobile radio,” “low power mobile radio” and “personal communications services” telecommunications services, and its attendant base station.
3. ANTENNA HEIGHT shall mean the vertical distance measured from the base of the antenna support structure at grade to the highest point of the structure even if said highest point is an antenna. Measurement of tower height shall include antenna, base pad, and other appurtenances and shall be measured from the finished grade of the parcel. If the support structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the highest and lowest grades of the parcel shall be used in calculating the antenna height.
4. ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE shall mean any pole, light standard, telescoping mast, tower, tripod or other structure which supports a device used in the transmitting or receiving of radio, telephonic or television frequency or television signals.
5. CELL SITE shall mean a tract or parcel of land that contains the telecommunications service facilities including any antenna, tower support structure, accessory buildings, and parking, and may include other uses associated with and ancillary to telecommunications services.
6. FAA shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration.
7. FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission.
8. GOVERNING AUTHORITY shall mean the Mayor and Council of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska.
9. PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE and PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES, as used in this Ordinance, shall be defined in the same manner as in Title 47, United States Code, Section 332(c)(7)(C), as they may be amended now or in the future.
10. TOWER shall mean any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including any antenna support structure, self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term encompasses personal wireless service facilities, radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers or personal communications services towers, alternative tower structures, and the like.
7.11.02 Exemptions
The following are exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance and shall be permitted in all zones:
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 137
1. Industrial processing equipment and scientific or medical equipment using frequencies regulated by the FCC.
2. Antennas and related equipment no more than three feet in height that are being stored, shipped, or displayed for sale.
3. Radar systems for military and civilian communications and navigation.
4. Wireless radio utilized for temporary emergency communications in the event of a disaster.
5. Licensed amateur (ham) radio operations.
6. Satellite dish antennas less than two meters in diameter, including direct to home satellite services, when used as a secondary use of the property.
7. Routine maintenance or repair of a personal wireless service facility and related equipment (excluding structure work or changes in height or dimensions of antennas, towers, or buildings), provided that compliance with the standards of this ordinance are maintained.
8. Subject to compliance with all other applicable standards of this ordinance, a building permit application need not be filed for emergency repair or maintenance of a personal wireless service facility until 30 days after the completion of such emergency activity.
7.11.03 Policy Statement
The Planning Commission and City Council have received requests to site towers and antennas. The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide specific regulations for the placement, construction and modification of radio, television, and personal wireless service facilities. The provisions of this Ordinance are not intended to and shall not be interpreted to prohibit or to have the effect of prohibiting the provision of radio, television, and personal wireless services, nor shall the provisions of this Ordinance be applied in such a manner as to unreasonably discriminate between providers of functionally equivalent services. The goals of this Ordinance are to: (i) encourage the location of towers on public property and in non-residential areas and to minimize the total number of towers throughout the City; (ii) encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing tower sites; (iii) encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the City is minimal; (iv) encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the visual impact of the towers and antennas; and (v) enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services throughout the City quickly, effectively, and efficiently. Accordingly, the City Council finds that the promulgation of this Ordinance is warranted and necessary:
To manage the location of towers and antennas in the City and provide for the use of public property for the placement thereof;
1. To protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of towers and falling ice;
2. To protect the airport hazard areas of the Wahoo Municipal Airport from potential adverse impact to operation, approach, transition and turning zones as depicted in the Nebraska Department of Aeronautics (NDA) zoning map for Wahoo Municipal Airport;
3. To minimize visual and aesthetic impacts of towers through minimal use of towers, careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques;
4. To accommodate the growing need for towers;
5. To promote and encourage shared use/co-location of existing and new towers as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers, and to reduce the number of such structures needed in the future;
6. To consider the public health and safety of towers to the extent allowed by the Telecommunications Act of 1996; and
7. To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties through engineering and proper siting of antenna support structure.
New Uses: All new antennas shall comply with this Ordinance after the date of passage.
Existing Uses: All towers existing on the date of passage of this Ordinance shall be allowed to continue their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance shall be permitted on such existing towers. New construction other than routine maintenance on existing towers shall comply with the requirements of this Ordinance.
7.11.04 Industry Site Selection Criteria
In siting a new tower or antenna site, it is anticipated that the industry will propose locations that are technically compatible with the established network. A general area is to be identified based upon engineering constraints and the desired area of service. Specific locations within that general area will be evaluated using the following criteria that are not listed in order of priority;
1. Topography as it relates to line of sight transmissions for optimum efficiency.
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 138
2. Availability of road access.
3. Availability of electric power.
4. Availability of land-based telephone lines or microwave link capability.
5. Leasable lands, and landlords who want facilities to be located on their properties consistent with zoning regulations.
6. Screening potential of existing vegetation, structures and topographic features.
7. Zoning that will allow personal wireless service facilities.
8. Compatibility with adjacent land uses.
9. The fewest number of sites to cover the desired area.
10. The greatest amount of coverage, consistent with physical requirements.
11. Opportunities to mitigate possible visual impact.
12. Availability of suitable existing structures for antenna mounting.
7.11.05 City Site Selection Criteria
As a fundamental element of this Ordinance, the telecommunications company proposing to construct an antenna support structure, or mount an antenna on an existing structure, is required to demonstrate, using technological evidence, that the antenna must go where it is proposed in order to satisfy its function in the company’s grid system. Further, the company must demonstrate by technological evidence that the height requested is the minimum height necessary.
Applications for necessary permits will only be processed when the applicant demonstrates that it is either an FCC licensed telecommunications provider or has in place necessary agreements with an FCC licensed telecommunications provider for use-or lease of the support structure.
Personal wireless service facilities should be located and designed to minimize any impacts on residential property values. Sites should be placed in locations where the existing topography, vegetation, buildings or other structures provide the greatest amount of screening.
Location and design of sites in all Districts should consider the impact of the site on the surrounding neighborhood and the visual impact within the zone district. In residential districts and residential land use areas, the minimum lot size for towers shall be three acres.
7.11.06 Priorities
The following establishes the order of priorities for locating new communications facilities:
1. Place antennas and towers on public property (excluding prairie, conservation or wildlife areas).
2. Place antennas on appropriate existing structures, such as buildings, towers, water towers, and smokestacks in other than residentially zoned districts.
3. Place antennas and towers in districts zoned District TA-1 Transitional Agricultural District, LLR, I-1 Light Industrial District, and I-2 Heavy Industrial District, which do not adjoin or adversely impact residential neighborhoods.
4. Place antennas and towers in the NRC Neighborhood Residential/Commercial District, provided that such towers may be no more than 40 feet in height.
5. Place antennas and towers on other private non-residential property in districts zoned C-1 Commercial District-Central Business District, and C-2 Commercial District-Highway.
6. Place antennas and towers on multi-family residential structures exceeding 30 feet in height in districts zoned R-3 Residential District-Multi-Family.
7. Place antennas and towers in R-2 Residential District-Single Family and R-3, Residential District-Single and Two Family: (a) only if locations for which a need has been demonstrated are not available on existing structures or in non-residential districts; and (b) only on or in existing churches, parks (as provided in Sec. 7.11.07), schools, utility facilities or other appropriate public facilities.
An applicant for a new antenna support structure to be located in a residential zoning district shall demonstrate that a diligent effort has been made to locate the proposed communications facilities on a government structure, a private institutional structure, or other appropriate existing structures within a non-residential zoning district, and that due to valid considerations including physical constraints, or technological feasibility, no other appropriate location is available. The telecommunications company is required to demonstrate that it contacted the owners of structures in excess of 30 feet in height within a one-quarter mile radius of the site proposed, asked for permission to install the antenna on those structures, and was denied for reasons other than economic ones. The information submitted by the applicant shall include a map of the area to be served by the tower, its relationship to other antenna sites in the applicant’s network, and an evaluation of existing buildings taller than 30 feet, towers and water tanks within one-quarter mile of
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 139
the proposed tower.
7.11.07 Use of City Property
1. Priority of Users
Priority for the use of City-owned land for wireless telecommunication antennas and towers will be given to the following entities in descending order:
a. City of Wahoo;
b. Public safety agencies, including law enforcement, fire, and ambulance services, which are not. part of the City of Wahoo and private entities with a public safety agreement with the City of Wahoo;
c. Other governmental agencies, for uses which are not related to public safety; and
d. Entities providing licensed, and unlicensed (where permitted by law), commercial wireless telecommunication services, cellular, personal communicational services (PCS), radio and television services, specialized mobilized radio (SMIR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), data, Internet, paging, and similar services that are marketed to the general public.
2. Minimum Requirements
The placement of wireless telecommunication antennas or towers on City-owned property must comply with the following requirements:
1. The antennas or tower will not interfere with the purpose for which the City-owned property is intended;
2. The antennas or tower will have no significant adverse impact on surrounding private property;
3. The applicant is willing to obtain adequate liability insurance and commit to a lease agreement that includes equitable compensation for the use of public land and other necessary provisions and safeguards. The fees shall be established by the City Council after considering comparable rates in other cities, potential expenses, risks to the City, and other appropriate factors;
4. The applicant will submit a letter of credit, performance bond, or other security acceptable to the City to cover the costs of antenna or tower removal;
5. The antennas or tower will not interfere with other users who have a higher priority as discussed in Section 7.11.07 (1);
6. The applicant must reimburse the City for any costs which it incurs because of the presence of the applicant’s antennas or tower;
7. The user must obtain all necessary land use approvals; and
8. The applicant will cooperate with the City’s objective to promote co-locations and thus limit the number of separate antenna sites requested.
7.11.08 Special Requirements
The use of certain City-owned property, such as water tower sites and parks, for wireless telecommunication antennas or towers brings with it special concerns due to the unique nature of these sites. The placement of wireless telecommunication antennas or towers on these special City-owned sites will be allowed only when the following additional requirements are met:
1. Water Tower Sites —The City’s water tower represents a large public investment in water pressure stabilization and peak capacity reserves. Protection of the quality of the City’s water supply is of prime importance to the City. As access to the City’s water storage systems increases, so too increased is the potential for contamination of the public water supply. For these reasons, the placement of wireless telecommunication antennas on towers or the water tower site will be allowed only when the City is fully satisfied that the following additional requirements are met:
a. The applicant’s access to the facility will not increase the risks of contamination to the City’s water supply;
b. There is sufficient room on the structure and/or on the grounds to accommodate the applicant’s facility;
c. The presence of the facility will not increase the water tower maintenance cost to the City; and
d. The presence of the facility will not be harmful to the health of workers maintaining the water tower.
2. Parks — the presence of certain personal wireless service facilities, antennas or towers represents a potential conflict with the purpose of some parks. In no case shall towers or antennas be allowed in designated prairie or other conservation or wildlife area unless they are to be installed in areas which currently contain tower facilities or antennas, and in no case shall towers or antennas be allowed in
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 140
areas without road access to the base of the tower, antenna support structure or facilities. Personal wireless facilities, antenna support structure, antennas or towers will be considered only in the following parks after the recommendation of the, Planning Commission and approval of the City Council:
a. Public parks of a sufficient scale and character that are adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use;
b. Commercial recreation areas and major play fields; and
c. Park maintenance facilities.
7.11.09 Co-Location
1. To minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation of towers, co-location of antennas by more than one carrier on existing or new towers and location of such antennas on public property shall take precedence over the construction of new single-use towers on public property as follows:
a. Proposed antennas may, and are encouraged by the opportunity for expedited review as provided in this Ordinance to co-locate onto existing towers. Even where such co-location is accomplished in a manner consistent with the policy, site criteria, and landscape/screening provisions contained in this Ordinance, new or additional conditional use approval is required, and any other permit, license, lease, franchise requirements also must be satisfied.
b. The City may deny the application to construct a new tower if the applicant has not shown by substantial evidence that it has made a good faith effort to mount the antenna on an existing structure and/or public property.
c. In order to reduce the number of antenna support structures needed in the City in the future, any new proposed support structure shall be designed to accommodate antenna for more than one user, unless the applicant demonstrates why such design is not feasible for economic, technical or physical reasons.
d. Unless co-location has been demonstrated to be infeasible, the site plan shall delineate an area near the base of the tower to be used for the placement of additional equipment buildings for other users. The site plan for towers in excess of 100 feet must propose space for two comparable tower users while the site plan for towers under 100 feet must propose space for one comparable tower user.
e. To provide further incentive for co-location as a primary option, an existing tower may be modified or reconstructed to accommodate the co-location of additional antenna, provided the additional antenna shall be consistent with the use and aesthetics as that on the existing tower. This is permitted by conditional use permit for existing towers in all zoning districts, subject to the following criteria being met:
i. Height: An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height, to accommodate the co-location of additional antenna, so long as it is done in accordance with (d) and (e), above.
ii. Onsite Location: A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna may be moved on-site within 50 feet of its existing location so long as it remains within the same zone and complies with the other provisions of this Ordinance. After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate co-location, only one tower may remain on site.
iii. Signage Prohibited: Except as set forth in 7.11.08 (2)(c), no signs, banners or similar devices or materials may be attached to the towers, antenna support structure or antennas.
2. Subject to the priorities as set forth in 7.11.05, to minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation of towers, co-location of antennas by more than one carrier on existing or new towers and location of such antennas on commercial, business, industrial or residential property shall take precedence over the construction of new single-use towers on commercial, business, industrial or residential property, as follows:
a. Proposed antennas may co-locate onto existing towers. Even where such co-location is accomplished in a manner consistent with the policy, site criteria, and landscape/screening provisions contained in this Ordinance, new or additional conditional use approval is required, and any other permit, license, lease, or franchise requirements also must be satisfied.
b. The City may deny the application to construct a new tower if the applicant has not shown by substantial evidence that it has made a good faith effort to mount the antenna on an existing structure.
c. In order to reduce the number of antenna support structures needed in the City in the future, any new proposed support structure shall be designed to accommodate antenna for more than one user, unless the applicant demonstrates why such design is not feasible for economic, technical
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 141
or physical reasons.
d. Unless co-location has been demonstrated to be infeasible, the site plan shall delineate an area near the base of the tower to be used for the placement of additional equipment buildings for other users. The site plan for towers in excess of 100 feet must propose space for two comparable tower users while the site plan for towers under 100 feet must propose space for one comparable tower user.
e. To provide further incentive for co-location as a primary option, an existing tower may be modified or reconstructed to accommodate the co-location of additional antenna, provided the additional antenna shall be consistent with the use and aesthetics as that on the existing tower. This is permitted by conditional use permit for existing towers in all zoning districts, subject to the following criteria being met:
i. Height: An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height, to accommodate the co-location of additional antenna, so long as it is done in accordance with (d) and (e), above.
ii. Onsite Location: A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna may be moved onsite within 50 feet of its existing location so long as it remains within the same zone and complies with the other provisions of this Ordinance. After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate co-location, only one tower may remain on site.
iii. Signage Prohibited: Except as set forth in 7.11.09 (2) (c), no signs, banners or similar devices or materials may be attached to the towers, antenna support structure or antennas.
7.11.10 Design Criteria
1. New towers and antenna support structure shall be designed to accommodate co-location for antenna for more than one user throughout the City in zoning districts as permitted by this Ordinance, unless the applicant demonstrates why such design is not feasible for economic, technical or physical reasons.
2. Facilities should be architecturally compatible with the surrounding buildings and land uses in the zoning district or otherwise integrated, through location and design, to blend in with the existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical.
a. Setback:
i. All towers up to fifty (50) feet in height shall be set back on all sides a distance equal to the manufacturers designed fall distance radius. The height of the tower shall be measured from the floor of the base pad to the top of the tower. Setback requirements shall be measured from the base of the tower to the nearest boundary line of the tract of land on which it is located.
ii. Towers of one hundred fifty (150) feet or less in height located in or adjacent to any residential or commercial district shall be located so that the distance from the base of the tower to any adjoining property line, or occupied structures other than those utilized by the tower owner, is a minimum of one hundred percent (100%) of the height of the tower.
iii. Towers exceeding one hundred fifty (150) feet in height may not be located in any residential district or commercial district, and must be separated from said districts and occupied structures other than those utilized by the tower owner, by a minimum of 300 feet or 100% of the height of the proposed tower, whichever is greater. Towers with heights greater than one hundred fifty (150) feet shall only be located in an industrial or agriculturally zoned district.
b. Towers must meet the following minimum separation requirements from other towers:
i. Monopole tower structures shall be separated from all other towers whether monopole, self-supporting lattice, or guyed towers, by a minimum of seven hundred fifty (750) feet.
ii. Self-supporting lattice or guyed towers shall be separated from all other self-supporting lattice or guyed towers by a minimum of five thousand (5,000) feet.
c. Color: Towers shall have a color generally matching the surroundings or background that minimizes their visibility, unless a different color is required by the FCC or FAA.
d. Lights. Signals and Signs: No signals, lights or signs shall be permitted on towers unless required by the FCC or the FAA. Should lighting be required, at the time of construction of the tower in cases where there are residential users located within a distance which is 300% of the height of the tower from the tower, then dual mode lighting shall be requested from the FAA.
e. Equipment Structures: Ground level equipment and buildings and the tower base shall be screened from public streets and residentially zoned properties. The standards for the equipment buildings are as follows:
i. The maximum floor area is 350 square feet per provider and the maximum height is 12 feet. Depending upon the aesthetics and other issues, the City, in its sole discretion, may approve multiple equipment structures or one or more larger structures.
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 142
ii. Ground level buildings shall be screened from adjacent properties by landscape plantings, fencing and other appropriate means, as specified herein or in the City Code.
iii. Equipment buildings mounted on a roof and other roof mounted equipment shall have a finish similar to the exterior building walls. Equipment for roof-mounted antenna may also be located within the building on which the antenna is mounted.
iv. In instances where equipment structures are located in residential zones or in close proximity to public right-of-ways, equipment structures shall comply with setback requirements and shall be designed so as to conform in appearance with nearby structures.
Equipment buildings, antenna and related equipment shall occupy no more than 25 percent of the total roof area of a building, which may vary in the City’s sole discretion if co-location and an adequate penthouse-type structure are used.
Antenna or equipment buildings not meeting these standards require a special exception in addition to the conditional use permit. The special exception must be approved on a comprehensive sketch plan or final development plan, as applicable.
3. Federal Requirements: All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this Ordinance shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations in accordance with the compliance deadlines/requirements of such standards and regulations. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owners’ expense.
4. Building Codes: Safety Standards: To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable City building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association (“EIA”), as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the City concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. If the owner fails to bring such tower into compliance within said 30 days, the City may remove such tower at the owner’s expense.
5. Structural Design: Towers shall be constructed to the EIA Standards, which may be amended from time to time, and all applicable construction/building codes. Further, any improvements and/or additions to existing towers shall require submission of site plans sealed and verified by a professional engineer which demonstrate compliance with the EJA Standards and all other good industry practices in effect at the time of said improvement or addition. Said plans shall be submitted to and reviewed at the time building permits are requested.
6. Fencing: A secure fence of suitable materials shall be provided around each tower. Access to the tower and equipment structures shall be through a locked gate.
7. Antenna height: The applicant shall demonstrate that the antenna is the minimum height required to function satisfactorily. No antenna that is taller than this minimum height shall be approved.
8. Antenna support structure safety: The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed antenna and support structure are safe and the surrounding areas also will not be negatively affected by interference. All support structures shall be fitted with anti-climbing devices, as approved by the manufacturers.
9. Required parking: If the cell site is fully automated, adequate parking shall be required for maintenance workers. If the site is not automated, arrangements for adequate off-street parking shall be made and documentation thereof provided to the City. Security fencing should be colored or should be of a design that blends into the character of the existing environment.
10. Antenna Criteria: Antenna on or above a structure shall be subject to the following:
a. The antenna must be architecturally compatible with the building and wall on which it is mounted and designed and located so as to minimize any adverse aesthetic impact.
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 143
b. The antenna shall be mounted on a wall of an existing building in a configuration as flush to the wall as technically possible and shall not project above the wall on which it is mounted unless, for technical reasons, the antenna needs to project above the roof line. In no event shall an antenna project more than 10 feet above the roofline.
c. The antenna shall be constructed, painted or fully screened to match as closely as possible the color and texture of the building and wall on which it is mounted.
d. The antenna may be attached to an existing conforming mechanical equipment enclosure which projects above the roof of the building, but may not project any higher than the enclosure.
e. If an accessory equipment shelter is present, it must blend with the surrounding buildings in architectural character and color.
f. The antenna, facilities and accessory equipment shelter must be architecturally and visually (color,-.size; bulk) compatible with surrounding existing buildings, structures, vegetation and/or uses or those likely to exist under the terms of the under in zoning. Such antenna, facilities and accessory equipment shelter will be considered architecturally and visually compatible if they are camouflaged to disguise the facility.
g. Site location and development shall preserve the pre-existing character of the site as much as possible. Existing vegetation should be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography of the site should be minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual impact of the site on the surrounding area. The effectiveness of visual mitigation techniques must be evaluated by City, in City’s sole discretion, taking into consideration the site as built.
h. For installations on buildings greater than 30 feet in height, see other applicable provisions of this Ordinance. In addition to the other requirements of this Ordinance, on buildings 30 feet or less in height, the antenna may be mounted on the roof if the following additional criteria are satisfied:
i. The City finds that it is not technically possible or aesthetically desirable to mount the antenna on a wall.
ii. No portion of the antenna or base station causes the height of the building to exceed the limitations set forth herein.
iii. The antenna or antennas and related base stations cover no more than an aggregate total of 25 percent of the roof area of a building, which may vary in the City’s sole discretion, if co-location and an adequate penthouse-type structure are used.
iv. Roof-mounted antenna and related base stations must be appropriately camouflaged or substantially screened from view by materials that are consistent and compatible with the design, color, and materials of the building.
v. No portion of the antenna may exceed 10 feet above the height of the existing building.
i. If a proposed antenna is located on a building or a lot subject to a site review, conditional use approval is still required prior to the issuance of a building permit.
j. No antenna shall be permitted on property designated as an individual landmark or as a part of a historic district, unless such antenna has been approved in accordance with the City Code.
k. No antenna owner or lessee or officer or employee thereof shall fail to cooperate in good faith to accommodate other competitors in their attempts to use the same tower or building for other antennas. If a dispute arises about the feasibility of accommodating another competitor, the City may require a third party technical study, at the expense of either or both parties, to resolve the dispute.
l. No antenna owner or lessee shall fail to assure that the antenna complies at all times with the then current applicable EIA or FCC standards, or other applicable federal standards, whichever standard is more stringent. After installation, but prior to putting the antenna in service, each antenna owner shall provide a notarized statement signed by a qualified engineer to that effect.
m. No antenna shall cause localized interference with the reception of any other communications signals including, but not limited to, public safety signals, and television and radio broadcast signals.
n. No person shall locate an antenna or tower for wireless communications services upon any lot or parcel except as provided in this Ordinance.
7.11.11 Other Permitted Uses
Applications for antenna for personal wireless communications services and associated unmanned equipment buildings may be reviewed in accordance with the use by special review process so long as the requirements of this Ordinance and the following standards are met:
1. In addition to the other requirements in this Ordinance, where the antenna is attached to the roof or sides of a building, an existing tower, a water tank, or a similar structure;
2. The following antenna are permitted under the provisions of this section:
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 144
a. Omnidirectional or whip antenna no more than seven inches in diameter and extending no more than 10 feet above the structure to which they are attached; or
b. Panel or similar antenna no more than two feet wide and six feet long, extending above the structure to which they are attached by no more than 10 feet; or
3. Antenna and antenna array not on publicly-owned property shall not extend more than 10 feet above the highest point of the structure on which it is mounted. The antenna, antenna array, and its support structure shall be mounted so as to blend with the structure to which the antenna is attached. The antenna and its support structure shall be designed to withstand a wind force of 100 miles per hour without the use of supporting guy wires, in all zones. The antenna, antenna array, and its support structure shall be a color that blends with the structure on which they are mounted.
4. Setback from street: Unless there are unusual geographic limitations or other public policy considerations, as determined in the City’s sole discretion, no such antenna, antenna array, or its support structure shall be erected or maintained closer to any street than the minimum setback for the zone in which it is located.
5. Guy wires restricted: No guy or other support wires shall be used in connection with such antenna, antenna array, or its support structure except upon approval of a conditional use permit.
7.11.12 Inspection Requirements
Each year after a facility becomes operational, the facility operator shall conduct a safety inspection in accordance with the EJA and FCC Standards and, within 60 days of the inspection, file a report with the City. Submission of a FCC required, and duly filed, safety inspection report, or the facility operator’s maintenance reports for the prior 12 months in the event no FCC report is required for such year, to the City shall satisfy the requirements of this section.
7.11.13 Landscaping/Screening
1. Landscaping.
Landscaping, as described herein, shall be required to screen as much of the support structure as possible, the fence surrounding both the support structure and any other ground level features (such as a building), and in general soften the appearance of the cell site. The City may permit any combination of existing vegetation, topography, walls, decorative fences or other features instead of landscaping, if they achieve the same degree of screening as the required landscaping. If the antenna is mounted on an existing building, and other equipment is housed inside an existing structure, landscaping shall not be required.
2. Screening.
The visual impacts of a tower shall be mitigated through landscaping or other screening materials at the base of the tower and ancillary structures. The following landscaping and buffering of towers shall be required around the perimeter of the tower and accessory structures, except that the standards may be waived by the City for those sides of the proposed tower that are located adjacent to undevelopable lands and lands not in public view. Landscaping shall be installed on the outside of fences. Further, existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable and may be used as a substitute for or in supplement towards meeting landscaping requirements.
a. A row of evergreen trees a minimum of 10 feet tall at planting a maximum of six feet apart, or a row of deciduous or coniferous trees a minimum of 10 feet tall at planting a maximum of 15 feet to 25 feet apart shall be planted around the perimeter of the fence; or
b. A continuous hedge at least 36 inches high, or a five-gallon size shrub, at planting capable of growing to at least 48 inches in height within 18 months shall be planted around the perimeter of the tower and accessory structures.
3. Maintenance.
In the event that landscaping is not maintained at the required level, the City, after giving 30 days advance written notice, may maintain or do the landscaping and bill both the owner and lessee for such costs until such costs are paid in full.
7.11.14 Non-Use/Abandonment
1. Abandonment:
In the event the use of any tower or antenna has been discontinued for a period of 60 consecutive days, the tower or antenna shall be deemed to be abandoned. Determination of the date of abandonment shall be made by the City which “shall have the right to request documentation and/or affidavits from the tower or antenna owner/operator regarding the issue of tower or antenna usage. Upon such abandonment, the owner/operator of the tower or antenna or the owner of property upon
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 145
which such facility is located shall have an additional 60 days within which to:
a. Reactivate the use of the tower or antenna or transfer the tower or antenna to another owner/operator who makes actual use of the tower or antenna; or
b. In the event that abandonment as defined in this Ordinance occurs due to relocation of an antenna at a lower point on the antenna support structure, reduction in the affected radiated power of the antenna or reduction in the number of transmissions from the antennas, the operator of the tower shall have six months from the date of effective abandonment to co-locate another service on the tower. If another service provider is not added to the tower, then the operator shall promptly dismantle and remove that portion of the tower that exceeds the minimum height required to function satisfactorily. Notwithstanding the foregoing, changes which are made to personal wireless facilities which do not diminish their essential role in providing a total system shall not constitute abandonment; however, in the event that there is a physical reduction in height of substantially all of the providers’ towers in the City, then all of such providers’ towers within the City shall similarly be reduced in height.
c. Dismantle and remove the tower or antenna. If such tower or antenna is not removed within said 60 days from the date of abandonment, the City may remove such tower or antenna, in accordance with applicable law, at the facility owner’s and/or property owner’s expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower or antenna, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower or antenna.
At the earlier of 60 days from the date of abandonment without reactivation or upon completion of dismantling and removal, City approval for the tower or antenna shall automatically expire.
7.11.15 Application Requirements
In the course of reviewing any request for any approval required under this Ordinance. made by an applicant to provide personal wireless service or to install personal wireless service facilities, the Planning Commission or the City Council, as the case may be, shall act within a reasonable period of time after the request is duly filed with the City, taking into account the nature and scope of the request, and any decision to deny such a request shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. All applicants who wish to locate a wireless telecommunication antenna or tower in the City must submit to the City Clerk a completed application and detailed plan that complies with the submittal requirements of this Ordinance, the Zoning Code and other regulations and ordinances of the City along with other pertinent information requested by the City. Application submission for conditional use, variance, and building permit requests may utilize any combination of site plans, surveys, maps, technical reports or written narratives necessary to convey the following information:
1. A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning, adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower, and any other proposed structures;
2. A current map and aerial as provided by the County Surveyor’s office showing the location of the proposed tower;
3. Legal description of the parcel, if applicable;
4. Approximate distance between the proposed tower and the nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties, and unplatted residentially zoned properties;
5. A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials;
6. Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and illumination;
7. A notarized letter signed by the applicant stating the tower will comply with all EIA Standards and all applicable federal and state laws and regulations and the City Code including specifically FAA regulations;
8. A statement by the applicant as to whether construction of the tower will accommodate co-location of additional antenna for future users;
9. A notarized letter signed by the applicant stating that the antenna usage will not interfere with other adjacent or neighboring transmission or reception functions;
10. The telecommunications company must demonstrate that it is licensed by the FCC if required to be licensed under FCC regulations;
11. The applicant, if not the telecommunications service provider, shall submit proof of lease agreements with an FCC licensed telecommunications provider if such telecommunications provider is required to be licensed by the FCC;
12. A full site plan shall be required for all cell sites, showing the antenna, antenna support structure, building, fencing, buffering, access, and all other items required in this Ordinance. The site plan shall not be required if the antenna is to be mounted on an existing structure;
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 146
13. At the time of site selection, the applicant should demonstrate how the proposed site fits into its overall network within the City;
14. This Ordinance shall apply to all applications which were filed prior to the effective date hereof and which have not been approved by the City Council as of the effective date of this Ordinance, and to applications filed thereafter.
7.11.16 Third Party Review
The telecommunications providers use various methodologies and analysis tools, including geographically-based computer software, to determine the specific technical parameters of telecommunications services and facilities, such as expected coverage area, antenna configuration, topographic constraints that affect signal paths, etc. In certain instances, there may be a need for expert review by a third party of the technical data submitted by the telecommunications provider. The City Council or the Planning Commission may require such a technical review, to be paid for by the applicant for the telecommunications services or facilities. The selection of the third party expert shall be by mutual agreement between the applicant and City, such agreement not to be unreasonably withheld by either party. The expert review is intended to be a site-specific review of technical aspects of the telecommunications services or facilities and other matters as described herein with respect to potential interference issues, and not a subjective review of the site selection. Such a review should address the accuracy and completeness of the technical data, whether the analysis techniques and methodologies are legitimate, the validity of the conclusions and any specific technical issues outlined by the City Council, Planning Commission, City Staff, or interested parties. Based on the results of the third party review, the City may require changes to the application for the telecommunications services, facilities and other matters as described herein that comply with the recommendations of the expert.
7.11.17 Conditional Use Permit Requirement
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, in all instances a Conditional Use Permit must be obtained with the affirmative vote of City Council before any radio, television, personal wireless services or facilities may be constructed or operated within the City or zoning jurisdiction.
7.11.18 Termination
The City Council may, subject to applicable law, rescind any previously granted or pending City approval or lease necessary for the construction, installation or operation of telecommunications facilities if it determines that any one of the following conditions exist:
1. A potential user with a higher priority cannot find another adequate location and the potential use would be incompatible with the existing use;
2. A user’s frequency broadcast unreasonably interferes with other users of higher priority of use as set forth in Sec. 7.11.06, regardless of whether or not this interference was adequately predicted in the technical analysis; or
3. A user violates any of the standards in this Ordinance or the conditions of City approval, lease provisions with the City or other terms of authorization by the City.
Before taking action, the City will provide notice to the user of the intended termination and the reasons for it, and provide a reasonable opportunity for the user to either cure the alleged interference, violation or condition or address the City Council regarding the proposed action.
This procedure need not be followed in emergency situations.
Notwithstanding the above, the City Council reserves the right to deny, for any reason, the use of any or all City-owned property by any one or all applicants. Such denial shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record.
Section 7.12 FENCES:
7.12.01 No fence shall be constructed within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Wahoo unless a permit therefore is approved and issued by the building inspector and is constructed in conformance with the following requirements:
1. The height limitation for fences shall be six feet above ground level except as provided herein.
2. A fence constructed within a front yard of a residential lot and vegetation used as a barrier, screen, or fence along and parallel to the front line of a residential lot, shall not exceed 48 inches in height.
3. A fence constructed within the portion of a side yard of a residential lot that lies in front of a line extending perpendicularly from the side lot line to the front corner of the structure that is closest to
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 147
such side lot line, shall not exceed four feet in height, except that if the lot is located on a corner, as defined in Article 2 of this Ordinance, a fence constructed within a side yard along the side lot line which is adjacent to a street shall not exceed six feet in height.
4. Where it is demonstrated that for security purposes the perimeter fencing around a plant or building located in an area zoned as an Industrial District must be higher than eight (8) feet in height, said additional height may be approved through a Conditional Use Permit.
5. Fences constructed along and parallel to lot lines separating a residential lot from property located in a Commercial or Industrial District shall not exceed eight feet in height.
6. Fences constructed along and parallel to rear and side lot lines adjoining arterial streets, as designated by the Nebraska Department of Roads, shall not exceed eight feet in height.
7.12.02 Fences located within a front or side yard of a residential lot must qualify within the definition of an open fence, except that solid fences may be constructed along a side lot line parallel and adjacent to the lot line that is adjacent to a Commercial District or an Industrial District. A solid fence may be constructed in a side yard parallel and adjacent to the lot line that is adjacent to a street.
7.12.03 No fence or vegetation shall be situated or constructed in such a way as to obstruct the vehicular traffic or otherwise create a traffic safety hazard.
7.12.04 The use of barbed wire in the construction of any fence is prohibited except:
1. Perimeter security fencing of buildings constructed in an Industrial District. The plans and specifications for any such fencing must be approved by the City Building Inspector before commencement of construction.
2. Farm fencing constructed for agricultural purposes on parcels of land 20 acres or more in the Transitional Agricultural District.
7.12.05 All fences shall be maintained in good repair.
7.12.06 All fences shall be located inside the boundaries of the property upon which constructed except where two adjacent property owners pursuant to written agreement filed with the City agree to build one fence on the common lot line of adjacent side yards or back yards.
7.12.07 Electric Fences.
No electric fence shall be constructed or maintained within the City of Wahoo or within its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction except in TA-Transitional Agriculture District as hereinafter provided. An owner or lessee of such property may, upon application to the City and approval by the Building Inspector, maintain electrified fencing provided same shall not be energized to the extent that it is capable of causing bodily harm to persons, be they children or adults, or to animals. Before the Building Inspector shall approve any electrified fencing, it shall be determine that non-electrified fencing will not adequately protect the owner’s property and the owner’s application for approval of electrified fencing shall set forth in detail the reasons why non-electrified fencing will not adequately protect his property.
7.12.08 Facing.
The finished surface of all fences shall face toward adjoining property or street frontage. However, in the case of two or more property owners wishing to share a common fence line between their properties, said property owners shall jointly determine upon which side of the common fence line the finished face of the fence shall be placed. Such determination shall be consistent for the entire length of the common fence line.
7.12.09 Fences in existence as of the date of adoption of this Ordinance.
Any existing fence constructed pursuant to a permit issued and approved by the City of Wahoo which was in conformity with the past provisions and which was in place as of said date, may remain without change in accordance with this section notwithstanding same may be in conflict with one or more provisions of this section as amended; provided, however, that replacement or change of said existing fence or addition of a new fence, must meet the requirements of this section as amended.
7.12.10 Pool Enclosures
The perimeter of all pools, spas, or hot tubs containing at least 24 inches of water must be enclosed at ground level by a barrier or fence with a minimum height of four feet and a maximum height of six feet. There shall be no opening in the fence that permits passage of an object of 4 inches in diameter or larger. All gates must have locking hardware to prevent access when not in use. Solid barriers which do not have openings, such as masonry or stone wall, shall not contain indentations or protrusions, except for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints.
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 148
In addition to the above requirement, when the wall of a dwelling serves as part of the barrier, one of the following conditions shall also be met:
1. The pool shall be equipped with a powered safety cover in compliance with ASTM F 1346; or
2. Doors with direct access to the pool through the wall of the dwelling shall be equipped with an audible alarm; or
3. Other means of protection, such as self-closing doors with self-latching devices, which are approved by the governing body, shall be acceptable, so long as the degree of protection afforded is not less than the protection afforded by Item 1 and 2 above.
4. Where an above-ground pool structure is used as a barrier, or where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, and the means of access is a ladder or steps:
a. The ladder or steps shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access; or
b. The ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier or fence with locking hardware to prevent access when not in use.
The intent of this barrier requirement is to prevent the uncontrolled access to a pool or spa from adjacent properties, and from the home.
Section 7.13 Storage or parking of vehicles, boats, campers and trailers:
7.13.01 Storage of boats, campers, recreational vehicles, or trailers in R-1, R-2, R-3, NRC and LLR zoning districts is permitted under the following conditions:
1. Said vehicle is owned by the resident of the residential property where the vehicle is parked for storage;
2. Said vehicle may be parked inside an enclosed structure when the structure conforms to the zoning requirements of the district in which it is located;
3. Said vehicles may be parked outside of an enclosed structure in the side yard or rear yard of the property;
4. Said vehicles may be parked in the required front yard on a concrete driveway or its equivalent during loading or unloading, preparation for use, or to accommodate temporary guests or visitors;
5. No part of said vehicle shall extend over the public sidewalk or the public right-of-way;
6. Said boats, campers and trailers together with accessory structures shall not occupy more than thirty-five percent of the required rear yard;
7. Said vehicles shall not be used for storage of goods, materials, or equipment other than those items considered to be a part of the unit or essential for its immediate use;
8. Said vehicles shall not be permanently connected to sewer lines, water lines, or electricity. A recreational vehicle may be connected to electricity or water temporarily to prepare the vehicle for use.
9. Said vehicles shall not be used for dwelling purposes except to accommodate temporary guests or visitors for no more than 14 days.
.
Section 7.14 Performance Standards for Industrial Uses
7.14.01 Physical Appearance: All operations shall be carried on within an enclosed building except that new materials or equipment in operable condition may be stored in the open. Normal daily wastes of an inorganic nature may be stored in containers not in a building when such containers are not readily visible from a street. The provisions of this paragraph shall not be construed to prohibit the display of merchandise or vehicles for sale or the storage of vehicles, boats, farm machinery, trailers, mobile homes, or similar equipment when in operable condition.
7.14.02 Fire hazard: No operation shall involve the use of highly flammable gasses, acid, liquids, grinding processes, or other inherent fire hazards. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the use of normal heating fuels, motor fuels and welding gasses when handled in accordance with other regulations of the City of Wahoo.
7.14.03 Noise: No operation shall be carried on which involves noise in excess of the normal traffic noise of the adjacent street at the time of the daily peak hour of traffic volume. Noise shall be measured at the property line and when the level of such noise cannot be determined by observation with the natural senses, a suitable instrument may be used and measurement may include breakdowns into a reasonable number of frequency ranges.
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 149
7.14.04 Sewage and Liquid Wastes: No operation shall be carried on which involves the discharge into a sewer, water course, or the ground, liquid waste of any radioactive or poisonous nature or chemical waste which are detrimental to normal sewage plant operation or corrosive and damaging to sewer pipes and installations.
7.14.05 Air Contaminants:
1. Air Contaminants and smoke shall be less dark than designated Number One on the Ringleman Chart as published by the United States Bureau of Mines, except that smoke of a density designated as Number One shall be permitted for one four minute period in each one-half hour. Light colored contaminants of such an capacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than the aforesaid shall not be permitted
2. Particulate mater of dust as measured at the point of emission by any generally accepted method shall not be emitted in excess of 0.2 grains per cubic foot as corrected to a temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit, except for a period of four minutes in any one-half hour, at which time it may equal but not exceed 0.6 grains per cubic foot as corrected to a temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit.
3. Due to the fact that the possibilities of air contamination cannot reasonably be comprehensively covered in this section, there shall be applied the general rule that there shall not be discharged from any sources whatsoever such quantities of air contaminants or other material in such quantity as to cause injury, detriment, nuisance, or annoyance to any considerable number of persons or to the public in general; or to endanger the comfort, repose, health, or safety of any such considerable number of persons or to the public in general, or to cause, or have a natural tendency to cause injury or damage to business, vegetation, or property.
4. Odor: The emission of odors that are generally agreed to be obnoxious to any considerable numbers of persons shall be prohibited. Observations of odor shall be made at the property line of the establishment causing the odor. As a guide to classification of odor it shall be deemed that strong odors of putrefaction and fermentation tend to be obnoxious and that such odor as associated with baking or the roasting of nuts and coffee shall not normally be considered obnoxious within the meaning of these Regulations.
5. Gasses: The gasses sulphur dioxide and hydrogen sulphide shall not exceed five parts per million, carbon monoxide shall not exceed five parts per million. All measurements shall be taken at the zoning lot line.
6. Vibration: All machines including punch presses and stamping machines shall be so mounted as to minimize vibration and in no case shall such vibration exceed a displacement of 0.003 of an inch measured at the zoning lot line. The use of steam or broad hammers shall not be permitted in this zone.
7. Glare and heat: All glare, such as welding arcs and open furnaces shall be shielded so that they shall not be visible from the zoning lot line. No heat from furnaces or processing equipment shall be sensed at the zoning lot line to the extent of raising the temperature of air or materials more than five degrees Fahrenheit.
Section 7.15 Landscaping Requirements:
7.15.01 Intent:
The intent of the landscaping requirements are to improve the appearance of lot areas and soften paved areas and buildings; to provide a buffer between differing land uses; to minimize the adverse effect of uses from one another; to minimize the effect of heat, noise and glare; to conserve the value of property and neighborhoods within the community; and to enhance the physical environment within the City of Wahoo by ensuring that yards, open spaces, parking lots and those areas abutting public rights-of-way are designed, installed and maintained in accordance with then provisions of this section.
Property development shall consider and respect land capabilities and constraints, minimize erosion and destruction of natural amenities and provide a buffer between differing land uses.
7.15.02 Application and Scope:
The provisions of the section shall apply to all new construction and development including, but not limited to, structures, dwellings, buildings, parking lots, residential subdivisions, office parks, shopping centers, and redevelopment for which either a building or zoning permit approval is required, except the following:
1. Agricultural buildings, structures and uses.
2. Replacement of lawfully existing structures or uses.
3. Additions, remodeling or enlargements of existing uses or structures provided that the enlargement of surface parking of less than 4,000 square feet shall not be excepted. Where such enlargement is
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 150
less than 4,000 square feet, the provisions of this section shall apply only to that portion of the lot or site where the enlargement occurs.
4. Where there is more than one lot or site being developed together as one unit with common property lines, the entire site shall be treated as one lot or site for the purpose of conforming to the requirements of this section.
5. When a lot or site with more than one ownership has been partially developed at the time of the adoption of this section. The application of the requirements of this section shall be determined by the City Council with the recommendation of the City Planning Commission.
7.15.03 Landscaping Requirements:
Landscaping shall be required and provided as follows:
1. Single-family and two-family dwellings shall provide and maintain a minimum of 30 percent of lot area as a permeable and uncovered surface that contains living material. Single-family and two-family dwellings shall be exempt from all other requirements of this section except for Plant Material and Maintenance.
2. Street Frontage:
A landscaped area having a minimum depth of 15 feet from the property line shall be provided along the street frontage of all lots or sites including both street frontage of corner lots.
a. The required landscaped are 15 feet may be reduced to 10 feet if an equal amount of square feet of landscaped area, exclusive of required side and rear yard landscaped areas, is provided elsewhere on the site.
b. Exclusive of driveways and sidewalks not more than 25 percent of the surface of the landscaped area shall have inorganic materials such as brick, stone, concrete, asphalt, aggregate, metal or artificial turf.
c. A minimum of one tree shall be planted for every 40 lineal feet or fraction thereof.
3. Side Yard:
A landscaped area having a minimum depth of 10 feet from the property line shall be provided along the side yard abutting any Residential District.
a. Exclusive of driveways and sidewalks, not more than 10 percent of the surface of the landscaped area shall be inorganic materials such as brick, stone, concrete, asphalt, aggregate, metal or artificial turf. If the slope of ground within the landscape area exceeds 2:1, not more than 50 percent of the surface shall be inorganic material.
b. Landscaping shall include a hedge screen or a random or informal screen of plant materials substantially blocking the views and attaining a minimum height of six feet within four years. A landscaped earth berm not exceeding six feet in height may be used in combination with the plant materials.
c. A solid wood and/or masonry fence or wall six feet in height may be used in lieu of or in combination with the plant materials required, provided that such fence is at least five feet from the property line.
4. Rear Yard:
A landscaped area having a minimum depth of 10 feet from the property line shall be provided along the rear yard abutting any Residential District.
a. The landscape requirements for the rear yard shall be the same as for the side yard described in section 7.15.04 (3)
5. Off-Site Parking Lots:
Parking lots not located on the property where the use served is located, shall conform to this section provided that a parking lot with an area of 4,000 square feet or less shall be exempt from the requirements of this section.
6. Parking Area Interior Landscaping:
Off-street parking lots, as defined in 7.17.04 (5), and other vehicular use areas shall have at least 10 square feet of interior landscaping for each parking space excluding those spaces abutting a perimeter for which landscaping is required by other sections of this Ordinance, and excluding all parking spaces which are directly served by an aisle abutting and running parallel to such perimeter.
The front of a vehicle may encroach upon any interior landscaped area when said area is at least four feet in depth per abutting parking space and protected by curbing. Two feet of said landscaped area may be part of the required depth of each abutting parking space. No more than two drive aisles
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 151
shall be placed parallel to one another without an intervening planter aisle of at least four feet in width; eight feet is required if parking spaces overlap the curbs of the aisle.
7. Perimeter Landscaping:
All commercial office and industrial developments, buildings, or additions thereto shall provide perimeter landscaping to include one tree for each 40 lineal feet or fraction thereof. Such landscaped area shall consist of sufficient area for the species of tree to be planted. Other perimeter landscaping shall require approval of the Planning Commission and City Council.
8. Plant Materials:
Landscape living plant materials shall consist of trees, shrubs, ground covers, vines, grasses, flowers, and any other plants.
a. The plant nomenclature shall conform with the recommendations and requirements of the “American Standard for Nursery Stock”, as amended, published by the American Association of Nurserymen, Inc.
b. Size. The minimum size of plant materials to be installed shall be as follows:
(1) Deciduous trees having a mature height of 20 feet or less shall have a minimum caliper of one and one-fourth inches.
(2) Deciduous trees having a mature height of more than 20 feet shall have a minimum caliper of one and one-half inches.
(3) Evergreen (conifer) trees shall have a minimum height of three feet.
(4) Deciduous shrubs shall have a minimum height of 18 inches.
(5) Evergreen shrubs shall have a minimum spread of 18 inches.
9. Planting Schedule:
The plant materials shall be installed prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. If, because of seasonal reasons, the landscaping cannot be installed, a surety satisfactory to the City of Wahoo equal to the contract cost shall be submitted to the City. The City shall release the surety when the plant materials have been installed. If the plant materials have not been installed within 12 months of the effective date of the certificate of occupancy, the City may install the required landscaping.
10. Required Plans:
Upon application of a building permit, a landscape-planting plan shall be submitted to the City of Wahoo for review and approval.
a. Three copies of the plan shall be submitted.
b. The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Property lines and other physical features necessary to show the proposed installation of plants.
(2) The location and spacing of plant materials.
(3) The scientific name, common name, plant size, quantity and planting method.
(4) The plan shall have a scale of not more than one-inch equals 100 feet.
(5) When necessary, existing and proposed contours shall be provided.
7.15.04 Screening Requirements
1. All parking areas or vehicular use areas abutting a residential district or public right-of-way shall be screened from grade level to a height not less than three feet.
2. All commercial and industrial uses that abut residential or office districts shall provide screening not less than six feet in height along the abutting property line(s).
3. Screening required by this section shall be equivalent to the following:
a. Solid fences or walls as approved by the Planning Commission on the final development plan.
b. Hedges, shrubs, or evergreen trees of 36 inches in height at planting spaced appropriately to provide a solid screen within three years after planting.
c. Berms of not less than three feet in height and that provide a maximum slope of 3:1 for easy maintenance. Such berms may be used in conjunction with plantings to achieve the solid visual screen as described in 7.17.04 (3a) above.
d. All projects except one-and-two family dwellings shall include a detailed drawing on the landscape plan indicating the method of enclosure and screening to be used on trash dumpsters. All dumpsters or trash bins shall maintain a solid enclosure six-foot in height around each unit. Said enclosure shall be of complementary materials suitable to the Planning Commission.
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 152
e. All plant material used for screening shall meet the standards in section 7.15.03
7.15.05 Installation and Maintenance of Landscaping and Screening:
1. Installation:
All landscaping shall be installed in a sound workmanship like manner and according to accepted good planting procedures. Landscaped areas shall require protection from vehicular encroachment. A qualified code enforcement officer or other planning official shall inspect all landscaping and no certificates of occupancy or similar authorization will be issued unless the landscaping meets the requirements herein provided. Temporary occupancy permits may be issued due to weather related conditions upon approval by the Building Official.
2. Maintenance:
The owner, developer, tenant and/or their agent, if any, shall be jointly and
severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping. All required landscaping shall be maintained in proper condition. When replacement is necessary all plants and other non-living landscape materials shall be equal in size, density and appearance to those items requiring replacement. Underground sprinkler systems shall be provided to serve all landscaped areas except individual one and two family dwellings unless an equivalent watering system is approved by the Planning Commission.
All required screening and fencing shall be maintained and, whenever necessary, replaced with materials that provide equivalent size, density, and appearance. All landscaping and screening shall be kept free from refuse and debris so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance. Lawn grass shall be maintained on all areas not covered by other landscaping, parking, drives, buildings, or similar structures. Existing yards shall be maintained with grass or other approved ground cover.
7.15.06 Preliminary Plan Approval
A landscape plan indicating both proposed and existing landscaping and screening shall be submitted, with the preliminary plat, preliminary RMD, or preliminary site plan for development, for review and recommendation by the Planning Commission and approval by the City Council. Said Plan shall be in sufficient detail to provide the Commission and City Council with a reasonable understanding of what is being proposed. Site calculations used in computing quantities shall also be submitted which are proposed to be used to satisfy the required amounts of landscaping.
7.15.07 Final Plan Approval
A detail listing of all plant materials to be used, quantities, size, and spacing shall be submitted to the Planning Commission on separate sheets for review and recommendation and approval by the City Council along with a planting schedule at final development plan submission.
7.15.08 Parking Lot Plan Approval
A final site development plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission with the requisite landscaping and screening required herein for each of the following types of parking lot improvements:
1. New construction.
2. Expansion of existing facilities.
3. Maintenance of existing facilities where an overlay is proposed at which time the landscaping and screening shall be required. Modifications to the required parking lot landscaping and screening may be granted by the Planning Commission after review of submitted plans and in consideration of surrounding uses.
4. No parking lot shall be exempted from these regulations; unless previously exempted.
Section 7.16 Wind Energy Systems
In any zoning district, a conditional use permit may be granted to allow wind energy conversion system, including such devices as wind charger, windmill, or wind turbine; subject to the following condition:
7.16.01 The distance from any tower support base to any tower support base of another wind energy device under other ownership shall be a minimum of five rotor distances figured by the size of the largest rotor.
7.16.02 The wind energy system operation shall not cause interference to the radio and television reception on adjoining property.
7.16.03 The wind energy system operation shall not encroach on airport hazard areas as depicted in the Nebraska Department of Aeronautics (NDA) zoning map for Wahoo Municipal Airport.
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 153
7.16.04 To limit climbing access to the tower, a fence six feet high with a locking portal shall be placed around the tower base or the tower climbing apparatus shall be limited to no more than 12 feet from the ground, or the tower may be mounted on a roof top.
7.16.05 The setback distances from all lot lines to any tower support base shall be determined according to the following setback table:
7.16.05 SETBACK TABLE
Rotor Diameter Setback Distance Minimum Lot Area1
5 feet 100 feet 1 Acre
10 feet 165 feet 2.5 Acres
15 feet 220 feet 4.5 Acres
20 feet 270 feet 6.75 Acres
25 feet 310 feet 9.0 Acres
30 feet 340 feet 10.75 Acres
35 feet 365 feet 12.25 Acres
1 Where there are several towers under single ownership the minimum lot areas may be adjusted down provided the minimum setback distances are met on all perimeter units. In addition, the landing areas for all internal towers and rotors shall be within the property owned by the operator.
7.16.06 Data pertaining to the machine’s turbine safety and stability shall be filed with the application. Such data shall include turbine safety and acceptance results from tests conducted by a qualified individual or organization based upon standards set by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) Utility Wind Turbine Verification Program.1
7.16.07 The application shall provide covenants, easements, or similar documentation from the abutting owners providing access to wind sufficient for its adequate operation, unless adequate accessibility to the wind is provided on the site.
Section 7.17 Sand and Gravel Mineral, Stone, Rock, and Soil Extraction and Quarries
7.17.01 The application shall include a grading map showing contours, proposed excavation contours, and proposed final grade contours.
7.17.02 The applicant shall identify the effect of the extraction on the groundwater table of the adjoining properties.
7.17.03 The application shall identify proposed vehicle and equipment storage areas;
7.17.04 Erosion controls, including retention and sediment basins shall be provided during extraction to prevent a change in the character of runoff onto adjacent land;
7.17.05 The surface shall be maintained in such a manner that surface waters do not collect or pond, unless specifically approved. Underground drainage may be supplied if it connects to an existing drainage facility;
7.17.06 Topsoil shall be collected and stored for redistribution on the site at the termination of the operation;
7.17.07 Excavation shall be conducted in such a way as not to constitute a hazard to any persons, nor to the adjoining property. All cuts shall be returned to a slope of less than three to one (3-1) as soon as possible. Safety screening shall be required at the outer boundary of the site; visual screening will also be required where said boundary is adjacent to residential or recreational land;
7.17.08 Within one year after completion of the excavation on any portion of the site, the topography and soils shall be stabilized, and the land shall be graded, seeded, and sodded so as to prevent erosion and siltation, and to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.
Section 7.18 Waste Disposal Sites and Landfills
A Conditional Use Permit may be granted for any waste material disposal, garbage disposal, or land fill operations in the designated zoning district; provided the following special conditions shall be considered:
7.18.01 The effects on the adjacent property, traffic, and
7.18.02 The public necessity and advantage
7.18.03 The maintenance of access routes related to all weather conditions and dropping of rubbish and litter
7.18.04 The effects on underground water quality
7.18.05 The immediate and long term effects on the environment and the public
7.18.06 The concerns for public safety
7.18.07 The application shall include documents to indicate conformance to all applicable governmental regulations and standards
1 U.S. Department of Energy – EPRI Wind Turbine Verification Program
Electric Power Research Institute – 3412 Hillview Avenue, Palo Alto, California 94304
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 154
7.18.08 The application shall include affidavits or permits from the Environmental Protection Agency and/or the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality, in the event an approval is required by these agencies.
Section 7.19 Schools
The following guidelines shall apply to schools regardless if the use is permitted or requires a conditional use permit:
7.19.01 Nursery schools shall provide and thereafter maintain outdoor play areas with a minimum area of 100 square feet per child of total capacity. A sight-obscuring fence at least four feet but not more than six feet in height shall be provided separating the play area from abutting properties.
7.19.02 Elementary schools shall provide one acre of site area for each 90 pupils or one acre for each three classrooms, whichever is greater.
7.19.03 Intermediate schools shall provide one acre of site area for each 75 pupils or one acre for each two and one-half classrooms, whichever is greater.
Section 7.20 Utility Substation or Pumping Station
The following criteria shall be met for any utility substation or pumping station regardless if the use is permitted or requires a conditional use permit:
7.20.01 The minimum lot size of the district in which a public utility facility is to be located may be waived only on finding that the waiver will not result in noise or other detrimental effect on adjacent property.
7.20.02 No equipment storage shall be permitted on the site in a residential district or in a C-1 District.
7.20.03 Such uses shall be fenced and landscaped as determined.
Section7.21 Junk Yards or Salvage Yards
Junk Yards and salvage of materials may be allowed by conditional use permit in the (I-2) Heavy Industrial District; provided the following minimum conditions are met (additional conditions may be required depending upon the operation and the proposed location:
7.21.01 Construction and operation shall comply with the Wahoo Municipal Code and any other applicable codes or requirements.
7.21.02 Receiving areas for junk or salvage material shall be designed to avoid the depositing of junk or salvage material outside a building or outside screened (solid fence) storage areas.
7.21.03 Junk yards and salvage of materials shall contain a minimum of two acres and shall not be located within a designated 100-year floodplain area as identified by the Corps of Engineers.
7.21.04 Junk or salvage material kept outside a building or buildings shall not be located closer than 500 feet from any designated State or Federal highway. Or locally designated Expressway, Major Arterial, and Other Arterial as per the State of Nebraska Department of Roads or subsequent successor agency.
7.21.05 Junk material kept outside a building or buildings shall not be located in the required front yard.
7.21.06 Junk or salvage material kept outside a building or buildings shall be at least 100 feet from the boundaries of the I-1 zoning district and shall be at least 500 feet from the any residential district or use.
Section 7.22 Townhouses
Townhouses shall be subject to the following criteria regardless if the use is permitted or requires a conditional use permit:
7.22.01 The common wall between attached units shall be on the side lot line separating the lots and shall not be subject to side yard requirements providing there are no doors, windows, vents or other openings in the common wall.
7.22.02 No unit shall have a depth greater than three times its width.
7.22.03 Any exterior wall which is not a common wall must meet all yard requirements.
7.22.04 Each lot must have direct access to a public street.
7.22.05 The deed to each lot must include covenants requiring the proper and timely reconstruction of any damaged or destroyed dwellings.
7.22.06 The application for said use must include a plot plan with general location of buildings, parking areas, driveways, fences, and other structures, the location of easements and utility lines, the number and type of all dwelling units, and the property lines within the proposed development.
Section 7.23 Preservation Guidelines
Guidelines: (Based on the Secretary of Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings)
7.23.01 Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use for a property which requires minimal alteration of the building, structure, or site and its environment, or to use a property for its originally intended purpose.
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 155
7.23.02 The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building, structure, or site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive architectural features should be avoided when possible.
7.23.03 All buildings, structures, and sites shall be recognized as products of their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and which seek to create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged.
7.23.04 Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are evidence of the history and development of a building, structure, or site and its environment. These changes may have acquired significance in their own right, and this significance shall be recognized and respected.
7.23.05 Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship which characterize a building, structure, or site shall be treated with sensitivity.
7.23.06 Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than replaced, wherever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the new material should match the material being replaced in composition, design, color, texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing architectural features should be based on accurate duplications of features, substantiated by historic, physical, or pictorial evidence rather than on conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural elements from other buildings or structures.
7.23.07 The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will damage the historic building materials shall not be undertaken.
7.23.08 Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve archeological resources affected by, or adjacent to any project.
7.23.09 Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and additions do not destroy significant historical, architectural or cultural material, and such design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material, and character of the property, neighborhood or environment.
7.23.10 Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to structures shall be done in such a manner that if such additions or alterations were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the structure would be unimpaired.
Section 7.24 Guidelines for Applying the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards
A. THE ENVIRONMENT:
Recommended
Not Recommended
Retaining distinctive features such as the size, scale, mass, color, and materials of buildings, including roofs, porches, and stairways that give a neighborhood its distinguishing character.
Introducing new construction into neighborhoods that is incompatible with the character of the district because of size, scale, color, and materials.
Retaining landscape features such as parks, gardens, street lights, signs, benches, walkways, streets, alleys and building set-backs that have traditionally linked buildings to their environment.
Destroying the relationship of buildings and their environment by widening existing streets, changing paving materials, or by introducing inappropriately located new streets and parking lots that are incompatible with the character of the neighborhood.
Using new plant materials, fencing, walkways, street lights, signs, and benches that are compatible with the character of the neighborhood in size, scale, material and color.
Introducing signs, street lighting, benches, new plant materials, fencing, walkways and paving materials that are out of scale or inappropriate to the neighborhood.
B. BUILDING SITE:
Recommended
Not Recommended
Identifying plants, trees, fencing, walkways, outbuildings, and other elements that might be an important part of the property’s history and development.
Making changes to the appearance of the site by removing old plants, trees, fencing, walkways, outbuildings, and other elements before evaluating their importance in the property’s history and development.
Retaining plants, trees, fencing, walkways, street lights, signs, and benches that reflect the property’s history and development. Basing decisions for new site work on actual knowledge of the past appearance of the property found in photographs, drawings, newspapers, and tax records. If changes are made, they should be carefully evaluated in light of the past appearance of the site.
Leaving plant materials and trees in close proximity to the building that may cause deterioration of the historic fabric.
Providing proper site and roof drainage to assure that water does not splash against the building or foundation walls, nor drain toward the building.
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 156
C. BUILDING: STRUCTURAL SYSTEMS
Recommended
Not Recommended
Recognizing the special problems inherent in the structural systems of historic buildings, especially where there are visible signs of cracking, deflection, or failure.
Disturbing existing foundations with new excavations that undermine the structural stability of the building.
Undertaking stabilization and repair weakening structural members and systems.
Leaving known structural problems untreated that will cause continuing deterioration and will shorten the life of the structure.
Replacing historically important structural members only when necessary. Supplementing existing structural systems when damaged or inadequate.
D. BUILDING: EXTERIOR FEATURES (Masonry: Adobe, brick, stone, terra cotta, concrete, stucco, and mortar)
Recommended
Not Recommended
Retaining original masonry and mortar, whenever possible, without the application of any surface treatment.
Applying waterproof or water repellent coating or surface consolidation treatments unless required to solve a specific technical problem that has been studied and identified. Coating are frequently unnecessary, expensive, and can accelerate deterioration of the masonry.
Repointing only mortar joints where there is evidence of moisture problems or when sufficient mortar is missing to allow water to stand in the mortar joint.
Repointing mortar joints that do not need pointing. Using electric saws and hammers to remove mortar can seriously damage the adjacent brick.
Duplicating old mortar in composition, color, and texture.
Duplicating old mortar in joint size, method of application, and joint profile.
Repointing with mortar joints of a differing size or joint profile, texture or color.
Repairing stucco with a stucco mixture that duplicates the original as closely as possible in appearance and texture.
Removing paint from masonry surfaces indiscriminately. This may subject the building to damage and change it appearance.
Cleaning masonry only when necessary to halt deterioration or to remove graffiti and stains and always with the gentlest method possible, such as low pressure water and soft natural bristle brushes.
Applying new material which is inappropriate or was unavailable when the building was constructed, such as artificial brick-siding, artificial cast stone or brick veneer.
Repairing or replacing, where necessary, deteriorated material with new material that duplicates the old as closely as possible.
Removing architectural features such as cornices, brackets, railings, windows architraves, and doorway pediments.
Replacing missing significant architectural features, such as cornices, brackets, railings, and shutters.
Repointing with mortar of high portland cement contact can often create a bond that is stronger than the building material. This can cause deterioration as a result of the differing coefficient of expansion and the differing porosity of the material and the mortar.
Retaining the original or early color and texture of masonry surfaces, including early signage, wherever possible. Brick or stone surfaces may have been painted or whitewashed for practical and aesthetic reasons
Sandblasting, including dry and wet grit and other abrasives, brick or stone surfaces; this method of cleaning erodes the surface of the material and accelerates deterioration. Using chemical cleaning products that would have an adverse chemical reaction with the masonry materials. I.e., acid on limestone or marble
E. WOOD: CLAPBOARD, WEATHERBOARD, SHINGLES AND OTHER WOODEN SIDING
Recommended
Not Recommended
Retaining and preserving important architectural features, whenever possible.
Removing architectural features such as siding, cornices, brackets, window architraves, and doorway pediments. These are, in most cases, an essential part of a building’s character and appearance that illustrates the continuity of growth and change.
Resurfacing frame buildings with new material that is inappropriate or was unavailable when the building was constructed such as artificial stone, brick veneer, asbestos or asphalt shingles, and plastic or aluminum siding, Such material can also contribute to the deterioration of the structure from moisture and insects.
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 157
F. ARCHITECTURAL METALS: CAST IRON, STEEL, PRESSED TIN, ALUMINUM, ZINC
Recommended
Not Recommended
Retaining original material, whenever possible.
Removing architectural features that are an essential part of a building’s character and appearance, illustrating the continuity of growth and change.
Cleaning when necessary with the appropriate method. Metals should be cleaned by methods that do not abrade surface.
Exposing metals which were intended to be protected from the environment. Do not use cleaning methods which alter the color, texture, and tone of the metal.
G. ROOFS AND ROOFING:
Recommended
Not Recommended
Preserving the original roof shape.
Changing the essential character of the roof by adding inappropriate features such as dormer windows, vents, or skylights.
Retaining the original roofing material, whenever possible.
Replacing deteriorated roof coverings with new materials that differ to such an extent from the old in composition, size, shape, color, and texture that the appearance of the building is altered.
Providing adequate roof drainage and insuring that the roof materials provide a weather-tight covering for the structure.
Stripping the roof of architectural features important to its character.
Replacing deteriorated roof coverings with new material that matches the old in composition, size, shape, color, and texture.
Applying new roofing material that is inappropriate to the style and period of the building and neighborhood.
Preserving or replacing, where necessary, all architectural features that give the roof its essential character, such as dormer windows, cupolas, cornices, brackets, chimneys, cresting, and weather vents.
H. WINDOWS AND DOORS:
Recommended
Not Recommended
Retaining and repairing existing window and door openings including window sash, glass, lintels, sills, architraves, shutters, doors, pediments, hoods, steps, and all hardware.
Introducing new window and door openings into the principal elevations, or enlarging or reducing window or door openings to fit new stock window sash or new stock door sizes
Duplicating the material, design, and the hardware of the older window sash and doors if new sash and doors are used.
Altering the size of window panes or sash. Such changes destroy the scale and proportion of the building.
Installing visually unobstructive storm windows and doors, where needed, that do not damage existing frames and that can be removed in the future.
Installing inappropriate new window or door features such as aluminum storm and screen window insulating glass combinations that require the removal of original windows and doors.
Using original doors and door hardware when they can be repaired and reused in the future.
Installing plastic, canvas, or metal strip awnings or fake shutters that detracts from the character and appearance of the building.
Discarding original doors and door hardware when they can be repaired and reused in place.
I. ENTRANCES, PORCHES, AND STEPS:
Recommended
Not Recommended
Retaining porches and steps that are appropriate to the building and its development. Porches or additions reflecting later architectural styles often important to the building’s historical integrity and wherever possible, should be retained.
Removing or altering porches and steps that are appropriate to the building’s development and style.
Repairing or replacing, where necessary, deteriorated architectural features of wood, iron, cast iron, terra cotta, tile, and brick.
Stripping porches and steps of original material and architectural features, such as handrails, balusters, columns, brackets, and roof decoration of wood, iron, cast iron, terra cotta, tile, and brick.
Enclosing porches and steps in a manner that destroys their intended appearance.
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 158
J. EXTERIOR FINISHES:
Recommended
Not Recommended
Discovering the historic paint colors and finishes of the structure and repainting with those colors to illustrate the distinctive character of the property.
Removing paint and finishes down to the bare surface; strong paint strippers, whether chemical or mechanical can permanently damage the surface.
Repainting with colors that cannot be documented through research and investigation to be appropriate to the building and the neighborhood.
K. NEW CONSTRUCTION
Recommended
Not Recommended
Keeping new additions and adjacent new construction to a minimum, making them compatible in scale, building materials, and texture.
Designing new work which is incompatible with the earlier building and the neighborhood in materials, size, scale, and texture.
Designing new work to be compatible in materials, size, scale, color and texture with the earlier building and the neighborhood.
Imitating an earlier style or period of architecture in new additions, except in rare cases where a contemporary design would detract from the architectural unity of an ensemble or group. Especially avoid imitating an earlier style of architecture in new additions that have a completely contemporary function such as a drive-in bank or garage.
Using contemporary designs compatible with the character and mood of the building or the neighborhood.
Adding new height to the building that changes the scale and character of the building. Addition in height should not be visible when viewing the principal facades.
Protecting architectural details and features that contribute to the character of the building.
Adding new floors or removing existing floors that destroy important architectural details, features and spaces of the building.
Placing television antenna and mechanical equipment, such as air conditioners, in an inconspicuous location.
Placing television antennae and mechanical equipment, such as air conditioners, where they can be seen from the street.
L. MECHANICAL SYSTEMS: HEATING, AIR CONDITIONING, ELECTRICAL, PLUMBING, FIRE PROTECTION
Recommended
Not Recommended
Installing necessary mechanical systems in areas and spaces that will require the least possible alteration to the structural integrity and physical appearance of the building.
Causing unnecessary damage to the plan, materials, and appearance of the building when installing mechanical systems.
Utilizing early mechanical systems, including plumbing and early lighting fixtures, where possible.
Attaching exterior electrical and telephone cables tot he principal elevations of the building.
Installing the vertical runs of ducts, pipes, and cables in closets, service rooms, and wall cavities.
Installing the vertical runs of ducts, pipes, and cables in places where they will be a visual intrusion.
Insuring adequate ventilation of attics, crawlspaces, and cellars to prevent moisture problems.
Concealing or “making invisible” mechanical equipment in historic walls or ceilings. Frequently this concealment requires the removal of historic fabric.
Installing thermal insulation in attics and in unheated cellars and crawlspaces to conserve energy.
Installing “dropped” acoustical ceilings to hide mechanical equipment. This destroys the proportions and character of the rooms.
Installing foam, glass fiber, or cellulose insulation into wall cavities of either wooden or masonry construction. This has been found to cause moisture problems when there is no adequate moisture barrier.
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 159
Section 7.25___Commercial Cabin Campgrounds: The purpose of this section is to provide opportunities for quality designed commercial cabin campgrounds that provide permanent cabins for use on a temporary basis. In order to create a desirable recreational environment and protect the public health, safety, and welfare, site plans are required for all new commercial cabin campgrounds. A commercial cabin campground shall meet the following regulations:
a. Minimum lot size requirement: Parcel must be at least three (3) acres
b. Accessory uses shall include:
i. Management headquarters
ii. Commercial uses exclusive to the commercial campground patrons only, and structures which are customarily incidental and subordinate to the operation of a commercial campground
c. Prohibited uses and structures:
i. Mobile homes and mobile home parks
ii. Permanent residences, excluding the accessory use of a resident management structure
d. Design standards for commercial cabin campground (entire premise):
i. Density: No more than six units per acre and a maximum footprint of 6,000 square feet per acre
ii. Access and location criteria – entrance/exit must be located along a public roadway
iii. Internal Roadways
1. Surfacing – roads must be rock surfaced
2. Erosion control plan required for the entire campground area. This must include runoff control
3. Minimum width – All internal roadways shall have a minimum width of no less than fourteen (14) feet for one‐way traffic and no less than eighteen (18) feet for two‐way traffic.
iv. Water and Sewer – cabins must be connected to either city sewer and water or have a septic and well service approved by NDEQ
v. Parking – No overnight parking of recreational vehicles, fifth‐wheel campers, self‐contained campers shall be allowed on the premise.
vi. Lighting – Entrance/exit lighting at the public road is required.
e. Design standards for camping cabin sites:
i. A camping cabin site must be designed so there is a minimum of twenty (20) feet between camping cabins.
ii. No storage sheds are permitted on an individual camping cabin site
iii. Camping cabin sites shall include a minimum of one (1) automobile vehicle parking space with minimum dimensions of ten (10) by twenty (20) feet.
iv. Each camping cabin site shall abut at least one internal roadway within the boundaries of the Campground. Ingress and egress to the camping cabin site shall be limited to an internal roadway.
vi. Fire pits – campfires shall only be permitted in designated fire pits.
vii. Camping cabin sites shall be set back at least twenty‐five (25) feet from and stream bank.
f. Design standards for cabins:
i. Each cabin shall be equipped with a full bathroom
ii. Each cabin shall have a minimum square footage of 400 square feet and a maximum of 4,000 square feet, with the maximum footprint of 2,000 square feet.
iii. Cabins shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act.
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 160
Section 7.26 Adult Establishments.
7.26.01 Purpose and Intent
It is the purpose of this section to regulate Adult Establishments to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of Adult Establishments within the city’s jurisdiction. The provisions of these regulations have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of these regulations to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of these regulations to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
7.26.02 Findings and Rationale
Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the city, and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions incorporated in the cases of City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C., 541 U.S. 774 (2004); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002); City of Erie v. Pap’s A.M., 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); N.Y. State Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 714 (1981); Sewell v. Georgia, 435 U.S. 982 (1978); FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); City of Dallas v. Stanglin, 490 U.S. 19 (1989); and
Farkas v. Miller, 151 F.3d 900 (8th Cir. 1998); Jakes, Ltd. v. City of Coates, 284 F.3d 884 (8th Cir. 2002); BZAPS, Inc. v. City of Mankato, 268 F.3d 603 (8th Cir. 2001); SOB, Inc. v. County of Benton, 317 F.3d 856 (8th Cir. 2003); Scope Pictures v. City of Kansas City, 140 F.3d 1201 (8th Cir. 1998); ILQ Invs. v. City of Rochester, 25 F.3d 1413 (8th Cir. 1994); City of Lincoln v. ABC Books, Inc., 470 N.W.2d 760 (Neb. 1991); Xiong v. City of Moorhead, 2009 WL 322217 (D. Minn. Feb. 2, 2009); Entm’t Prods., Inc. v. Shelby County, 721 F.3d 729 (6th Cir. 2013); Lund v. City of Fall River, 714 F.3d 65 (1st Cir. 2013); Imaginary Images, Inc. v. Evans, 612 F.3d 736 (4th Cir. 2010); LLEH, Inc. v. Wichita County, 289 F.3d 358 (5th Cir. 2002); Ocello v. Koster, 354 S.W.3d 187 (Mo. 2011); 84 Video/Newsstand, Inc. v. Sartini, 2011 WL 3904097 (6th Cir. Sept. 7, 2011); Plaza Group Properties, LLC v. Spencer County Plan Commission, 877 N.E.2d 877 (Ind. Ct. App. 2007); Flanigan’s Enters., Inc. v. Fulton County, 596 F.3d 1265 (11th Cir. 2010); East Brooks Books, Inc. v. Shelby County, 588 F.3d 360 (6th Cir. 2009); Entm’t Prods., Inc. v. Shelby County, 588 F.3d 372 (6th Cir. 2009); Sensations, Inc. v. City of Grand Rapids, 526 F.3d 291 (6th Cir. 2008); World Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 368 F.3d 1186 (9th Cir. 2004); Ben’s Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); Peek-a-Boo Lounge v. Manatee County, 630 F.3d 1346 (11th Cir. 2011); Daytona Grand, Inc. v. City of Daytona Beach, 490 F.3d 860 (11th Cir. 2007); Heideman v. South Salt Lake City, 348 F.3d 1182 (10th Cir. 2003); Williams v. Morgan, 478 F.3d 1316 (11th Cir. 2007); Jacksonville Property Rights Ass’n, Inc. v. City of Jacksonville, 635 F.3d 1266 (11th Cir. 2011); H&A Land Corp. v. City of Kennedale, 480 F.3d 336 (5th Cir. 2007); Hang On, Inc. v. City of Arlington, 65 F.3d 1248 (5th Cir. 1995); Fantasy Ranch, Inc. v. City of Arlington, 459 F.3d 546 (5th Cir. 2006); Illinois One News, Inc. v. City of Marshall, 477 F.3d 461 (7th Cir. 2007); G.M. Enterprises, Inc. v. Town of St. Joseph, 350 F.3d 631 (7th Cir. 2003); Richland Bookmart, Inc. v. Knox County, 555 F.3d 512 (6th Cir. 2009); Bigg Wolf Discount Video Movie Sales, Inc. v. Montgomery County, 256 F. Supp. 2d 385 (D. Md. 2003); Richland Bookmart, Inc. v. Nichols, 137 F.3d 435 (6th Cir. 1998); Spokane Arcade, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 75 F.3d 663 (9th Cir. 1996); DCR, Inc. v. Pierce County, 964 P.2d 380 (Wash. Ct. App. 1998); City of New York v. Hommes, 724 N.E.2d 368 (N.Y. 1999); Taylor v. State, No. 01-01-00505-CR, 2002 WL 1722154 (Tex. App. July 25, 2002); Fantasyland Video, Inc. v. County of San Diego, 505 F.3d 996 (9th Cir. 2007); Gammoh v. City of La Habra, 395 F.3d 1114 (9th Cir. 2005); Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C. v. City of Littleton, Civil Action No. 99-N-1696, Memorandum Decision and Order (D. Colo. March 31, 2001); People ex rel. Deters v. The Lion’s Den, Inc., Case No. 04-CH-26, Modified Permanent Injunction Order (Ill. Fourth Judicial Circuit, Effingham County, July 13, 2005); Reliable Consultants, Inc. v. City of Kennedale, No. 4:05-CV-166-A, Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law (N.D. Tex. May 26, 2005); Major Liquors, Inc. v. City of Omaha, 188 Neb. 628 (1972); DLH Inc. v. Nebraska Liquor Control Commission, 266 Neb. 361(2003); Village of Winslow v Sheets, 261 Neb.203 (2001),
and based upon reports concerning secondary effects occurring in and around adult establishments, including, but not limited to, “Correlates of Current Transactional Sex among a Sample of Female Exotic Dancers in
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 161
Baltimore, MD,” Journal of Urban Health (2011); “Does the Presence of Sexually Oriented Businesses Relate to Increased Levels of Crime? An Examination Using Spatial Analysis,” Crime & Delinquency (2012) (Louisville, KY); Metropolis, Illinois – 2011-12; Manatee County, Florida – 2007; Hillsborough County, Florida – 2006; Clarksville, Indiana – 2009; El Paso, Texas – 2008; Memphis, Tennessee – 2006; New Albany, Indiana – 2009; Louisville, Kentucky – 2004; Fulton County, GA – 2001; Chattanooga, Tennessee – 1999-2003; Jackson County, Missouri – 2008; Ft. Worth, Texas – 2004; Kennedale, Texas – 2005; Greensboro, North Carolina – 2003; Dallas, Texas – 1997; Houston, Texas – 1997, 1983; Phoenix, Arizona – 1995-98, 1979; Tucson, Arizona – 1990; Spokane, Washington – 2001; St. Cloud, Minnesota – 1994; Austin, Texas – 1986; Indianapolis, Indiana – 1984; Garden Grove, California – 1991; Los Angeles, California – 1977; Whittier, California – 1978; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma – 1986; New York, New York Times Square – 1994; the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Adult establishments, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota); Dallas, Texas – 2007; “Rural Hotspots: The Case of Adult Businesses,” 19 Criminal Justice Policy Review 153 (2008); “Stripclubs According to Strippers: Exposing Workplace Sexual Violence,” by Kelly Holsopple, Program Director, Freedom and Justice Center for Prostitution Resources, Minneapolis, Minnesota; “Adult establishments: An Insider’s View,” by David Sherman, presented to the Michigan House Committee on Ethics and Constitutional Law, Jan. 12, 2000; Sex Store Statistics and Articles; and Law Enforcement and Private Investigator Affidavits (Adult Cabarets in Forest Park, GA and Sandy Springs, GA), McCleary and Weinstein; Do “Off-Site Adult Businesses Have Secondary Effects? Legal Doctrine, Social Theory and Empirical Evidence, Law and Policy, Vol. 31, No. 2 (April 2009), Adult Business Study: Town and Village of Ellicottville, Cattaraugus County, New York (January 1998), the city finds:
1. Adult Establishments, as a category of commercial uses, are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but not limited to, personal and property crimes, prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking, negative impacts on surrounding properties, urban blight, litter, and sexual assault and exploitation. Alcohol consumption impairs judgment and lowers inhibitions, thereby increasing the risk of adverse secondary effects.
2. Adult Establishments should be separated from sensitive land uses to minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses, and should be separated from other adult establishments, to minimize the secondary effects associated with such uses and to prevent an unnecessary concentration of adult establishments in one area.
3. Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm which the city has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating. Additionally, the city’s interest in regulating Adult Establishments extends to preventing future secondary effects of either current or future adult establishments that may locate in the city. The city finds that the cases and documentation relied on in this resolution are reasonably believed to be relevant to said secondary effects.
The city hereby adopts and incorporates herein its stated findings and legislative record related to the adverse secondary effects of adult establishments, including the judicial opinions and reports related to such secondary effects.
7.26.02 Definitions
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
Adult Arcade: shall mean a commercial establishment to which the public is permitted or invited that maintains booths or rooms smaller than 100 square feet, wherein image-producing devices are regularly maintained, where a fee is charged to access the booths or rooms, and where minors are excluded from the booths or rooms by reason of age.
Adult Bookstore: shall mean a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business activities, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.” A “principal business activity” exists where the commercial establishment meets any one or more of the following criteria:
1. At least 35% of the establishment’s displayed merchandise consists of said items, or
2. At least 35% of the establishment’s revenues derive from the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of said items, or
3. The establishment maintains at least 35% of its floor area for the display, sale, and/or rental of said items; or
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 162
4. The establishment maintains at least seven hundred fifty square feet (750 sq. ft.) of its floor area for the display, sale, and/or rental of said items.
ADULT ESTABLISHMENT: shall mean an “adult arcade,” an “adult bookstore,” an “adult motion picture theater,” a “semi-nude lounge,” or a “sex paraphernalia store.”
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: shall mean a commercial establishment to which the public is permitted or invited that maintains viewing rooms that are 100 square feet or larger wherein films or videos characterized by their emphasis upon “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” are regularly shown.
Characterized By: shall mean describing the essential character or quality of an item. As applied to adult establishments, no business shall be classified as an adult establishment by virtue of showing, selling, or renting materials rated NC-17 or R by the Motion Picture Association of America.
Employee of an Adult Establishment: shall mean any person who works on the premises of an adult establishment, on a full time, part time, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, lessee, or otherwise. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
Nudity or Nude Conduct: shall mean the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, or anus with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola.
Operator of Adult Establishment: shall mean any person on the premises of an adult establishment who manages, supervises, or controls the business or a portion thereof. A person may be found to be an operator regardless of whether such person is an owner or part owner, of the business.
Semi-Nude or Semi-Nudity: shall mean the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola and extending across the width of the breast at that point, or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breasts exhibited by a bikini, dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, or similar wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
Semi-Nude Lounge: shall mean a nightclub, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club, massage parlor, or similar commercial establishment that regularly offers live semi-nude conduct. No establishment shall avoid classification as a semi-nude lounge by offering nude conduct.
Sexual Device: shall mean any three (3) dimensional object designed for stimulation of the male or female human genitals, anus, buttocks, female breast, or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others and shall include devices commonly known as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, cock rings, anal beads, butt plugs, nipple clamps, and physical representations of the human genital organs. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy.
Sex Paraphernalia Store: shall mean a commercial establishment where more than 100 sexual devices are regularly made available for sale or rental. This definition shall not be construed to include any establishment located within an enclosed regional shopping mall or any establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical products.
Specified Anatomical Areas: shall mean less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, and/or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
Specified Sexual Activities: shall mean intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy.
Viewing Room: shall mean the room or booth where a patron of an adult establishment would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, videocassette, digital video disc, or other video on an image-producing device.
7.26.03 Regulations
1. No person shall establish, operate, or cause to be operated an adult establishment in Wahoo’s jurisdiction within:
A. 1,000 feet of another adult establishment;
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 163
B. 500 feet of a business licensed to sell alcohol at the premises; or
C. 1,000 feet of a residential district, residential use, residence, church, educational institution, park, or recreational facility.
D. For the purpose of this section, measurements shall be made in a straight line in all directions without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest part of the structure containing the adult establishment to the closest point on a property boundary of another adult establishment, a business licensed to sell alcohol at the premises, a residential district, a residential use, a residence, a church, an educational institution, park, or a recreational facility.
2. No adult establishment shall be or remain open for business between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day.
3. No patron, employee of an adult establishment, or any other person shall knowingly or intentionally, in an adult establishment, appear in a state of nudity or engage in a specified sexual activity.
4. No person shall knowingly or intentionally, in an adult establishment, appear in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee of an adult establishment who, while semi-nude, remains at least six (6) feet from all patrons and on a stage at least eighteen (18) inches from the floor in a room of at least six hundred (600) square feet.
5. No employee of an adult establishment who appears semi-nude in an adult establishment shall knowingly or intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer on the premises of an adult establishment. No customer shall knowingly or intentionally touch such an employee of an adult establishment or the clothing of such an employee of an adult establishment on the premises of an adult establishment.
6. No person shall possess alcoholic beverages on the premises of an adult establishment.
7. No person shall knowingly or recklessly allow a person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be or remain on the premises of an adult establishment.
8. No operator of an adult establishment shall knowingly or recklessly allow a room in the adult establishment to be simultaneously occupied by any patron and any other employee of an adult establishment who is semi-nude or who appears semi-nude on the premises of the adult establishment, unless an operator of the adult establishment is present in the same room.
9. A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult establishment which exhibits in a booth or viewing room on the premises, through any mechanical or electronic image-producing device, a film, video cassette, digital video disc, or other video reproduction characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall comply with the following requirements.
A. The operator of the adult establishment shall, within one week of opening the adult establishment for business, submit to the City Zoning Officer a diagram of the premises showing the location of all operator’s stations, booths or viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, and restrooms, and shall designate all portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Restrooms shall not contain equipment for displaying films, video cassettes, digital video discs, or other video reproductions. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
B. It shall be the duty of the operator of the adult establishment, and of any employees of the adult establishment present on the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted.
C. The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five (5.0) foot candles as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator of an adult establishment, and of any employees of an adult establishment present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that the premises is occupied by patrons or open for business.
D. It shall be the duty of the operator of an adult establishment, and of any employees of an adult establishment present on the premises, to ensure that no specified sexual activity occurs in or on the licensed premises.
E. It shall be the duty of the operator of an adult establishment to post conspicuous signs in well-lighted entry areas of the business stating all of the following:
Article 7: Supplemental Regulations
WAHOO, NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 164
i. That the occupancy of viewing rooms less than 150 square feet is limited to one person.
ii. That specified sexual activity on the premises is prohibited.
iii. That the making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited.
iv. That violators will be required to leave the premises.
v. That violations of these regulations are unlawful.
F. It shall be the duty of the operator of an adult establishment to enforce the regulations articulated in e.i. though e.v. above.
G. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from an operator of the adult establishment’s station of every area of the premises, including the interior of each viewing room but excluding restrooms, to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. An operator’s station shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. If the premises has two (2) or more operator’s stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms, from at least one of the operator’s stations. The view required in this paragraph must be by direct line of sight from the operator’s station. It is the duty of the operator of an adult establishment to ensure that at least one employee of an adult establishment is on duty and situated in each operator’s station at all times that any patron is on the premises. It shall be the duty of the operator of an adult establishment, and it shall also be the duty of any employees of an adult establishment present on the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in this paragraph remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or enclosures at all times that any patron is present on the premises.
H. It shall be the duty of the operator of an adult establishment to ensure that no porous materials are used for any wall, floor, or seat in any booth or viewing room.
I. It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under subsections 9.a. through 9.h above to knowingly or recklessly fail to fulfill that duty.
J. No patron shall knowingly or recklessly enter or remain in a viewing room less than 150 square feet in area that is occupied by any other patron.
K. No patron shall knowingly or recklessly be or remain within one foot of any other patron while in a viewing room that is 150 square feet or larger in area.
L. No person shall knowingly or recklessly make any hole or opening between viewing rooms.
10. It shall be the duty of the operator of an adult establishment to ensure that the interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five (5.0) foot candles as measured at the floor level and the illumination must be maintained at all times that any customer is present in or on the premises.
11. Unless a culpable mental state is otherwise specified herein, a showing of a reckless mental state shall be sufficient to establish a violation of a provision of this section 7.26.03.
Section 7.27 Granting of Waivers (Exceptions) and Conditions.
In addition to exceptions contained in this Ordinance, the Planning Commission may recommend and the City Council may grant waivers for use of property from the provisions of this Ordinance, but only after determining that: 1) there are unique circumstances or conditions affecting the property that are not the result of actions by the requestor and/or property owner; 2) the waivers are necessary for the reasonable and acceptable use of the property in question; 3) the granting of waivers will not be detrimental to the public or injurious to adjacent and nearby properties.
This process is not intended to take the place of procedures under Article 6: Conditional Use Permits, or Article 8: Board of Adjustment.
Article 8: Board of Adjustment
WAHOO NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 165
ARTICLE 8: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Section 8.01 Members, Terms and Meetings. Pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-908 (R.R.S. 1997): The board of adjustment shall consist of five regular members, plus one additional member designated as an alternate who shall attend and serve only when one of the regular members is unable to attend for any reason, each to be appointed for a term of three years and removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after public hearings. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. One member only of the board of adjustment shall be appointed from the membership of the planning commission, and the loss of membership on the planning commission by such member shall also result in his or her immediate loss of membership on the board of adjustment and the appointment of another planning commissioner to the board of adjustment. The first vacancy occurring on the board of adjustment shall be filled by the appointment of a person who resides in the extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction of the City at such time as more than two hundred persons reside within such area. Thereafter, at all times, at least one member of the board of adjustment shall reside outside of the corporate boundaries of the City but within its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction. The board of adjustment shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of any ordinance adopted pursuant to sections 19-901 to 19-914. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine. Such chairperson, or in his or her absence the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record.
Section 8.02 Appeals to Board, Record of Appeal, Hearings and Stays. As provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-909 (R.R.S. 1997): Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the City affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with the officer from whom appeal is taken and with the Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of the appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record in application on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties, in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney.
Section 8.03 Powers and Jurisdiction on Appeal. The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers:
1. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official or agency based on or made in the enforcement of any zoning regulation or any regulation relating to the location or soundness of structures;
2. to hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, requests for interpretation of any map, or for decisions upon other special questions upon which the Board is authorized by this Ordinance to pass; and
3. to grant variances, where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of enactment of this Ordinance, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property, the strict application of any regulation under this Ordinance would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardships upon the owner of such property, to authorize, upon an appeal relating to the property, a variance from such strict application so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship, if such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this Ordinance.
No such variance shall be authorized by the Board unless it finds that:
1. The strict application of the Ordinance would produce undue hardship;
Article 8: Board of Adjustment
WAHOO NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 166
2. Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity;
3. The authorization of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and the character of the district will not be changed by the granting of the variance; and
4. The granting of such variance is based upon reasons of demonstrable and exceptional hardship as distinguished from variations for purposes of convenience, profit or caprice. No variance shall be authorized unless the Board finds that the condition or situation of the property concerned or the intended use of the property is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to this Ordinance.
In exercising the above mentioned powers, the Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this Ordinance or to effect any variation in this Ordinance.
Section 8.04 Appeals to District Court. Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may appeal as provided by Section 19-912, Reissue Revised Statutes of 1943 (in full).
Article 9: Amendments
WAHOO NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 167
ARTICLE 9: AMENDMENT
Section 9.01 Amendments. Pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-905 (R.R.S. 1997): This Ordinance may, from time to time, be amended, supplemented, changed, modified, or repealed. In case of a protest against such change, signed by the owners of 20 percent or more either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or of those immediately adjacent on the sides and in the rear thereof extending 300 feet therefrom, and of those directly opposite thereto extending 300feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all members of the City Council. The provisions of this section of the Ordinance relative to public hearings and official notice shall apply equally to all changes or amendments. In addition to the publication of the notice therein prescribed, a notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on or near the property on which action is pending. Such notice shall not be less than 18 inches in height and 24 inches in width with a white or yellow background and black letters not less than one and one-half inches in height. Such posted notice shall be so placed upon such premises that it is easily visible from the street nearest the same and shall be so posted at least 10 days prior to the date of such hearing. It shall be unlawful for anyone to remove, mutilate, destroy, or change such posted notice prior to such hearing. Any person so doing shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. The provisions of this section in reference to notice shall not apply:
1. In the event of a proposed change in such regulations, restrictions, or boundaries throughout the entire area of an existing zoning district or of such municipality, or
2. in the event additional or different districts are made applicable to areas, or parts of areas, already within a zoning district of the City.
Section 9.02 Planning Commission Review. No amendment, supplement, change or modification of this Ordinance, including the boundaries of any zoning district, shall be made by the City Council without first the consideration by the City Planning Commission, the Commission shall submit in writing its recommendations on each amendment, supplement, change or modification to the City Council within 45 days after receipt thereof. Said recommendations shall include approval, disapproval, or other suggestions and the reasons thereof, and a discussion of the effect of each amendment, supplement, change or modification on the Comprehensive Plan. Said recommendations shall be of an advisory nature only.
In addition, any person or persons seeking such an amendment, supplement, change, or modification of any zoning district, shall comply with the following:
9.02.01 At the time that application for a change of zoning district or amendment to the zoning test is filed with the Planning Commission, there shall be deposited the sum set in Article 4, Section 4.23 as a fee to cover investigation, legal notices, or other expenses incidental to the determination of such matter.
9.02.02 An application for a change of district to a Light Industrial District shall contain a minimum area of 10,000 square feet. The area, if more than one parcel of land is involved, shall be contiguous, exclusive of any streets or easements.
9.02.03 The foregoing requirements in 9.02.02 shall not apply in the case of an extension of a Light Industrial District.
Section 9.03 Zoning Administrator. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by a Zoning Enforcement Officer appointed by the City Council, who shall have the power to make inspection of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his or her duties in the enforcement of this Ordinance.
Section 9.04 Building Permits. The following shall apply to all new construction and all applicable renovations and remodels within Wahoo’s Zoning Jurisdiction:
9.04.01 It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for the construction of any building, or any accessory buildings, or to commence the moving or alteration of any buildings, including accessory buildings, until the Zoning Administrator has issued a building permit for such work.
9.04.02 Issuance of a building permit. In applying to the Zoning Administrator for a building permit, the applicant shall submit a dimensioned sketch or a scale plan indicating the shape, size and height and location of all buildings to be erected, altered or moved and of any building already on the lot. He shall also state the existing and intended use of all such buildings, and supply such other information as may be required by the Zoning Administrator for determining whether the provisions of this Ordinance are being observed. If the proposed excavation or construction as set forth in the application is in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, and other Ordinances of the City then in force, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a building permit for such excavation or
Article 9: Amendments
WAHOO NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 168
construction. If a building permit is refused, the Zoning Administrator shall state such refusal in writing, with the cause, and shall immediately thereupon mail notice of such refusal to the applicant at the address indicated upon the application. The Zoning Administrator shall grant or deny the permit within a reasonable time from the date the application is submitted. The issuance of a permit shall, in no case, be construed as waiving any provisions of this Ordinance. A building or zoning permit shall become void 12 months from the date of issuance unless substantial progress has been made by that date on the project described therein.
Section 9.05 Certificate of Occupancy. No land or building or part thereof hereafter erected or altered in its use or structure shall be used until the Zoning Administrator shall have issued a certificate of occupancy stating that such land, building or part thereof, and the proposed use thereof, are found to be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. Within three days after notification that a building or premises is ready for occupancy or use, it shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to make a final inspection thereof and to issue a certificate of occupancy if the land, building, or part thereof and the proposed use thereof are found to conform with the provisions of this Ordinance, or, if such certification is refused, to state refusal in writing, with the cause, and immediately thereupon mail notice of such refusal to the applicant at the address indicated upon the application.
Section 9.06 Penalties. Pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-913 (R.R.S. 1997), the owner or agent of a building or premises in or upon which a violation of any provisions of this Ordinance has been committed or shall exist or lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises in or upon which violation has been committed or shall exist, or the agent, architect, building contractor or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any violation or who maintains any building or premises in or upon which such violation shall exist, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $100 for any one offense. Each day of non-compliance with the terms of this Ordinance shall constitute a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
Section 9.07 Remedies. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure, or land is used in violation of Neb. Rev. Stat. §§19-901 to 19-914 (R.R.S. 1997), or this Ordinance, or any regulation made pursuant to said sections, the appropriate authorities of the City may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
Article 10: Comprehensive Plan Relationship
Article 11: Legal Status Provisions
WAHOO NEBRASKA  ZONING ORDINANCE  2005 (Rev. 06/06/2019) 169
ARTICLE 10: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN RELATIONSHIP
These zoning ordinances are designed to implement various elements of the comprehensive plan as required by state statutes. Any amendment to the district ordinances or map shall conform to the comprehensive plan adopted by the governing body.
ARTICLE 11: LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
Section 11.01 Separability. Should any article, section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
Section 11.02 Purpose of Catch Heads. The catch heads appearing in connection with the foregoing sections are inserted simply for convenience, to serve the purpose of any index and they shall be wholly disregarded by any person, officer, court or other tribunal in construing the terms and provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 11.03 Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance, or inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance, are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this Ordinance full force and effect.
Section 11.04 Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and publication according to law.
ADOPTED AND APPROVED by the Governing Body of Wahoo, Nebraska,
This 10th day of February, 2005.
(Seal)
ATTEST: /s/ Melissa M. Harrell /s/ Daryl Reitmajer
(CITY CLERK) (MAYOR)

CITY OF WAHOO
SAUNDERS COUNTY, NEBRASKA
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
ORDINANCE NUMBER 2114
ADOPTED BY THE CITY OF WAHOO, NEBRASKA
NOVEMBER 8, 2012
JEO Project No. 100150.00
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 I
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1: TITLE, PURPOSE, AND DEFINITIONS. ....................................................................................... 1
SECTION 1.01 NAME AND CITATION OF TITLES. ......................................................................................................... 1
SECTION 1.02 PURPOSE ............................................................................................................................................. 1
SECTION 1.03 DEFINITIONS ........................................................................................................................................ 1
ARTICLE 2: GENERAL PROVISIONS ................................................................................................................. 7
SECTION 2.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS ......................................................................................................................... 7
SECTION 2.02 JURISDICTION. ..................................................................................................................................... 7
SECTION 2.03 POWERS. .............................................................................................................................................. 7
SECTION 2.04 APPLICABILITY. ................................................................................................................................... 7
SECTION 2.05 INTERPRETATION. ................................................................................................................................ 7
SECTION 2.06 CONFLICT. ........................................................................................................................................... 7
SECTION 2.07 PERMITS. ............................................................................................................................................. 8
SECTION 2.08 AMENDMENTS. .................................................................................................................................... 8
SECTION 2.09 MODIFICATIONS. .................................................................................................................................. 8
SECTION 2.10 STORM RUN-OFF CONTROL. ................................................................................................................ 8
SECTION 2.11 REVIEW FEES. ...................................................................................................................................... 8
ARTICLE 3: PROCEDURES ................................................................................................................................... 9
SECTION 3.01 PROCEDURE FOR FILING PRE-APPLICATION PLANS AND DATA. ............................................................ 9
SECTION 3.02 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT. ........................................................................... 9
SECTION 3.03 PRELIMINARY PLAT SPECIFICATIONS. ................................................................................................ 10
SECTION 3.04 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT. ..................................................................................... 11
SECTION 3.05 FINAL PLAT AND REQUIRED SPECIFICATIONS. .................................................................................... 11
SECTION 3.06 PLATS OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS.................................................................................................. 12
SECTION 3.07 VACATION OF PLAT OF RECORD. ....................................................................................................... 13
SECTION 3.08 REPLATS ............................................................................................................................................ 13
SECTION 3.09 ADMINISTRATIVE PLATS .................................................................................................................... 13
SECTION 3.10 CONCURRENT PLATS/MINOR SUBDIVISION ........................................................................................ 14
ARTICLE 4: DESIGN STANDARDS .................................................................................................................... 15
SECTION 4.01 MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS. ........................................................................................................ 15
SECTION 4.02 STREETS, CULVERTS, BRDGES, SUBGRADE, CONCRETE, CURB AND GUTTER. .................................... 15
SECTION 4.03 DEDICATION OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY FOR NEW STREETS. ........................................................................ 17
SECTION 4.04 DEDICATION OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY FOR EXISTING STREETS. ................................................................. 17
SECTION 4.05 INTERSECTIONS. ................................................................................................................................ 17
SECTION 4.06 CURVES IN STREETS; HORIZONTAL. ................................................................................................... 17
SECTION 4.07 STREET GRADES AND ELEVATIONS. ................................................................................................... 17
SECTION 4.08 FRONTAGE ROADS/MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS, ALLEYS, AND DRIVEWAYS. ................................... 18
SECTION 4.09 ACCESS. ............................................................................................................................................ 18
SECTION 4.10 STREET JOGS. .................................................................................................................................... 18
SECTION 4.11 CUL-DE-SAC STREETS. ....................................................................................................................... 18
SECTION 4.12 STREET NAMES.................................................................................................................................. 18
SECTION 4.13 PRIVATE STREETS AND RESERVE STRIPS. .......................................................................................... 18
SECTION 4.14 BLOCKS. ............................................................................................................................................ 19
SECTION 4.15 LOTS. ................................................................................................................................................ 19
SECTION 4.16 THROUGH (DOUBLE FRONTAGE) LOTS. ............................................................................................. 19
SECTION 4.17 EASEMENTS. ...................................................................................................................................... 19
SECTION 4.18 STORM SEWER AND DRAINAGE SYSTEM. ........................................................................................... 19
SECTION 4.19 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM. ............................................................................................................... 20
SECTION 4.20 WATER. ............................................................................................................................................. 20
SECTION 4.21 SIDEWALKS. ...................................................................................................................................... 21
SECTION 4.22 ACCESSIBILITY STANDARDS (ADA). ................................................................................................. 21
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 II
SECTION 4.23 STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS. .................................................................................................... 21
SECTION 4.24 FLOOD HAZARDS. .............................................................................................................................. 21
SECTION 4.25 CREEK SETBACK. ............................................................................................................................... 21
SECTION 4.26 EROSION CONTROL. ........................................................................................................................... 21
SECTION 4.27 MINIMUM STREET STANDARDS ......................................................................................................... 22
SECTION 4.28 EMERGENCY WARNING SIRENS ......................................................................................................... 22
SECTION 4.29 CONFORMANCE WITH OTHER REGULATIONS ..................................................................................... 22
ARTICLE 5: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS ...................................................................................................... 23
SECTION 5.01 GENERAL. .......................................................................................................................................... 23
SECTION 5.02 MONUMENTS AND MARKERS. ........................................................................................................... 23
SECTION 5.03 MONUMENT CONSTRUCTION. ............................................................................................................ 23
SECTION 5.04 SURVEY REQUIREMENTS. .................................................................................................................. 23
SECTION 5.05 STREET GRADING AND CONSTRUCTION. ............................................................................................ 23
SECTION 5.06 STREET SIGNS, LIGHTING, ELECTRICAL, NATURAL GAS, TELEPHONE, CABLE TV, AND MAIL BOXES. 24
SECTION 5.07 LANDSCAPE SCREENS. ....................................................................................................................... 24
SECTION 5.08 STORM SEWER AND DRAINAGE. ........................................................................................................ 24
SECTION 5.09 SANITARY SEWERS. ........................................................................................................................... 25
SECTION 5.10 WATER MAINS .................................................................................................................................. 25
SECTION 5.11 EXTENSIONS TO BOUNDARIES ........................................................................................................... 26
SECTION 5.12 OFF-SITE EXTENSIONS ....................................................................................................................... 26
SECTION 5.13 SIDEWALKS. ...................................................................................................................................... 26
ARTICLE 6: DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS ON PUBLIC LAND ..................................................... 27
SECTION 6.01 DEDICATION. ..................................................................................................................................... 27
SECTION 6.02 DEDICATIONS OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS AND WITHIN EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION. .......... 27
SECTION 6.03 RESERVATION AND DEDICATION OF PUBLIC LAND AND OPEN SPACE. ............................................... 27
SECTION 6.04 DEVELOPER AGREEMENTS. ................................................................................................................ 29
ARTICLE 7: IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURE .................................................................................................... 30
SECTION 7.01 PLATTING COSTS AND IMPROVEMENTS FINANCING. .......................................................................... 30
SECTION 7.02 SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS GUARANTEES. .................................................................................... 30
SECTION 7.03 SURETY PERFORMANCE BOND. ......................................................................................................... 30
SECTION 7.04 ESCROW ACCOUNT. ........................................................................................................................... 30
SECTION 7.05 SECURITY AGREEMENT ..................................................................................................................... 30
SECTION 7.06 IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS. ................................................................................................................ 31
SECTION 7.07 TIME LIMITS. ..................................................................................................................................... 31
SECTION 7.08 REQUIRED SUBMITTALS PRIOR TO CONSTRUCTION. ........................................................................... 31
SECTION 7.09 INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS. ................................................................................................... 31
SECTION 7.10 PLAN AND ADMINISTRATION REVIEW REIMBURSEMENT. ................................................................... 32
SECTION 7.11 FAILURE TO COMPLETE IMPROVEMENTS. ........................................................................................... 32
SECTION 7.12 TESTING REQUIREMENTS. .................................................................................................................. 32
SECTION 7.13 INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION. ...................................................................................................... 32
SECTION 7.14 REDUCTION OF GUARANTEES. ........................................................................................................... 33
SECTION 7.15 RELEASE OF GUARANTEE. ................................................................................................................. 33
SECTION 7.16 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. ...................................................................................................... 33
ARTICLE 8: WAIVERS ........................................................................................................................................... 34
SECTION 8.01 GRANTING OF WAIVERS (EXCEPTIONS) AND CONDITIONS. ................................................................ 34
SECTION 8.02 RECORDING OF PLAT ......................................................................................................................... 34
SECTION 8.03 PLANNED UNIT/CLUSTER DEVELOPMENTS. ....................................................................................... 34
ARTICLE 9: ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND AMENDMENTS ................................................. 34
SECTION 9.01 GENERAL. .......................................................................................................................................... 34
SECTION 9.02 AMENDMENTS ................................................................................................................................... 34
SECTION 9.03 VIOLATION/PENALTIES. ..................................................................................................................... 34
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 III
ARTICLE 10: CERTIFICATION AND DEDICATION STATEMENTS .......................................................... 35
SECTION 10.01 ACKNOWLEDGE OF NOTARY ............................................................................................................ 35
SECTION 10.02 SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATION ........................................................................................................... 35
SECTION 10.03 APPROVAL OF WAHOO CITY PLANNING COMMISSION ..................................................................... 35
SECTION 10.04 APPROVAL OF WAHOO CITY PLANNING COMMISSION ..................................................................... 35
SECTION 10.05 ACCEPTANCE BY WAHOO CITY COUNCIL ........................................................................................ 36
SECTION 10.06 ACCEPTANCE BY WAHOO CITY COUNCIL ........................................................................................ 36
SECTION 10.07 ACCEPTANCE BY THE WAHOO CITY ENGINEER ............................................................................... 36
SECTION 10.08 ACCEPTANCE BY THE WAHOO CITY ENGINEER ............................................................................... 36
SECTION 10.09 ACCEPTANCE BY SAUNDERS COUNTY REGISTER OF DEEDS ............................................................. 36
SECTION 10.10 REVIEW OF SAUNDERS COUNTY SURVEYOR .................................................................................... 36
SECTION 10.11 COUNTY TREASURER’S CERTIFICATIONS ......................................................................................... 37
SECTION 10.12 ADMINISTRATIVE PLAT APPROVAL .................................................................................................. 37
SECTION 10.13 OWNER'S CERTIFICATION ................................................................................................................. 37
SECTION 10.14 LIEN HOLDER CONSENT .................................................................................................................. 38
ARTICLE 11: ANNEXATION AND RECORDING OF PLAT .......................................................................... 39
SECTION 11.01 SUBDIVISION ANNEXATION OF ADJOINING OR CONTIGUOUS PROPERTIES ........................................ 39
SECTION 11.02 PETITION FOR ANNEXATION ............................................................................................................ 39
ARTICLE 12: LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS ................................................................................................... 39
SECTION 12.01 SEPARABILITY ................................................................................................................................. 39
SECTION 12.02 REPEALS .......................................................................................................................................... 39
SECTION 12.03 EFFECTIVE DATE ............................................................................................................................. 39
SECTION 12.04 ADOPTION ....................................................................................................................................... 39
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 1
ARTICLE 1: TITLE, PURPOSE, AND DEFINITIONS.
Section 1.01 Name and Citation of Titles.
This Ordinance shall be known, referred to and cited as "The Subdivision Regulations" of Wahoo, Nebraska.
Section 1.02 Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide for the orderly development of Wahoo and its environs by insuring, through the prescribed rules and standards, functional arrangements of street layouts; open spaces; adequate community facilities and utilities, to coordinate development with the City's transportation, land use and capital facilities plan, and to generally provide conditions favorable for the health, safety and convenience of the community.
Section 1.03 Definitions
For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain words used herein are defined as follows:
1.03.01 APPLICANT shall mean the titleholder of record, his agent, or a person holding a notarized letter authorizing the person to represent the legal owner of the property, or an appropriate purchase agreement.
1.03.02 ALLEY shall mean a minor public service street or public thoroughfare 20 feet or less in width, through a block of lots primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on another street. Buildings facing an alley shall not be construed as satisfying the requirements of this regulation related to frontage on a dedicated street.
1.03.03 BLOCK shall mean a tract or parcel of land platted into lots and bounded by public streets or by waterways, right-of-ways, railroads, unplatted land, City-County boundaries, adjoining property lines, or a combination thereof.
1.03.04 BOND shall mean any form of security including a cash deposit, security bond, or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the City Council which meets the intent of such security required by this Ordinance.
1.03.05 BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENT: shall mean the transfer of property by deed to a respective owner or owners of contiguous property for the purpose of adjusting a boundary line and not for the purpose of creating an additional lot or parcel. The relocation of a single common property line between two abutting lots, parcels or other units of land where an additional lot, parcel or unit of land is not created and the existing lot, parcel or unit of land reduced in size by the adjustment must comply with the applicable zoning requirements. A property line adjustment does not vacate a plat nor does it add lot lines. A property line adjustment does not alter the location of utility services and hook ups.
1.03.06 BUILDING INSPECTOR shall mean the individual appointed and/or employed by the city to enforce the prescribed and adopted building codes for the city.
1.03.07 BUILDING SETBACK LINE shall mean a line parallel, or nearly parallel, to the street line indicating the minimum of distance as prescribed by the zoning regulations between any property line and the closest point of the building line or face of a building or structure related thereto, including all overhangs. In the case of a cul-de-sac the building line shall be measured around the curvature of the street line and shall be located at the required front yard setback where the lot width shall meet the minimum lot width required in the district.
1.03.08 CITY shall mean the City of Wahoo, Nebraska. Also, City Council or governing body.
1.03.09 CITY COUNCIL shall mean the governing body for the City of Wahoo, Nebraska.
1.03.10 CITY ENGINEER shall mean the City Engineer of the City of Wahoo retained by the City Council for the recommendation, advice, and implementation of engineering work as requested by the City.
1.03.11 CLERK shall mean the City Clerk of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska.
1.03.12 COMMON OPEN SPACE shall mean that undivided land in a subdivision which may be jointly owned by all property owners of the subdivision, for the benefit of the owners of the individual building sites of said development.
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 2
1.03.13 COMMON SEWER SYSTEM shall mean a sanitary sewage system in public ownership which provides for the collection and treatment of domestic effluent in a central sewage treatment plant which meets the minimum requirements of the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality for primary and secondary sewage treatment and which does not include individual septic tanks or portable sewage treatment facilities.
1.03.14 COMMON WATER SYSTEM shall mean a water system which provides for the supply, storage and distribution of potable water on an uninterrupted basis which is in public ownership.
1.03.15 COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN shall mean the Comprehensive Plan of Wahoo, Nebraska as adopted by the City Council, setting forth policies for the present and foreseeable future community welfare as a whole and meeting the purposes and requirements set forth in Nebr. Rev. Stat. 19-903 § (R.R.S. 1997).
1.03.16 COMPUTER AIDED DRAFTING AND DESIGN (CADD) shall mean the software used to furnish the preliminary and final plat documents.
1.03.17 COVENANT shall mean a written promise or pledge.
1.03.18 CUL-DE-SAC shall mean a short public way that has only one outlet for vehicular traffic and terminates in a vehicular turn-around.
1.03.19 CULVERT shall mean a transverse drain that channels water under a bridge, street, driveway or pedestrian way.
1.03.20 DEAD END STREET shall mean a public way that has only one outlet for vehicular traffic and does not terminate in a vehicular turn-around but may be intended to be extended or continued in the future.
1.03.21 DEDICATION shall mean the intentional appropriation of land by the owner to some public use.
1.03.22 DEVELOPER. shall mean any person, corporation, partnership, or entity that is responsible for any undertaking that requires a building or zoning permit, conditional use permit, or sign permit.
1.03.23 EASEMENT shall mean a space or a lot or parcel of land reserved for or used for public utilities or public or private uses.
1.03.24 ENGINEER, CITY See “City Engineer”.
1.03.25 FLOOD PLAIN shall mean those lands which are subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year as identified by FEMA.
1.03.26 FLOODWAY shall mean the channel of a watercourse or drainageway and those portions of the flood plain adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the flood water of any watercourse or drainageway without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
1.03.27 FRONTAGE shall mean that portion of a parcel of property which abuts a dedicated public street or highway.
1.03.28 FRONTAGE ROAD shall mean minor streets parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways, which reduce the number of access points to the Arterial Street or highway for the purpose of increased traffic safety.
1.03.29 GIS / SURVEY CONTROL NETWORK shall mean the horizontal reference basis for all engineering and surveying work directed by the City of Wahoo for the purposes of creating and maintaining accurate maps, and being defined by a series of permanent survey control monuments whose coordinate values are published and made available to any engineer or surveyor performing work under the direction of the City of Wahoo.
1.03.30 GREENWAY shall mean a parcel or parcels of land, together with the improvements thereon, dedicated as an easement for access and/or recreation; usually a strip of land set aside for a walkway, bicycle trail, bridal path, or other similar access-way.
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 3
1.03.31 IMPROVEMENTS shall mean street grading, street surfacing and paving, curbs and gutters, street lights, street signs, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains and lines, fire hydrants, sanitary sewers, storm drainage facilities, culverts, bridges, public utilities, or other such installation as designated by the City Council or its specific approving authority.
1.03.32 LOT shall mean a parcel or tract of land which is or may be occupied by a permitted use, together with yards, and other required open spaces, that has frontage upon a street, and is part of a recorded subdivision plat or has been recorded prior to the adoption of the regulations, or a parcel of real property delineated on an approved record of survey, lot-split or sub-parceling map as filed in the office of the County Register of Deeds and abutting at least one public street or right-of-way, two thoroughfare easements, or one private road.
1.03.33 LOT CONSOLIDATION shall mean a method for approval of lot boundary adjustments which reduces the number of lots to not greater than two.
1.03.34 LOT, CORNER shall mean a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets at an angle of not more than 135 degrees. If the angle is greater than 135 degrees, the lot shall be considered an “Interior Lot”. The setbacks for a front yard shall be met on all abutting streets.
1.03.35 LOT DEPTH shall mean the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines. Corner lots shall provide at least one dimension equal to the required lot depth prescribed in the affected zoning district.
1.03.36 LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE shall mean a lot having a frontage on two non-intersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot.
1.03.37 LOT, FLAG shall mean lots, being those lots landlocked from public right-of-way, except for a narrow tract of land of less width than required under assigned zoning.
1.03.38 LOT FRONTAGE shall mean that portion of a lot abutting a street or improved county road. For purposes of determining yard requirements of corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot abutting a street or road shall be considered frontage.
1.03.39 LOT, INTERIOR shall mean a lot other than a corner lot which has frontage on one street only.
1.03.40 LOT LINE shall mean the property line bounding a lot.
1.03.41 LOT MINIMUM AREA shall mean the minimum square footage of land area within the boundaries of the platted lot lines, as applicable to designated zoning districts.
1.03.42 LOT, NONCONFORMING shall mean a lot having less area or dimension than that required in the zoning district in which it is located and which was lawfully created prior to the zoning thereof whereby the larger area or dimension requirements were established, or any lot, other than one shown on a plat recorded in the office of the County Registrar of Deeds, which does not abut a public road or public right-of-way and which was lawfully created prior to the effect date of the zoning regulations.
1.03.43 LOT, PLATTED shall mean a lot which is part of a subdivision of the plat of which, or the appropriate permit for which, has been legally approved by the City and recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds for Saunders County.
1.03.44 LOT OF RECORD shall mean a lot held in separate ownership as shown on the records of the County Registrar of Deeds at the time of the passage of a zoning regulation or a regulation establishing the zoning district in which the lot is located.
1.03.45 LOT SPLIT shall mean a subdivision involving the division of one or more lots with the end result not being greater than two lots.
1.03.46 LOT, THROUGH shall mean a lot other than a corner lot fronting on more than one street.
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 4
1.03.47 LOT, WIDTH OF shall mean the minimum street frontage measured along the front street property line except when a lot fronts on the inside or concave side of a horizontal curvilinear alignment of a street or on a corner lot; in which case, the minimum lot width shall be measured along the front building line of the principal use structure extended to both lot property lines.
1.03.48 MASTER PLAN See Comprehensive Development Plan.
1.03.49 MONUMENT shall mean an identification marker established by certified land survey and set by a registered land surveyor at each section corner, angle point, block corner, street centerline, or other point.
1.03.50 OUTLOT shall mean a lot remnant or parcel of land left over after platting, which is intended as open space or other use, for which no building permit shall be issued for any private structure, except for signs.
1.03.51 PERSON shall mean an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, syndicate, or any legal entity and including any trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar representatives thereof.
1.03.52 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT shall mean a development designed to provide for an unusual or different arrangement of residential, business, or industrial uses in accordance with an approved development plan.
1.03.53 PLANNING COMMISSION shall mean the Planning Commission of Wahoo, Nebraska.
1.03.54 PLAT shall mean a map that delineates the subdivision of a quantity of land. A plat commonly shows the location, boundaries, legal description, streets and other features relevant to the development and improvement of the property.
1.03.55 PLAT, ADMINISTRATIVE shall provide for lots splits, lot combinations, and boundary adjustment which result in lots divided or combined into not more than two tracts without having to re-plat said lot, provided that the resulting lots shall not again be divided without re-platting.
1.03.56 PLAT, FINAL shall mean the final plan of the plat, subdivision or dedication of land prepared for filing or recording in conformance with this Ordinance.
1.03.57 PLAT, PRELIMINARY shall mean the preliminary plan of the plat, subdivision or dedication prepared in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance.
1.03.58 PLAT, REVISED PRELIMINARY A revised plat or map of a previously approved preliminary plat, including supporting data, indicating a proposed subdivision development, prepared in accordance with this ordinance.
1.03.59 PLOT shall mean a parcel of ground.
1.03.60 PUBLIC WAY shall mean an alley, avenue, boulevard, bridge, channel, ditch, easement, expressway, freeway, highway, land, parkway, right-of-way, road, sidewalk, street, subway, tunnel, viaduct, walk, or other ways in which the general public or public entity have a right, or which are dedicated, whether improved or not.
1.03.61 REPLAT is the act of platting the lots, parcels and easements in a recorded subdivision to achieve a reconfiguration of existing subdivision or to increase or decrease the number of lots in the subdivision.
1.03.62 RIGHT-OF-WAY shall mean a strip of land either public or private, on which an irrevocable right of passage has been dedicated, recorded, or otherwise legally established for the use as a public way of vehicles or pedestrians or both. In addition to the roadway, it normally incorporates the curbs, lawn strips, sidewalks, lighting, and drainage facilities, and may include special features such as grade separation, landscaped areas, viaducts and bridges.
1.03.63 SETBACK LINE shall mean a line, as shown on a recorded plat or otherwise established by the Wahoo City Council, beyond which no part of an exterior wall of a building or structure may project.
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 5
1.03.64 SETBACK LINE, FRONT YARD shall mean a line which defines the depth of the required front yard. Said setback line shall be parallel with the right-of-way line or highway setback line when one has been established.
1.03.65 SETBACK LINE, REAR YARD OR SIDE YARD shall mean a line which defines the width or depth of the required rear or side yard. Said setback line shall be parallel with the property line, removed therefrom by the perpendicular distance prescribed for the yard in the district.
1.03.66 SEWERS, ON-SITE shall mean a septic tank or similar installation on an individual lot which utilizes an aerobic bacteriological process or equally satisfactory process for the elimination of sewage and provides for the proper and safe disposal of the effluent, subject to the approval of health and sanitation officials having jurisdiction.
1.03.67 SIDEWALK OR WALKWAY shall mean that portion of a dedicated right-of-way or easement improved and intended for pedestrian use only.
1.03.68 STREET shall mean a public thoroughfare or right-of-way dedicated, deeded, or condemned for use as such, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property including public streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, parkways, roads, place, way, drive, lanes, viaducts, subways, tunnels, and bridges. Where explicitly authorized by the City Council, private streets may be authorized as part of planned developments.
1.03.69 STREET, ARTERIAL shall mean a street designed with the primary function of efficient movement of through traffic between and around areas of the City with controlled access to abutting property, including necessary control of entrances, exits and curb use. See also “Street, Major”.
1.03.70 STREET CENTERLINE shall mean the centerline of a street right-of-way as established by official surveys.
1.03.71 STREET, COLLECTOR shall mean a street or highway that is intended to carry traffic from minor streets to major streets. Collector streets are usually the principal entrance streets to residential developments and the streets for circulation within the development as designated in the Comprehensive Development Plan.
1.03.72 STREET, LOCAL shall mean a street designed for local pedestrian and vehicular traffic that provides direct access to abutting residential, commercial, or industrial properties.
1.03.73 STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS shall mean a local or collector street, parallel and adjacent to an arterial or collector street, providing access to abutting properties and protection from arterial or collector streets. (Also called frontage streets or service roads.)
1.03.74 STREET, MAJOR shall mean a street or highway used primarily for fast or high volume traffic, including expressways, freeways, boulevards, and arterial streets as designated in the Comprehensive Development Plan. (Also known as Arterial Streets.)
1.03.75 STREET, MINOR (LOCAL) See “Street, Local”.
1.03.76 STREET, PRIVATE shall mean an open, unoccupied space, other than a street or alley dedicated to the public, but permanently established as the principal means of vehicular access to abutting properties. The term “private street” includes the term “place”.
1.03.77 STREET, SIDE shall mean that street bounding a corner lot and which extends in the same general direction as the line determining the depth of the lot.
1.03.78 SUBDIVIDER shall mean any person, group, corporation, partnership, or other entity, or any agency thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision.
1.03.79 SUBDIVISION shall mean the division of a land, lot, tract, or parcel into two or more lots, parcels, plats, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose of sale, lease, offer, or development, whether immediate or future,
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 6
provided that the smallest lot created by the division is less than 10 acres in size. The term shall also include the division of residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, or other land whether by deed, metes and bounds description, lease, map, plat, or other instrument.
1.03.80 SUBDIVISION AGREEMENT An agreement between the City of Wahoo and a developer whereby the developer agrees to construct any required public street, drainage, and other improvements, for a subdivision and to provide security for completion of the subdivision improvements and in situations involving public financing, the relative cost be borne by the developer and by the public entity.
1.03.81 SURVEYOR shall mean any person registered in Nebraska to practice surveying.
1.03.82 VICINITY MAP shall mean a drawing located on the plat which sets forth by dimensions or other means, the relationship of the proposed subdivision or use to other nearby developments or landmarks and community facilities and services within the City of Wahoo, in order to better locate and orient the area in question.
1.03.83 WALKWAY See “Sidewalk”.
1.03.84 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR shall mean the person or persons authorized and empowered by the city to administer and enforce the requirements of these regulations.
1.03.85 ZONING DISTRICT shall mean an area delineated on a zoning map for which uniform use regulations are specified.
1.03.86 ZONING ORDINANCE shall mean the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Wahoo as amended from time to time.
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 7
ARTICLE 2: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 2.01 General Provisions
The Subdivision Regulations as herein set forth are intended to provide for harmonious development of the City and its environs; for the integration of new subdivision streets with other existing or planned streets or with other features of the Comprehensive Development Plan of the City; for adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light and air; for the distribution of population and traffic in a manner which will tend to create conditions favorable to health, safety, convenience, or prosperity to insure conformance of subdivision plans with the capital improvement program of the City and its planning area; and, to secure equitable handling of all subdivision plats by providing uniform procedures and standards for observance by subdividers, Planning Commission and City Council.
Section 2.02 Jurisdiction.
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all land located within the legal boundaries of the City, as the same may be amended by subsequent annexation, and shall also include all land lying within one mile of the corporate limits of the City, or as indicated on the Official Zoning Map of the City and not located in any other Municipality.
Section 2.03 Powers.
No plat of a subdivision of land lying within the jurisdiction of the City shall be filed or recorded until it shall have been submitted to and a report and recommendation thereon made, by the Planning Commission to the City Council and the City Council has approved the final plat.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent, or person having control of any land within the corporate limits of the City, or within the area shown on the Official Zoning Map to subdivide land except in accordance with Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-916 (R.R.S. 1997) and the provisions of the title; provided, however, that any subdivision of land caused by the acquisition of land by the federal government, the State of Nebraska, any County, the City, or any City incorporated or unincorporated, within the jurisdiction of the City, shall be deemed to have received approval as required by Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-916 (R.R.S. 1997).
Section 2.04 Applicability.
Any plat, hereafter made, for each subdivision or each part thereof lying within the jurisdiction of this ordinance, shall be prepared, presented for approval, and recorded as herein prescribed. The regulations contained herein shall apply to the subdivision of a lot, tract, parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts, or other division of land for the purpose of sale or development, whether immediate or future, including the subdivision or replatting of land or lots, except that the division of land when the smallest parcel created is more than 10 acres in area shall be exempt from this Ordinance. Further, the regulations set forth by this ordinance shall be minimum regulations which shall apply uniformly throughout the jurisdiction of this ordinance except as hereinafter provided.
2.04.01 Each separate principal use/building within the jurisdiction of this ordinance shall be situated on a separate and single subdivided lot of record unless otherwise provided in the zoning ordinance of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska.
2.04.02 No subdivision of land shall be permitted within the jurisdiction of this ordinance unless a plat is approved in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. Further, no lot in a subdivision may be sold, transferred or negotiated to sell, no permit to erect, alter, or repair any building upon land in a subdivision may be issued, and no building may be erected in a subdivision unless a final plat has been approved by the Wahoo City Council and recorded with the Saunders County Register of Deeds.
2.04.03 These regulations shall not apply to the following:
A. To a subdivision of land whereby the smallest parcel created or remaining is more than ten (10) acres.
B. The subdivision of burial lots in cemeteries.
Section 2.05 Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the terms of this Ordinance, subdividers shall be held to be minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and general welfare.
Section 2.06 Conflict.
No final plat of land within the force and effect of the existing Zoning Ordinance shall be approved unless it conforms to the Subdivision Regulations contained herein. Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions noted herein and those contained in the Zoning Regulations, Building Regulations, or other official regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive shall apply.
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 8
Section 2.07 Permits.
Unless a lot shall have been platted in accordance with the provisions of this Article, no building permit shall be issued.
Section 2.08 Amendments.
Any provisions of this Ordinance may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, modified, or repealed by the City Council; provided, however, that such amendments shall not become effective until after public hearing and consideration by the Planning Commission; and a public hearing by the City Council in relation thereto has been held, public notice of which shall have been published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Wahoo at least one time, 10 days prior to such hearing.
Section 2.09 Modifications.
Where, in the case of a particular proposed subdivision, the subdivider can show that the strict compliance with this Ordinance would result in extraordinary hardship to the subdivider because of unusual topography; or other such conditions not inflicted by the applicant; or where conditions would result in inhibiting the achievement of the objectives of this Ordinance, the Board of Adjustment, after receiving a report from the Planning Commission, may vary, modify, or waive the requirements so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured. Provided, that such modifications or waiver will not adversely affect the development, the character of which shall be in conformance with recommended platting and development practices in the general area of the proposed subdivision; will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the regulations; and, will not interfere with carrying out the Comprehensive Development Plan of the City.
Section 2.10 Storm Run-off Control.
Where in the case of a proposed development, which requires the grading of the site, redistribution of storm water run-off, increase of storm water run-off above the prescribed amount as allowed in section 4.18, or other conditions noted by City Council, Planning Commission and/or City Engineer, said development shall contain all necessary control measures for siltation and run-off control as deemed necessary by the City and/or City Engineer.
Section 2.11 Review Fees.
A fee schedule for administrative costs associated with the review of preliminary plats, final plats, replats, lot splits, plans and specifications of proposed improvements and construction review has been adopted by the City and such fees shall be paid by the subdivider.
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 9
ARTICLE 3: PROCEDURES
Section 3.01 Procedure for Filing Pre-application Plans and Data.
Pre-application Plans and Data: Prior to filing an application for approval of a preliminary plat the subdivider shall submit plans and data to the city in sketch form showing the proposed subdivision of land. The sketch plan shall include:
3.01.01 The proposed tentative layout of streets, lots and other features in relation to existing streets, utilities, topography and other conditions.
3.01.02 A general location map showing the proposed subdivision and its relationship to existing abutting subdivisions and community facilities in the area, such as streets, alleys, schools, parks, commercial areas and other data supplementing the plans which outline or describe all of the proposed development as it relates to existing conditions.
These pre-application plans and data shall not require a formal application fee. After discussion with the subdivider and review of the data, city staff will inform the subdivider in writing whether such plans and data submitted meet the objectives of this Ordinance and shall describe any inconsistencies with the requirements of this Ordinance.
Section 3.02 Procedure for Approval of Preliminary Plat.
3.02.01 Before any subdivider or agent contracts for the sale or offers to sell any subdivision of land or any part thereof, which is wholly or partly within the City of Wahoo or which is within a one mile limit of the City of Wahoo as it may from time to time exist or which is proposed to be annexed, the subdivider or his agent shall file a preliminary plat of said subdivision with the City of Wahoo. The Preliminary Plat shall be prepared in accordance with the regulations set forth herein, and shall be submitted to the City prior to the completion of final surveys of streets and lots and before the start of grading or construction work upon the proposed streets and lots and before any map of said subdivision is made in a form suitable for recording. The City shall determine whether the plat is in proper form and shall not receive and consider such plat as filed until it is submitted in accordance with the requirements hereof. The street layout shall be in conformity with a plan for the most advantageous development of the entire neighboring area and in conformity with the Comprehensive Development Plan.
3.02.02 All plats, preliminary and final, shall be prepared in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance and in conformance with the Comprehensive Development Plan and Zoning Ordinance. The subdivider shall be responsible for such conformance.
3.02.03 Fifteen (15) 18”x24” copies and fifteen (15) 11 x17 (folded) copies of the Preliminary Plat and required supplementary material as specified in Section 3.03 of this Ordinance shall be submitted to the City of Wahoo in accordance to the review schedule. The plat shall be submitted twenty-one (21) days prior to the public hearing of the Planning Commission when within the Corporate Limits of Wahoo and thirty (30) days when outside the Corporate Limits, but within the City’s jurisdiction. At least ten (10) days prior to the Wahoo Planning Commission meeting at which the preliminary plat is to be considered for approval, the planning commission shall distribute one copy of the proposal with a request for comments to the following, and shall notify such agency of the meeting date:
 City Engineer,
 School Board,
 Fire Chief,
 Police Department or Sheriff’s Department, as applicable,
 Saunders County Planning Commission, if located outside the corporate limits,
 Local Telephone Exchange,
 Local Cable Television,
 Wahoo Utilities,
 Lower Platte North Natural Resources District
 United States Postal Service,
 Nebraska Department of Roads, when applicable
 and wherever else deemed necessary by the Planning Commission.
3.02.04 The Planning Commission shall consider the Preliminary Plat at a public hearing, of which notice must be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Wahoo at least ten days prior to the Public Hearing, and shall:
1. Review the preliminary plat and other material submitted for conformity thereof to this Ordinance,
2. Review any recommendations of the above agencies and other agencies, and
3. Recommend to the subdivider changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by him/her.
The Planning Commission shall act on the plat as submitted or modified within thirty (30) days after the official
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 10
meeting at which the plat was considered, and if approved, the Planning Commission shall express its approval as conditional approval and state the conditions of such approval, if any, or if disapproved, shall express its disapproval and its reasons in writing. The action of the Wahoo Planning Commission shall be noted on three (3) copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions determined. One (1) copy shall be returned to the subdivider, one (1) copy relayed to the city council and one (1) copy retained by the planning commission.
3.02.05 Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute an acceptance of the plat, but shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat.
3.02.06 If the Planning Commission recommends disapproval or approval, then the City Clerk will order Notice of Public Hearing before the City Council to be published. The notice must be published at least 10 days prior to the Public Hearing in a paper of general circulation within the City of Wahoo. The City Council may (a) Concur with the Planning Commission's Recommendation; (b) Reverse the Planning Commission's recommendation; or (c) Refer the Preliminary Plat back to the Planning Commission for reconsideration with specific instructions to the Planning Commission; (d) approve with some modification from the Planning Commission’s recommendation.
3.02.07 Approval of a Preliminary Plat shall not constitute approval of the Final Plat. Rather, the Preliminary Plat shall be deemed an expression of approval of the general design concept and serves as an acceptable guide for the preparation of the Final Plat. Approval of the Preliminary Plat shall become void after 12 months from the date of such approval by City Council, if no Final Plat has been filed or a Final Plat of previously proposed phases has not been filed or unless extension of approval has been granted by City Council, such extension shall not exceed 12 months.
Section 3.03 Preliminary Plat Specifications.
The Preliminary Plat shall be drawn to a scale of at least one inch equals 100 feet (or 1” = 200’ if 75% of the lots are one acre or larger) with a sheet size not to exceed 18” x 24” and shall be plainly marked “Preliminary Plat” and shall include, show, or be accompanied by the following information:
3.03.01 A location map showing the general location of the proposed subdivision in relation to surrounding developments with a north arrow, scale and legend.
3.03.02 Both existing and proposed grades shall be shown.
3.03.03 Phasing lines shall be delineated on the plat and a phasing schedule, if developed in phases.
3.03.04 The proposed name of the subdivision which must not be as similar to that of an existing subdivision as to cause confusion.
3.03.05 The proposed names and addresses of the owner and subdivider; the engineer, surveyor, or landscape architect responsible (all of which are licensed to practice in Nebraska) for the subdivision layout; and the names of all landowners abutting the proposed subdivision.
3.03.06 The legal description of the area being platted, and boundary line (accurate in scale) and dimensions, and the location of monuments found or set, section lines, existing and the approximate acreage of the proposed development.
3.03.07 Width and location of platted streets and alleys within 200 feet of the property; physical features of the property, including location of water courses, ravines, bridges, culverts, present structures and other features affecting the subdivision; contours with intervals of five feet or less; the location of all existing utilities with their sizes indicated, as well as flow lines; elevations of existing sanitary and storm sewer, the outline of wooded areas (the location of important individual trees may be required).
3.03.08 Location and name(s) of adjoining subdivision(s) or undeveloped land and owners and persons having ownership interest within 300 feet of the subject property (not including streets and right-of-ways). This should be prepared by a title company and submitted in list form and as mailing labels.
3.03.09 The proposed lot layout, lot and block numbers and approximate lot dimensions and square footage and grounds proposed to be dedicated for public use, such as schools, parks, pathways, playgrounds and streets.
3.03.10 The location and width of proposed streets, all easements including buffer easements, building setback lines, Rights of Way, corner radii, pavement width, thickness and type, sidewalks, alleys, location of all proposed improvements including: sanitary sewers, water mains, storm water drainage and other features and improvements required by this ordinance.
3.03.11 Easements for public utility and rights-of-way purposes. The book and page number of existing easements shall be labeled on the plan and any private easements should be labeled as such.
3.03.12 All established floodway, floodway-fringe, and flood plain overlay lines.
3.03.13 The existing zoning classification and proposed uses (zoning) and of land and required setbacks within the proposed subdivision shall also be designated.
3.03.14 Location and setbacks of existing buildings.
3.03.15 Three draft copies of the subdivision agreement, based upon the sample subdivision agreement provided by the City, with attached itemized cost estimate for all public improvements and detailed breakdown of portion of
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 11
estimated costs to be borne by subdivider and those to be borne by the City, S.I.D. or other proposed issuer of public debt.
3.03.16 Signature block indicating approval of the Planning Commission per Section 10.03
3.03.17 Signature block indicating approval of the City Council per Section 10.05
3.03.18 Signature block indicating approval of the City Engineer per Section 10.07
3.03.19 Requests for waivers of design standards.
3.03.20 The subdivider or subdividers representative shall be in attendance at the City Planning Commission and City Council meetings and hearings when the Preliminary Plat (displayed in duplicate) is discussed.
3.03.21 Traffic impact analysis study may be required by the City Engineer.
3.03.22 Four copies of the following to the City for distribution to the city engineer and utility superintendent for review at the time of preliminary plat submittal :
1. A sanitary sewer plan.
2. A preliminary drainage study and report within the subdivision.
3. A street profile plan with a statement of proposed street improvements.
4. A water distribution system plan.
5. An erosion and sediment control plan.
6. A grading plan within the subdivision.
7. A traffic study (if required).
Section 3.04 Procedure for Approval of Final Plat.
3.04.01 The Final Plat shall conform to the Preliminary Plat as approved and may be comprised of only that portion of the approved Preliminary Plat which the subdivider proposed to record and develop at the time.
3.04.02 The Final Plat shall be submitted, in accordance with the review schedule, to the City for Planning Commission and City Council review.
3.04.03 Prior to approval of the City Council, at least three signed reproducible copies (Mylar) of the final plat [(2) 18x24 and (1) 11x17] shall be prepared as specified in this Ordinance and submitted to the City. In addition, a total of eleven (11) 18”x24” folded paper copies of the final plat shall also be submitted to the City along with two electronic copies on a compact disc in an AutoCad format or other software format specified by the city. The electronic Cadd files will reference the City of Wahoo GIS / Survey Control Network.
3.04.04 Upon approval of the Final Plat, a certification of approval by the City shall be endorsed thereon by the Mayor and the Planning Commission Chair.
3.04.05 Final Approval by the City Council shall be by Resolution after receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
3.04.06 The final plat will be filed with the register of deeds by the city after City Council’s approval and after required improvements are installed and accepted by the city.
Section 3.05 Final Plat and Required Specifications.
After approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning Commission, the subdivider shall prepare and submit to the Planning Commission a final plat prepared by a registered land surveyor for recording purposes and shall submit in conformance with the approved preliminary plat drawn to a scale of one inch to 100 feet or larger with a sheet size required for proper filing with the Saunders County Register of Deeds and accompanied by the following information:
3.05.01. Name of subdivision designated, by name or as otherwise prescribed, in bold letters inside the margin at the top of each sheet included in the plat.
3.05.02. Date, north arrow and graphic scale.
3.05.03. Lot designation, street names, location, and rights-of-way width for all streets within or abutting the plat shall be shown.
3.05.04. An accurate boundary survey of the property, with bearings and distances, referenced to section lines and/or adjacent subdivisions, as well as referenced to the City of Wahoo GIS / Survey Control Network. The boundary survey shall meet or exceed the "Minimum Standards for Surveys", as established by the Professional Surveyors Association of Nebraska.
3.05.05. Fractional lines and corners of the government township and section surveys shall be approximately labeled and dimensioned as applicable to the plat.
3.05.06. Boundary dimensions from angle point to angle point shall be used for all sides of the closed traverse.
3.05.07. Bearings, based on the City of Wahoo GIS / Survey Control Network, of all boundary lines or internal angles of all angle points on the boundary shall be shown.
3.05.08. The minimum unadjusted acceptable error of closure for all subdivision boundaries shall be 1:10,000 and shall be 1:5,000 for any individual lot.
3.05.10. Adjacent subdivisions, streets, alleys and easements, with their widths and names.
3.05.11. Names and widths of the streets, and block and lot numbers (numbered consecutively).
3.05.12. Location of lots, streets, public highways, alleys and other property features, with accurate bearings and
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 12
distances. At a minimum all curves shall be identified with the following data; radius, arc distance, chord distance and chord bearing. It is intended that enough information be shown, so the subdivision can be reestablished on the ground.
3.05.13. All distances shall be shown in feet to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot.
3.05.14. A notarized dedication signed and acknowledged by all parties having any titled interest in, or lien upon the land to be subdivided consenting to the final plat including the dedication of parts of the land for streets, easements, and other purposes as per Section 10.01.
3.05.15. A block for the certification signed by the County Treasurer stating that there are no regular or special taxes or special assessments due or delinquent against the platted land as per Section 10.11
3.05.16. A block for the approval of the Planning Commission as per Section 10.04
3.05.17. A block for the approval of the City Council to be signed by the Mayor and attested to by the City Clerk as per Section 10.06
3.05.18. A block for the approval of the City Engineer per Section 10.08
3.05.19. A legal description including total acreage for the subdivision and individual lot areas.
3.05.20. A block for Certificate of County Register of Deeds as per Section 10.09
3.05.21. A block of review from the Saunders County Surveyor as per Section 10.10
3.05.22. A block for Owner’s Certification as per Section 10.13
3.05.23. A block for the approval of the Lending Institution as per Section 10.14
3.05.24. A block for Surveyors Certification as per Section 10.02.
3.05.25. Three copies of any private restrictions or covenants affecting the subdivision or any part thereof, if applicable.
3.05.26. Plat Boundary computations shall be based on Nebraska State Plane Coordinates as set forth in Neb. Rev State §86-1601 to 86-1606 (RRS 1998), except that North American Datum (“NAD”) 1983 should be version 1995 under Neb. Rev. Stat. §86-1602(2), and the use of United States Feet and decimals of a foot shall be required in Wahoo (Saunders County) pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §86-1603. State Plan Coordinates shall be shown for all boundary corners and reference points used in the boundary description of the final plat.
3.05.27. Statement of estimated costs and financial assumptions for any possible sanitary and improvement districts (SID) connection fees.
3.05.28. Financial data showing cost of all public improvements. Costs to be itemized and all soft costs to be itemized and funding sources identified as to general obligation, special assessment, and private.
3.05.29. Development of an acceptable subdivision agreement prior to City Council action guaranteeing the installation of improvements.
3.05.30. A bond or escrow or security agreement approved by the city attorney in an amount sufficient to guarantee the installation of the required improvements.
3.05.31. Waivers being requested.
3.05.32. Four copies of the following to the City for distribution to the city engineer and utility superintendent for review at the time of final plat submittal:
1. Final construction plans and specifications of improvements.
2. Final drainage study and report.
3. Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP).
4. Geotechnical report.
5. A traffic study (if required).
3.05.33. Flood plain findings as per zoning.
3.05.34. Title search of real estate as shown on the final plat certified within 10 days of filing final plat application.
3.05.35. Range of addresses for all proposed lots submitted to the city for property address assignments.
3.05.36. Final Plat shall then be submitted to the City Council for approval and adoption prior to the start of construction, at a public hearing advertised and posted with notice at least 10 days prior to the hearing in a paper of general circulation in the City of Wahoo.
Section 3.06 Plats Outside Corporate Limits.
Procedure for approval of Preliminary and Final Plats of land within extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction but outside the corporate limits of the city shall be the same as set forth in this Article. Subdivisions outside the corporate limits should be considered for annexation as provided in Article 11.
3.06.01 Notification of County Planning Commission. The City shall notify the Saunders County Planning Commission of any proposed subdivision plat and provide the Commission with all available materials on the proposed plat, when such proposed plat lies partially or totally within the extraterritorial subdivision jurisdiction being exercised by that municipality in such county. The Commission shall be given four (4) weeks to officially comment on the appropriateness of the design and improvements proposed in the plat. The review period shall run concurrently with subdivision review activities of the city after the commission receives all available material for a proposed subdivision plat.
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 13
Section 3.07 Vacation of Plat of Record.
3.07.01 A subdivider may make application to the City to vacate any plat of record under the following conditions:
1 The Plat to be vacated is a legal plat of record.
2 Vacation of the subdivision will not interfere with development of, nor deny access via public thoroughfare to, adjoining properties or utility services or other improvements.
3 Vacation of the subdivision will not be contrary to the Comprehensive Development Plan.
3.07.02. The owner or owners shall present a proposal to the City, containing the legal description of the subdivision and calling for vacation thereof. The Planning Commission shall after public hearing and consideration send recommendations to the City Council. The City Council, after public hearing shall approve or deny the proposal. If the proposal is approved, it shall then be recorded in the office of the Saunders County Register of Deeds. All fees for the recording of such vacation and for filing the application shall be paid by the subdivider.
Section 3.08 Replats
Whenever a re-subdivision of a parcel consists of 10 or fewer lots, the City may waive the separate submission requirements for the Preliminary and Final Plats to expedite the subdivision review process if, in the judgment of the city staff, separate submission will not serve the public interest and will not conflict with the intent of this Ordinance. Concurrent Plats shall be:
3.08.01 Replats shall be discussed with the City at a scheduled pre-application Conference, as set out in Section 3.01.
3.08.02 Be submitted to the City in accordance with the review schedule;
3.08.03 Be accompanied by all application fees and completed application forms as required;
3.08.04 Follow the procedure set forth for herein and contain the required information Preliminary and Final Plats, including public hearings. Such hearing shall be posted with notice at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing;
3.08.05 Include a drainage study showing how run-off generated by the proposed development impacts drainage on downstream drainage systems.
3.08.06 Changes required by the Planning Commission shall be made prior to submission to City Council. Final plats shall be submitted to the City at least 15 days prior to the next regular meeting of the City Council.
3.08.07 A final plat, in conformance with Sections 3.04.03 and 3.05, shall be submitted to the City.
3.08.08 All requirements of Section 3.05 shall be met and a revised preliminary plat shall be required if any of the guidelines of section 3.09.03, (1) through (8) are determined to be present.
Section 3.09 Administrative Plats
3.09.01 The intent of this section is to provide for lots splits, lot combinations, and boundary adjustment which result in lots divided or combined into not more than two (2) lots without having to re-plat said lot, provided that the resulting lots shall not again be divided without re-platting. City staff shall review the administrative plat application and the building inspector shall make a final determination.
3.09.02 Requests for an administrative plat approval shall be made by the owner or a designated representative of the land to the city. Five (5) copies of a land survey of the lots involved if there are not structures thereon, or, if structures are located on any part of the lot being split, consolidated, or adjusted, five (5) copies of a survey of the lot(s) and the location of the structure(s) thereon together with the precise nature, location and dimensions of the proposed plat shall accompany the application; and such surveys shall also include two electronic copies on compact disc in an AutoCad format or other software format specified by the city. The administrative plat shall include the following:
1. A survey of the lot(s),
2. Location and setbacks of all existing structures(s),
3. Location and dimensions of the proposed administrative plat,
4. A block for Acknowledgment by Notary as per Section 10.01,
5. A block for Surveyors Certification as per Section 10.02,
6. A block for Certificate of County Register of Deeds as per Section 10.09,
7. A block of review from the Saunders County Surveyor as per Section 10.10,
8. A block for approval or certification signed by the County Treasurer stating that there are no regular or special taxes due or delinquent against the platted land as per 10.11,
9. A block for the approval of the City as per Section 10.12
3.09.03 Disapproval of administrative plat shall be based on the following guidelines:
1. A new street or alley is needed or proposed,
2. Vacations of streets, alleys, setback lines, access control or easements are required or proposed,
3. Such action will result in significant increases in service requirements, e.g., utilities, schools, traffic control, streets, etc.: or will interfere with maintaining existing service levels.
4. There is less street right-of-way than required by this Ordinance or the Comprehensive Development Plan unless such dedication can be made by separate instrument,
5. All easement requirements have not been satisfied,
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 14
6. Such action taken during an administrative plat will result in a tract without direct access to a street,
7. A substandard-sized lot or parcel will be created,
8. The lot has been previously split.
3.09.04 No Administrative Plats shall be approved unless all required public improvements have been installed, no new dedication of public right-of-way or easements is involved, and such subdivision complies with the ordinance requirements concerning minimum areas and dimensions of such lots.
3.09.05 Application will be made to the city for review and approval by the city zoning building inspector. The building inspector shall, in writing, either approve, with or without conditions, or disapprove, with reasons therefore, the administrative plat within forty-five (45) days of application. If the building inspector does not act within forty-five (45) days, the administrative plat shall be deemed to have received a favorable recommendation in all respects and the plat shall be filed with the Register of Deeds.
3.09.06 Prior to the approval of the administrative plat, the subdivider shall provide a statement from the County Treasurer's office showing there are no tax liens against said land within the proposed subdivision or any part thereof. The subdivider shall also provide a statement from the City Treasurer's office showing that all special assessment installment payments are current as applied to said proposed subdivision or any part thereof. All taxes shall be paid in full on all real property dedicated to a public use.
3.09.07 The filing fee for the administrative plat shall be in accordance to the City’s Master Fee Schedule.
3.09.08 After approval from the City, all mylars must be certified by all applicable parties and two copies filed with the City prior to the issuance of a building permit.
Section 3.10 Concurrent Plats/Minor Subdivision.
Whenever a subdivision or re-subdivision of a parcel consists of four (4) or fewer lots, the City Council may waive the separate submission requirements for the Preliminary and Final Plats to expedite the subdivision review process if, in the judgment of the city staff, separate submission will not serve the public interest and will not conflict with the intent of these regulations. Concurrent Plats shall:
3.10.01 Be discussed with the Zoning Administrator at a scheduled Pre-application Conference, as set out in Section 3.01 of this article:
3.10.02 Be submitted to the City Clerk at least fifteen (15) days prior to the next regular meeting of the Planning Commission at which request is to be heard;
3.10.03 Be accompanied by the application fees and completed application forms as required;
3.10.04 Follow the procedure set forth herein and contain the required information for Preliminary and Final Plats, including public hearings, except that a public hearing and recommendation from the planning commission is not required. Such hearing shall be posted with notice at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing;
3.10.05 A drainage plan showing how run-off generated by the proposed development impacts drainage on downstream drainage systems;
1. Exceptions: Drainage reports shall not be required for the following:
A. Subdivision of existing tax lots that are primarily developed;
B. Subdivision of a farmstead that creates not more than two (2) lots and allows for the split of the main residence from the remaining farmstead.
C. Acreages where lots are not less than one (1) acre in size.
3.10.06 Changes required by the Zoning Administrator shall be made prior to submission to the governing body. Final plans shall be submitted to the City Clerk at least seven (7) days prior to the next regular meeting of the governing body.
3.10.07 A final plat, in conformance with Sections 3.04.03 and 3.05, shall be submitted to the city council for review and action prior to start of construction.
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 15
ARTICLE 4: DESIGN STANDARDS
Section 4.01 Minimum Design Standards.
No subdivision shall be approved unless it is in conformance with the requirements of this Ordinance and the Comprehensive Development Plan.
In subdividing property, consideration shall be given to suitable sites for schools, parks, playgrounds, and other common areas for public use so as to best conform with any recommendations of the Comprehensive Development Plan. Any provisions for schools, parks, and playgrounds should be indicated on the preliminary plat in order that it may be determined when and in what manner such areas will be provided or acquired by an appropriate agency.
Land which the City has found to be unsuitable for subdividing, due to flooding, poor drainage, steep slopes, rock formation, or other features likely to be harmful to the safety, welfare or health of the future residents, shall not be subdivided unless adequate methods for subdivision are formulated by the developer and acceptable to the City that would eliminate or substantially reduce such hazards.
The City may require all contiguous land under common ownership to be submitted with the Preliminary Plan in order to evaluate overall development patterns and conformity with the Comprehensive Development Plan and issue proper extension of future roads and services.
If a proposed subdivision contains lots which are sufficiently larger parcels than the minimum required lot size of the zoning district, such parcels shall be arranged to permit a logical future street and utility system and logical re-subdivision. This information shall be shown on the preliminary plat.
Section 4.02 Streets, Culverts, Bridges, Subgrade, Concrete, Curb and Gutter.
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the Comprehensive Development Plan and be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, topographical conditions, public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of land to be serviced by such streets.
The street layout of the proposed subdivision shall provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of streets and alleys already existing in areas adjacent to the area being subdivided. Where, at the determination of the city with recommendation from the City Engineer, it is desirable to provide street access to adjoining properties, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundaries of the subdivision. Where the City Engineer deems it necessary, such dead-end streets shall be provided with a temporary turnaround having a radius at outside of the pavement of at least 40 feet or other approved design.
New or reconstructed streets shall be constructed of the materials as herein specified, on an approved subgrade, in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines, grades, typical cross-section and details shown on the approved Plans. The Nebraska State Standard Specifications shall be the Nebraska Department of Roads Standard Specifications for Highway Construction, latest edition, English Units Edition.
Where natural drainage channels intersect any street right-of-way, it shall be the responsibility of the developer to have satisfactory bridges, drainage structures and/or culverts constructed. Where drainage pipe or culverts are required, minimum requirements shall be observed as follows:
4.02.01 All drainage pipe or culverts shall extend across the entire right-of-way width of the existing or proposed street. The cover over the culvert and its capacity shall be determined by the developer’s engineer. The minimum diameter of a drainage pipe shall be eighteen (18) inches. Depending on existing drainage conditions, head walls may be required.
4.02.02 Driveway culverts, if applicable, shall have a minimum diameter of eighteen (18) inches. The driveway culverts shall be laid so as to maintain the flow lines of the ditch. Head walls may be required.
4.02.03 Excavation, Embankment, and Subgrade.
Work shall be in accordance with Section 205 and 206 of the Nebraska State Standard Specifications. Fill material shall be Class III, uniform and free of trash, lumber and other debris. Material shall be properly moistened to approximately optimum requirements and thoroughly compacted to a minimum of 95% maximum dry density as determined by ASTM D-698, with moisture content of 0% to 3% above optimum or as specified in the Geotechnical Report.
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 16
All Trench fill below areas to be covered with street pavement, drives or sidewalks shall meet the minimum compaction requirements as specified in the Geotechnical Report.
Pavement subgrade shall be a minimum of 12 inches deep or as specified in the Geotechnical Report. Material for pavement subgrade shall be properly moistened to approximately optimum requirements and thoroughly compacted to a minimum of 98% maximum dry density as determined by ASTM D-698, with a moisture content of 0% to 3% above optimum or as specified in the Geotechnical Report.
Compaction tests shall be taken by an approved testing laboratory. Results of all compaction tests shall be furnished to the City Administrator.
4.02.04 Concrete.
Concrete shall conform to Division 600 of the Nebraska State Standard Specifications. Concrete shall be Class “47B-3,500”. Minimum compressive strength shall be 3,500 psi in 28 days. Materials shall conform to Nebraska State Standard Specifications for Highway Construction, Division 1000, Material Details. Curing shall be with a continuous coating of white pigmented curing compound conforming to the requirements of Section 1012 of the Nebraska State Standard Specifications.
To verify compressive strength of the concrete, a set of three (3) all concrete test cylinders shall be made according to ASTM C-31 and C-39. One set of concrete cylinders shall be required for each day’s concrete placement or for each 200 cubic yards of concrete placed if more than 100 cubic yards are placed in one day.
The concrete shall be tested by an approved testing laboratory and results of the testing furnished to the City Administrator. Testing for strength requirements shall be at seven (7) days and twenty-eight (28) days from the date of casting the cylinders.
4.02.05 Pavement Construction or Reconstruction.
All new or reconstructed full depth paving shall be constructed with Portland cement concrete. Surface maintenance of existing paved streets may utilize hot mix asphalt, armor coat, seal coat or other methods approved by the City.
Concrete paving shall be constructed in accordance with the Nebraska State Standard Specifications. The minimum pavement thickness shall be seven (7) inches. Arterial and Collector roadway pavement thickness shall be determined by pavement design calculations and approved by the City.
All street improvements shall conform to the Nebraska Board of Public Roads Classifications and Standards, Minimum Design Standards, and the Minimum Street Standards in the City’s Subdivision Regulations.
Alternate materials for street paving may be approved by the City Council on a case by case basis. Curb and gutter shall be required on all streets built within the City Limits unless the City Council approves construction without curb and gutter.
4.02.06 Full Depth Patching.
Full depth paving replacement for utility cuts and other repairs shall be made as per the details in the City of Wahoo, “Infrastructure Standards and Specifications”. Concrete and asphalt shall be replaced with Portland cement concrete at the minimum depths as follows:
 Collector streets, alleys, commercial driveways (8” depth)
 Residential Streets (7” depth)
 Residential Driveways (6” depth)
 Sidewalks (4” depth)
Brick paving shall be replaced with a Portland cement concrete base and reinstalling the brick pavers as per the detail. Trench material shall be compacted to the standards stated in Section 4.02.03 “Excavation, Embankment and Subgrade”. Concrete shall be as specified in Section 4.02.04 “Concrete”. All removals will be made to existing joints. If the depth of the existing paving exceeds the depth of the proposed replacement, the greater depth shall be replaced.
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 17
4.02.07 Curb and Gutter.
All new curb and gutter installations shall conform to the Type “A” profile, as depicted below.
Section 4.03 Dedication of Rights-of-way for New Streets.
The dedications of rights-of-way for new streets measured from lot line to lot line shall be shown on the plat and shall meet the right-of-way requirements as stated in Section 4.27 of this Ordinance. Access to lots located on arterials and other arterials shall be approved by the City.
Section 4.04 Dedication of Rights-of-way for Existing Streets.
Subdivisions platted along existing streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way or easements if necessary to meet the minimum street width requirements set forth in this Ordinance. The entire minimum right-of-way width shall be dedicated where the subdivision is on both sides of an existing street. When the subdivision is located on only one side of an existing street, one half of the required right-of-way width, measured from the centerline of the existing roadway, shall be dedicated along with any proposed easements. Dedication of one-half of the right-of-way for a proposed street along the boundaries of land proposed for subdivision shall be prohibited except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision and where it is found to be practical and reasonable to require the dedication of the other half of the right-of-way when adjoining property is subdivided.
Section 4.05 Intersections.
Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at an angle of 90 degrees, and no intersection shall be at an angle of less than 60 degrees. Street curb intersections shall be rounded by radii of at least 20 feet. When the smallest angle of street intersection is less than 75 degrees, the city council may require curb radii of greater length. Whenever necessary to permit the construction of a curb having a desirable radius without reducing the sidewalk at such street corner to less than nominal width, the property line at such street corner shall be rounded or otherwise set back sufficiently to permit such construction. No lot or other parcel of land which abuts on and has access to either a collector or minor street shall have a service drive, curb cut, or other means of access to an arterial street.
Section 4.06 Curves in Streets; Horizontal.
A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reversed curves on arterial and collector streets.
Where there is a deflection angle of more than 10 degrees in the horizontal alignment of a street, a curve with a radius adequate to ensure safe sight distance shall be made. Minimum requirements shall conform to the standards in section 4.27 of this ordinance.
Section 4.07 Street Grades and Elevations.
All streets, roads and alleys shall be graded to their full widths by the subdivider, so that street pavements and sidewalks can be constructed on the same level plane. Deviation from this standard due to special topographical conditions will be allowed only with the approval of the City Council. All streets shall be designed so as to provide for the discharge of surface water from the pavement and from the right-of-way by grading and drainage. For adequate drainage, the minimum street grade shall not be less than five tenths (0.50' / 100') of one percent. Minimum grades for gutters and ditches shall be four tenths (0.4' / 100') and five tenths (0.5' / 100') of one percent respectively. Storm sewer construction shall be required where necessary to meet these minimum grade requirements. Street grades shall conform to the minimum requirements provided in section 4.27 of this Ordinance.
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 18
Before grading is started, the entire right-of-way area shall be first cleared of all tree stumps, roots, brush, and other objectionable materials and of all trees not intended for preservation. The subgrade shall be properly shaped, rolled and uniformly compacted to conform with the accepted cross-section and grades. In cuts and fills, all tree stumps, boulders, organic material, soft clay, spongy material and other objectionable materials shall be removed to a depth of at least two (2) feet below the graded surface. This objectionable matter, as well as similar matter from cuts, shall be removed from the right-of-way area and disposed of in such a manner that it will not become incorporated in fills or hinder proper operation of the drainage system.
Section 4.08 Frontage Roads/Marginal Access Streets, Alleys, and Driveways.
Where a subdivision fronts on or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the City may require marginal access streets in all situations indicated below or, reverse frontage lots with screen planting located in the non-access arterial street frontage along the rear of the lots, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of properties from the arterial street and to protect and preserve the safety and traffic handling capabilities of the arterial street.
Marginal access streets may be required by the City for subdivisions fronting on arterial streets. If lots back up to the arterial street and such lots have access other than the arterial street frontage a marginal access street may not be required.
4.08.01 Alleys shall be proved to give access to the rear of all lots used for commercial and industrial purposes. Minimum width of an alley shall conform to the requirements of Section 4.27 of this ordinance. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe vehicular movement. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate facilities at the dead-end, as determined by the Wahoo City Council. Alleys need not be provided in residential areas where the subdivider produces evidence of easements which are satisfactory to the city council.
4.08.02 Driveways shall have a maximum grade of ten percent (10%). Driveways and curb cuts shall be located not less than three (3) feet from the side lot lines. Curb cuts for straight curbs and the flare for rolled curbs shall be three (3) feet wider than the driveway pavement on each side.
Section 4.09 Access.
There shall be a minimum of two vehicular access points per platted subdivision. The City Engineer shall determine the most suitable location for said access points during the review period.
Section 4.10 Street Jogs.
Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet at intersections shall be prohibited.
Section 4.11 Cul-de-sac Streets.
Minor terminal temporary dead-end streets or cul-de-sacs shall not be longer than 500 feet and shall provide a turnaround conforming to the requirements of section 4.27 of this ordinance. The City may approve alternative designs for a temporary turn-around. The length of the cul-de-sac shall be measured from the center of the turn-around to the center of the intersecting street.
Section 4.12 Street Names.
Proposed streets which are in alignment with other existing streets shall bear the name of such streets. The name of a proposed street which is not in alignment with an existing street shall not be similar to the name of any existing street. Whenever a street alignment changes direction more than 45 degrees without a return to the original alignment within a distance of five hundred (500) feet, then the name of the street shall be changed at the point of the curvature. Whenever a cul-de-sac street serves not more than three (3) lots, the name of the intersecting street shall apply to the cul-de-sac. To avoid duplication and confusion, the proposed names of all streets shall be approved by the City prior to such names being assigned or used.
Section 4.13 Private Streets and Reserve Strips.
New private streets may be created as part of a plan unit development district or mixed use district, provided such streets are specifically authorized by the City Council as an exception to the terms of the Ordinance. There shall be no reserve strips in a subdivision except where their control is definitely vested in the municipality under conditions of approval by the City as authorized in this Ordinance.
4.13.01 In rural subdivisions roads shall be dedicated to public but maintained as a private road until such time subdivision is annexed.
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 19
Section 4.14 Blocks.
The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to the provisions of adequate access and circulation, building sites suitable to the needs of the use contemplated, zoning requirements regarding minimum lot sizes, widths and frontages and the limitations or opportunities presented by the topography. Block lengths, except in unusual circumstances, shall not exceed 1,320 feet and shall be a minimum length of 300 feet. Pedestrian easements 10 feet wide shall be provided through or near the center of blocks more than 600 feet long in order to provide for pedestrian circulation.
Section 4.15 Lots.
The lot sizes, width, depth, shape and orientation shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. Corner lots for residential uses shall have additional width to permit appropriate building setback distances and orientation to both streets. The subdividing of land shall be such as to provide each lot with satisfactory vehicular access by means of public street or approved private street. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to curved street lines.
Section 4.16 Through (Double Frontage) Lots.
Double frontage lots, shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from arterial streets or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography. Where such lots are used in relation to an arterial street, a landscape screen of at least 10 feet in width shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such arterial street and the subdivider shall install trees, shrubbery or fences or a combination thereof to screen the residential development from the arterial street and dampen the noise generated by traffic on the arterial street. Such screen shall be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
Section 4.17 Easements.
Easements for sanitary or storm sewers, where necessary, shall be provided and shall be a total of at least 15 feet wide or wider when required by the City.
Where a subdivision is traversed by a major watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall be provided to the City a permanent storm water easement or drainage right-of-way such width as will be adequate for both water flow and maintenance operations as determined by the City. No other surface improvements or fill, except trails, bank stabilization, and stabilization structures, shall be placed in any such easement right-of-way.
Where a subdivision is traversed by a river or one of its tributaries, there shall be provided to the City and the Lower Platte North Natural Resources District a permanent easement adequate for construction, operation, and maintenance of channel and flood control improvements and public recreation trails. No other surface improvements or fill, except bank stabilization structures, shall be placed in any such easement right-of-way.
Perpetual easements shall be granted to the City of Wahoo and any telecommunications entity or other corporation transmitting communication signals authorized to use the city streets, to erect, operate, maintain, repair and renew poles, wires, cables, conduits, and other related facilities, and to extend thereon wires or cables for the carrying and transmission of electric current for light, heat, and power and for the transmission of signals and sounds of all kinds and the reception on, over, through, under and across a five (5)-foot wide strip of land abutting all front and side boundary lot lines, and eight-foot wide strip of land abutting the rear boundary lines of all interior lots, and a sixteen (16)-foot wide strip of land abutting the rear boundary lines of all exterior lots. The term “exterior lots” is herein defined as those lots forming the outer perimeter of the above-described addition. Said sixteen (16)-foot wide easement will be reduced to an eight (8)-foot wide strip when the adjacent land is surveyed, platted and recorded. No permanent buildings or retaining walls shall be placed in the said easement ways, but the same may be used for gardens, shrubs, landscaping and other purposes that do not then or later interfere with the afore-said uses or rights herein granted.
Perpetual easements shall be granted to all other utility providers, and their successors and assigns, to erect, install, operate, maintain, repair and renew pipelines, hydrants and other related facilities, and to extend thereon pipes for the transmission of gas, sanitary sewer, and water on, through under and across a five-foot-wide strip of land abutting all cud-de-sac streets. No permanent buildings or retaining walls shall be placed in the said easement ways, but the same may be used for gardens, shrubs, landscaping and other purposes that do not then or later interfere with the afore-said uses or rights herein granted.
Section 4.18 Storm Sewer and Drainage System.
A drainage system, including pipes, inlets, drainage structures, bridges, ditches, detention cells and other structures shall be designed and constructed by the subdivider to provide for proper drainage of surface water of the subdivision and the drainage area of which it is a part of. The storm sewer system shall be constructed and installed to provide for adequate drainage.
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 20
Storm drainage, including drain tile around basements and discharge from basement sump pumps shall not be permitted to discharge into any sanitary sewer facility, but shall be connect to an adequate drainage outlet.
The subdivider shall submit, a drainage report prepared by a registered professional engineer licensed in the State of Nebraska describing the existing and proposed drainage conditions. A Preliminary Drainage Report shall be included with the Preliminary plat. The Final Drainage Report shall be submitted with the Final Plat and shall include an evaluation of the ability of the proposed improvements pertaining to drainage in the subdivision to handle the run-off. The report shall also consider the impacts of the upstream and downstream drainage systems.
The Preliminary Drainage Report shall include:
1. Preliminary estimates of the quantity of storm water entering the subdivision naturally and upon full development of lots within the subdivision for a 2-year, 10-year and 100-year frequency storm events.
2. Existing conditions of the watershed that may affect the proposed subdivision, such as soil type, drainage channels, obstructions, flood plain, floodway, wetlands, etc.
3. A preliminary grading plan illustrating the proposed drainage improvements and storm water management.
The Final Drainage Report shall include:
1. Calculations of the quantity of storm water entering the subdivision naturally and estimates of such storm water upon full development within the subdivision based on the proposed zoning.
2. Quantities of flow at each pick-up point.
3. Estimates and type of erosion control measures necessary to control erosion during construction.
4. A description of an adequate drainage system within the subdivision and its design capacities based on a 2-year, 10-year and 100-year frequency storm events.
In determining the size or type of storm sewer system, the design shall be sufficient to handle the computed runoff based on the Nebraska Department of Roads “Drainage Design and Erosion Control Manual, latest addition” and the Rational Method as described in said document. No storm sewer pipe shall be less than 15” in diameter. All storm sewers shall be designed to allow for a minimum of 12” between the bottom of the pavement slab to the top of said storm sewer pipe.
Based on the findings of the Drainage Reports, improvements shall be made to limit the peak rate of storm water discharge from the subdivision. Post development runoff (cubic feet per second) shall reflect a “no net” increase in runoff based on 2-year, 10-year and 100-year frequency storm events. Pre-development shall be the condition prior to improvements being completed, including cultivated row crops. Storm routing shall be performed as described in Technical Release 55 “Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds” prepared by the US Department of Agriculture and the Natural Resources Conservation Service. The city shall require retention or detention basins (storage facilities) or other flow attenuation or reduction method in order to control the post-development run-off. All temporary stored runoff shall be drained within 48 hours.
The outlet works of any storage facility shall include a principal outlet as well as an emergency overflow. Flow through the emergency overflow must be demonstrated to discharge in a safe manner. Outlet works must operate without requiring attendance or operation. During the design and construction of any storage facility public safety shall be the highest concern. Consideration shall be made for fencing, flattening approach slopes or other safety measures.
Section 4.19 Sanitary Sewer System.
Design standards for sanitary sewers shall conform to standards of the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality and the Recommended Standards for Water Works, latest edition (aka 10 States Standards) by Great Lakes – Upper Mississippi River Board of State Public Health and Environmental Managers.
Section 4.20 Water.
All water improvements will meet the requirements of the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services and the Recommended Standards for Water Works, latest edition (aka 10 States Standards) by Great Lakes – Upper Mississippi River Board of State Public Health and Environmental Managers.
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 21
Section 4.21 Sidewalks.
All sidewalks within subdivisions shall have a minimum pavement width of four (4) feet and minimum pavement thickness of six (6) inches if they are considered part of the City’s trail system and four (4) inches everywhere else, all of which shall be located within the right of way and one foot from the property line unless otherwise directed by the city engineer. Installation of sidewalks shall be completed within two (2) years of approval of the final plat or at 50% build-out, whichever is first. All sidewalks shall be poured-in-place Portland cement. Concrete shall be Class “47B-3,500”. Construction joints shall be placed at intervals approximately equal to the sidewalk width. Where required by the City and/or City Engineer, material shall be properly moistened to approximately optimum requirements and thoroughly compacted to a minimum of 95% maximum dry density as determined by ASTM D-698, with moisture content of 0% to 3% above optimum or as specified in the Geotechnical Report. All sidewalks shall meet all ADA Requirements. The street improvement plans shall show the location of the proposed sidewalks.
Section 4.22 Accessibility Standards (ADA)
All Improvements within Public Right-of-Way shall conform to the following ADA Guidelines
1. ADA Design Standards, latest edition
2. PROWAG (Proposed Right of Way Accessibility Guidelines), latest edition
Section 4.23 Standards and Specifications.
In addition to the prescribed requirements of these Regulations, the City has adopted further standards and specifications referred to as “Infrastructure Standards and Specifications”. Whenever there is a conflict between any of the materials and testing standards and specifications and those provided herein, the highest standard and specifications shall govern.
Section 4.24 Flood Hazards.
Land subject to flooding and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable for residential or other development shall not be platted for such purposes. Such land may be set aside on the plat for such uses compatible with the hazards associated with flooding or erosion. All development shall be flood proof in accordance with the flood hazard zoning provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
Section 4.25 Creek Setback.
No person shall be granted a permit for the construction of any structure, exclusive of bank stabilization structures, adjacent to any creek or stream unless such structure is located so that no portion thereof is any closer to the stream than will allow a maximum three-to-one slope plus 20 feet between the water’s edge of the stream and the closest point on the structure at grade. As used herein, the edge of the water of the stream shall be the point constituting the edge of the water during normal flow conditions.
A property may be exempt from the provisions of before mentioned upon a showing by a registered professional engineer that adequate bank stabilization structures or slope protection will be installed in the construction of said structure, having an estimated useful life equal to that of the structure, which will provide adequate erosion control conditions coupled with adequate lateral support so that no portion of said structure adjacent to the stream will be endangered by erosion or lack of lateral support. In the event that the structure is adjacent to any stream which has been channelized or otherwise improved by any agency of government, then such certification providing an exception to the before mentioned may take the form of a certification to the adequacy and protection of the improvements installed by such governmental agency.
Prior to work on or near any watercourses all the necessary permits must be obtained from the Army Corp of Engineers or any other governmental agencies.
Section 4.26 Erosion Control.
The subdivider shall be required to provide for the control of erosion of areas of the subdivision which are disturbed by grading operations by constructing temporary terraces on slopes, temporary silting basins, sod swales and spillways, silt fences and whatever may be necessary to prevent erosion and damage to adjacent properties from surface drainage as approved by the city and city engineer. The city may require an erosion control plan at the developer’s expense to be submitted for approval with the preliminary plat.
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 22
Section 4.27 Minimum Street Standards
Street Classifications
Minimum Right-of-Way (ft.)
Minimum Pavement Width1 (ft.)
Minimum Number of Traffic Lanes
Maximum Grade (%)
Minimum Centerline Radius (ft.)
(Curve Data)
Minimum Sight Distance (VC)3 (ft)
Minimum Pavement Thickness4
(in)
Arterial Street6
100
497
4
8
7005
4005
9
387
3
Collector Street
80
44
3
10
300
300
8
Local Street
60
31
2
10 (average)
100
300
7
Alleys
20
12 res.
20 comm.
1
No max.
100
None
7
Cul-De-Sac2 and Loop Street
60 (rad.)
40 radius (min)
2
10 (average)
100
200
7
Marginal Access (Frontage Road) (No Parking)
60
26
2
10
300
300
7
Minor Streets (No Parking)
50
25
2
10 (average)
100
300
7
Private Road8
30
-
1
-
-
-
-
1. Pavement width measured back to back of curb.
2. Minimum right-of-way radius for the cul-de-sac turnaround shall be 50 feet and the minimum pavement radius for the cul-de-sac turnaround shall be 37.5 feet in residential areas. Larger dimensions will be required in commercial and industrial areas as directed by the City Engineer.
3. (VC) - Vertical Curve of road
4. Strength equivalent to pour-in-place Portland Cement Concrete as per design standards by AASHTO or per geotechnical report
5. Per NDOR Standards or as directed by the City Engineer.
6. All section line roads will be designated as arterial streets.
7. Based on traffic study.
8. Also includes leg portion of flag lots or ingress/egress easements.
Section 4.28 Emergency Warning Sirens.
Emergency warning sirens shall be installed by the developer, if deemed necessary by the city and civil defense authorities, and shall meet specifications set by civil defense authorities.
Section 4.29 Conformance with Other Regulations.
No final plat of land within the City or its jurisdictional area shall be approved unless it conforms to existing zoning regulations unless waived by the Planning Commission and City Council in accordance with this Ordinance. Whenever there is a variance between the minimum standards set forth in this Ordinance and those contained in other regulations the most restrictive standard shall govern.
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 23
ARTICLE 5: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Section 5.01 General.
The subdivider shall design and construct improvements using standards not less than the standards outlined in this Ordinance. All such plans shall be approved by the City upon recommendation of the City Engineer. The construction cost of all infrastructure improvements shall be paid for by the subdivider. All contract documents between the subdivider and contractor shall be reviewed and approved by the City.
The work shall be done in accordance with specifications approved by the City and shall be completed within the time limitations established herein. The minimum requirements for materials shall be in accordance with specifications approved by the City. Standards applicable to health and sanitation as required by the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality and the Nebraska Health and Human Services System shall be the minimum standards required thereof.
The cost of all plans and specifications for improvements, reports, permits, review fees, and construction review shall be paid for by the subdivider.
Section 5.02 Monuments and Markers.
Monuments and markers placement shall be as follows:
5.02.01 Concrete monuments shall be located at all quarter section points or other reference points tied to the federal survey system on the boundaries of or within the area being platted.
Section 5.03 Monument Construction.
5.03.01. Monumentation shall meet or exceed the "Minimum Standards for Surveys" as adopted by the Professional Surveyors Association of Nebraska in February 1989. These standards are as follows:
5.03.02. The surveyor shall establish or confirm the prior establishment of permanent monuments at each corner on the boundary lines of the parcel being surveyed. Monuments shall be solid and substantially free from movement. In such cases where the placement of a permanent monument at the true corner is impractical because of instability or is likely to be destroyed, the surveyor shall set a corner accessory monument and show its relationship by dimension to the true corner.
5.03.03. The monuments set shall be constructed of material capable of being detected by commonly used magnetic locators. These monuments shall consist of an iron pipe or steel rod with a minimal diameter of five-eighths inch and minimal length of 24 inches. When extenuating circumstances dictate, the surveyor may use monuments (i.e., nail and washer) that have a probability of permanence. Where a corner or a line falls on or within a wall, column line or other physical feature and the placement of a monument is not feasible, the wall, column line or physical feature shall become the monument by reference thereto.
5.03.04. In addition, monuments shall be set at all block corners, lot corners, deflection points and points of curvature, except in cases where it is deemed clearly unreasonable or infeasible by the City Council.
Section 5.04 Survey Requirements
5.04.01. A land survey is required to support data furnished on the final plat, and this survey shall conform to all requirements set forth in Section 3.05
5.04.02. Horizontal Control - The Final Plat, and all electronic Computer Aided Drafting and Design (Cadd) deliverables for infrastructure (Paving, Drainage, Water, and Sanitary Sewer) improvements shall be tied into the City of Wahoo GIS / Survey Control Network. The survey control monuments which define the City of Wahoo GIS / Survey Control Network are published in the City of Wahoo “Infrastructure Standards and Specifications”
5.04.03. Vertical Control – The Final Plat, and all electronic Computer Aided Drafting and Design (Cadd) deliverables for infrastructure (Paving, Drainage, Water, and Sanitary Sewer) improvements shall reference the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), unless otherwise specified by the City of Wahoo.
Section 5.05 Street Grading and Construction.
5.05.01 All streets shall be graded to the full width of right of way and to within six inches of the street grade established in the approved final plat construction plans and specifications. Final construction plans shall be in conformance with specifications set forth by the City.
5.05.02 Higher design standards may be required by the City to provide for unusual soil conditions or extraordinary traffic volumes or other abnormal characteristics.
5.05.03 The streets in the proposed subdivision shall be paved, including curbs and gutters, and street surfacing shall be of concrete or any other suitable surface as recommended by the city engineer and approved by the city council. Materials for street improvements shall meet the requirements of the city’s Materials and Testing Standards and Specifications.
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 24
5.05.04 Curb and gutter shall be required for all streets within the boundaries of the subdivision and constructed in conformance with the minimum standards of the city as required by the city engineer unless accepted by the City in accordance with the terms of this Ordinance. In areas of notable flash flooding or heavy rain run-off, curbs shall be required on all streets designed for areas where the existing or anticipated residential density of the areas surrounding the proposed subdivision equals or exceeds three (3) dwelling units per net acre. In commercial developments, or where other similar intensive urban uses exist or are anticipated, curbs shall be required. Where curbs exist on abutting properties, their extension shall be required throughout the proposed subdivision.
5.05.05 The applicant shall comply with all NPDES requirements as administered by the State of Nebraska and the Lower Platte North Natural Resource District.
Section 5.06 Street Signs, Lighting, Electrical, Natural Gas, Telephone, Cable TV, and Mail Boxes.
5.06.01 At least one street sign shall be installed at each street intersection within or on the perimeter of the subdivision and shall be located in the northeast corner thereof, whenever possible, and within the area between the street and sidewalk at a point approximately six inches from said sidewalk or its intended location. Whenever possible street signs shall be installed on street utility poles.
5.06.02 The developer shall pay for the materials and installation of street lights at each entrance (street or sidewalk) into a subdivision and at each street intersection within the subdivision and at such intermediate points as necessary, as specified by City of Wahoo. Whenever the distance between two (2) adjacent street or walkway lights would exceed three hundred (300) feet, then additional street lights shall be installed in such manner that proper light intensity shall be provided and maintained. New subdivision street and walkway lighting may be installed with all associated wiring underground or overhead, as required by the city.
5.06.03 New subdivision lighting and electrical power, gas, and telephone shall be underground wiring and easements for such wiring shall be indicated on the plat. All underground wiring shall meet proper specifications for installation. Gas service may be required where reasonably accessible. Whenever such facilities are reasonably accessible and available, they may be required to be installed within the area prior to the approval of the final plat. Telephone, cable tv, electric, street lighting, and communications conductors may be installed underground at the option of the city. Utility boxes shall be shall be installed at the front of the lots unless otherwise required by the City to be located at the rear of the property. Any necessary overhead secondary utility lines shall be located at the rear of all lots. Whenever a sanitary sewer line and electric and/or telephone line is each placed underground in the same utility easement, the following provisions shall be applicable:
1. The total easement width shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet, and
2. The sanitary sewer line shall be installed within three (3) feet of the easement, and the electric and/or telephone line shall be installed within three (3) feet of the opposite side of the easement.
5.06.04 Mailboxes owned and serviced by the post office shall be clustered whenever possible and coordinated through the Post Master and the City Engineer to be consistent with future parking restrictions.
Section 5.07 Landscape Screens.
Landscape screens as required by the City shall be installed at the subdivider's expense as a buffer for the protection of residential properties along major streets, railroad rights-of-way, and land uses which are substantially different from that proposed in the subdivision. Such screen shall be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
Section 5.08 Storm Sewer and Drainage.
A drainage system, including pipes, inlets, drainage structures, bridges, ditches, detention cells and other structures shall be designed and constructed by the subdivider to provide for the proper drainage of surface water of the subdivision and the drainage area of which it is a part of. The city shall require retention or detention basins in order to control the post development runoff for the subdivision. The improvements shall be made to limit the peak rate of storm water discharge from the subdivision. Post development runoff shall reflect a “no net” increase in runoff rate based on a 2-year, 10-year and 100-year frequency storm events. The system shall be sufficient to handle the computed runoff as outlined in the Final Drainage Report. The Nebraska Department of Roads “Drainage Design and Erosion Control Manual, latest edition and Technical Release 55 “Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, latest edition” prepared by the US Department of Agriculture and the Natural Resources Conservation Service shall serve as a guideline in design and construction. Materials for storm sewer improvements shall meet the requirements of the city’s “Materials and Testing Standards and Specifications”.
5.08.01 Subdivisions and other proposed new development shall be required to assure that 1) all such development are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage, 2) all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage, 3) adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards so as to assure that all building sites are reasonably safe from flood hazards.
5.08.02 Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings and individual lot drainage shall
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 25
be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot into areas not designed to handle flood waters. Lot drainage plans shall conform to the drainage report required for submittal and shall be submitted to the city prior to development of the lot.
Section 5.09 Sanitary Sewers.
Where a sanitary sewer is accessible by gravity flow within 1,320 feet of the final plat, the developer shall connect thereto and provide adequate sewer lines and stubs to benefit each lot. Where a sanitary sewer is not accessible by gravity flow within 1,320 feet of the final plat, the developer shall make provisions for the disposal of sewage required by law. Where a sanitary sewer is not accessible by gravity flow within 1,320 feet of the final plat, but where plans for installation of sanitary sewers within such proximity to the plat have been prepared and construction will commence within 12 months from the date of the approval of the plat, the developer shall be required to install sewers in conformity with such plans. Design of sanitary sewer lines shall conform to standards and guidelines approved by the city engineer and city council as well as section 4.19. A sanitary sewer main shall be installed in the proposed street right-of-way to serve the lots in the development. All lots shall be served by an individual service line. Materials for sanitary sewer improvements shall meet the requirements of the City’s “Materials and Testing Standards and Specifications”.
5.09.01 Where deemed required, public sanitary sewers shall be installed to adequately serve all lots, including lateral connections to the public system. Combination of sanitary sewers and storm sewers shall be prohibited.
5.09.02 Where a public sanitary sewer system is not reasonably accessible, the subdivider may provide:
1. A central treatment plant, provided that such central treatment plant is installed in accordance with the city and State Department of Environmental Quality and Department of Health requirements, or
2. Lots may be served by individual disposal systems, if the provisions of the following section are met.
3. Sewer mains and/or stormwater drainage improvements shall be located under paved sections of streets so that connections may be made at a later date.
4. Property owners shall connect to public sanitary sewer system at such time as connection becomes accessible.
5.09.03 Where the installation of individual disposal systems is considered, the following shall apply:
1. The suitability of the soil for individual systems, the absorptive ability of the soil, surface drainage, ground water level, applicable wellhead protection regulations, and topography shall be the criteria for determining whether or not the installation of individual systems is permissible. Criteria shall be in accordance with the requirements of the city and the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality and Department of Health.
2. Each lot so served shall be of a size and shape to accommodate the necessary length of tile field at a safe distance from and at a lower elevation than the proposed buildings. Such lot size and shape shall conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which they are located, provided that in no case shall said minimum lot be less than one (1) acre in area where there is a public water supply available at the lot, and two and a half (2 ½) acres where there is not a public water supply available.
3. At least one (1) percolation test shall be made for each lot area being platted, and each test shall be located in close proximity to the proposed individual sewage disposal unit, be numbered and its location shown on the preliminary plat. All percolation tests shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of the Wahoo City Council.
Section 5.10 Water Mains.
The subdivision shall be provided with an adequate water supply system, which shall be connected to a water supply source approved by the City. Where adequate water lines are accessible within 1,320 feet of the final plat, connections to the water line shall be made. Water lines shall be looped according to specifications set by the city council. If tract is located in excess of 1,320 feet from existing water lines, utility lines may be installed but not connected to city systems, at city’s discretion.
Design of municipal water mains shall conform to standards and guidelines approved by the City. A water main shall be installed in the proposed right-of-way to serve the lots in the development. All lots shall be served by an individual service line. Materials for water improvements shall meet the requirements of the City’s “Materials and Testing Standards and Specifications”.
5.10.01 Fire hydrants shall be provided by the developer in all subdivisions with public water supplies. The hydrants shall be located between property lines and curbs with all outlets facing or parallel to the street. Hydrants shall be placed at the corners of all blocks and mid-block for blocks exceeding eight hundred (800) feet in length. Hydrants shall also be required at the entrance and end of all cul-de-sacs exceeding four hundred (400) feet in length. The type of hydrant and control valves and the location of the hydrant shall be approved by the fire chief. The minimum size of any water line serving any hydrant shall not be less than six (6) inches in diameter
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 26
and should be circulating water lines. The size and location of water lines shall be approved by the city engineer and the fire chief.
Section 5.11 Extensions to Boundaries.
The subdivider may be required to extend the necessary improvements to the boundary of the proposed subdivision to serve adjoining unsubdivided land, as determined by the city.
Section 5.12 Off-Site Extensions.
If street or utilities are not available at the boundary of a proposed subdivision, and if the council finds the extensions across undeveloped areas would not be warranted as a special assessment to the intervening properties or as a municipal expense until some future time, the subdivider may be required, prior to the approval of the final plat, to obtain necessary easements or right-of-way and construct and pay for such extensions. Such improvements shall be available for connections by subdividers of adjoining land.
Section 5.13 Sidewalks.
For the safety of pedestrians in residential and commercial subdivisions, the subdivider shall construct Portland cement concrete sidewalks at one (1) foot from the property line within the right-of-way, on both sides of the street to meet the following specifications:
5.13.01 Single Family or Duplex Dwelling Units
Four (4) feet wide.
5.13.02 Multi-family or Group Housing Developments
Five (5) feet wide.
5.13.03 Commercial Developments
Eight (8) feet wide.
5.13.04 City Trails:
Where sidewalks are designated as part of a trail system, such sidewalks shall conform to the standards of such trail design as determined by the City.
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 27
ARTICLE 6: DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS ON PUBLIC LAND
Section 6.01 Dedication.
As a condition of final plat approval, the subdivider shall dedicate to the public all streets and alleys and easements as may be required by the City of Wahoo. If such streets and alleys are not to be dedicated and are to be developed as private streets, the subdivider shall make adequate provision for a homeowner's association with direct responsibility to and control by the property owners of the subdivision, to provide for the maintenance of all such private streets and alleys and the removal of debris and snow therefrom so as to maintain adequate access at all times for fire, police, sanitation, utility and emergency vehicles. Legal assurances shall be provided which show that the association is self-perpetuating and has the authority to collect assessments from owners of property within the subdivision to accomplish these and other related purposes. The agreement by which the legal assurances are proved shall be an enforceable covenant running with the land in form acceptable to the City. Subdividers of “commercial” type subdivisions may be required to dedicate land for off-street parking as determined necessary by the City.
Such provisions shall also provide for agreement of the property owners that if the City is requested or required to perform any reconstruction, maintenance, repair, or snow removal from such streets in order to maintain adequate access, said owners shall pay the costs thereof to the City and that if not paid, the same shall become a lien upon the properties until such costs are paid in full.
Section 6.02 Dedications Outside Corporate Limits and Within Extraterritorial Jurisdiction.
Whenever a subdivision is proposed outside the corporate limits and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of Wahoo, the developer shall obtain written consent from the Saunders County Board of Supervisors in order to dedicate specific streets, street rights-of-way, and other infrastructure prior to the City of Wahoo approving said final plat. However, if the Saunders County Board of Supervisors rejects the dedication of said streets or maintenance thereof, street rights-of-way or other infrastructure, the developer shall be responsible for establishing a homeowners association to maintain proposed dedications as private roads until such time the county accepts responsibility or city annexes the subdivision.
Section 6.03 Reservation and Dedication of Public Land and Open Space.
6.03.01 Intent. As a way of assuring adequate land is available for new parks and facilities and that all existing and new recreational amenities are properly maintained, the City of Wahoo has implemented a policy for the dedication of land for such parks and facilities and a park fee in-lieu of such dedication. Before preliminary or final plat approval is given, the Planning Commission and City Council shall require the subdivider to reserve sites for parks, playgrounds, open space, schools, and other public land consistent with the Parks and Recreation Master Plan in the adopted Comprehensive Plan, as determined by the Planning Commission and City Council.
6.03.02 Time Limit. Reservation of land for public acquisition and/or use shall be for a period not to exceed three (3) years from the date the plat is officially recorded or up to a point where 50% or more of the subdivision is developed, unless otherwise provided for in these regulations. If such reserved site is not acquired by the City or other governmental entity within said three (3) year period, the subdivider may then re-subdivide the site for alternative purposes and sell any or all of the site.
Where a park, playground, school, or other site for public use indicated in the Parks and Recreation Master Plan is located in whole or in part in the applicant's subdivision the Planning Commission and City Council may require the immediate acquisition, reservation or accept the dedication of such area.
6.03.03 Determination of Dedication or Fee Payment. When there is a new subdivision platted within Wahoo’s jurisdiction, the City shall require either a dedication of parkland (for parks, trails, open space, or other recreational facilities) and/or a park dedication fee. Logistics of the recreational facility type and its exact location shall be determined through the pre-application meetings of the platting process. The parcel of ground to be dedicated or the amount of fee to be paid will be negotiated and written into the subdivision agreement. Master plans for such parks and facilities shall be laid out at time of preliminary plat and approved at time of final platting and prior to execution/filing of final plat. Any required park development fees shall be submitted to the City at the time of final platting and placed into the City’s established park fund. Such funds shall be used for the acquisition of land, development, and maintenance of Wahoo’s park system.
When deciding whether or not the developer should dedicate land, pay the fee, or both, the City and developer shall consult the Existing and Proposed Parks and Facilities Map within the Parks and Recreation Master Plan. If there is a future park, trail, open space, or other recreational facility located in whole or in part of the new subdivision, the City may require that the subdivider dedicate land for such improvements. Development and maintenance of each park, trail, etc. shall be determined in the individual subdivision agreements.
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 28
6.03.04 Dedication requirements. Dedication of such parkland and fees described above is determined by the size and type of subdivision development. Land dedication in subdivision developments shall be as follows:
 Residential developments shall dedicate:
- 11% of the area of buildable land proposed to be subdivided into parcels of one-half acre or smaller
- 7.5% of the area of buildable land proposed to be subdivided into parcels larger than one-half acre and not larger than one acre.
- 5% of the area of buildable land proposed to be subdivided into parcels one acre or larger but not larger than three acres.
- 2.5% of the area of buildable land proposed to be subdivided into parcels of three acres or larger but not larger than five acres.
 Commercial developments shall dedicate 10% of buildable land.
 Industrial developments shall dedicate 10% of buildable land.
As a minimum, developers shall dedicate the maximum required parkland area for the type of park and/or recreational facility identified, unless negotiated to a smaller amount with the City Council through the platting process and subdivision agreement approval. The remaining acres of un-dedicated land falling within the required percentages listed above shall be evaluated with a per acre park development fee set forth in the City of Wahoo’s adopted Master Fee Schedule and described hereafter. In absence of such a fee schedule, the fees set forth herein shall apply.
If the Parks and Recreation Master Plan does not identify a proposed park or facility in the platted area and the subdivider is directed to provide the City with fee payment in lieu of parkland dedication, then such subdivider shall pay a park development fee based upon a set multiplier. Such fee is to aid in the acquisition of parks and open spaces and/or maintenance of recreational facilities, as needed or as indicated in the Comprehensive Plan and/or the adopted Parks and Recreation Master Plan. Any fees received shall be placed into the City’s established park fund. The following fee schedule is based upon gross total acres of development at time of platting and shall be paid prior to execution of the final plat:
 Residential developments: $1650.00 per acre
- Neighborhood Park or Mini-Park - $995/acre
- Community Park - $411/acre
- Trails, Greenways, Green Streets - $209/acre
 Commercial developments: $1754.00 per acre
- Community Park - $897/acre
- Trails, Greenways, Green Streets - $857/acre
 Industrial developments: $1754.00 per acre
- Community Park - $897/acre
- Trails, Greenways, Green Streets - $857/acre
Subdivisions of mixed use developments or planned unit developments shall dedicate parkland or pay a park development fee based upon the amount individually zoned land. If land in the subdivision is utilized by multiple uses (residential, commercial, industrial) without different zoning, then the higher amount of parkland dedication or park development fee shall be required for entire subdivision.
Where cash has been accepted in lieu of land dedication, the amount of cash donation shall be stated on the final plat and the Council shall record in the minutes of the meeting upon the proposed subdivision why the dedication of land for parks, playgrounds, and/or trails was undesirable.
6.03.05 Dedication Process. Before final plat approval, the subdivider may convey any dedication of land for parks, playgrounds, trails, or other public spaces as described to the City of Wahoo in the following manner:
1. Subdivider shall provide the City with an affidavit of title to such real estate
2. Subdivider shall provide the City with a deed conveying fee simple title
3. Said title shall be free and clear of all liens or encumbrances
A. Liens or encumbrances dischargeable by cash accompanying said deed are exempt
B. Current real estate taxes are exempt
4. Commitment for title insurance issued by a title insurance company acceptable to the City Council for a
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 29
period of not more than 30 days prior to the date of conveyance in an amount equivalent to the fair market value of the land that is being dedicated to the city.
6.03.06 Exemptions. A park dedication may not be required for:
1. An administrative plat.
2. Land proposed for subdivision into parcels larger than five acres.
3. A subdivision in which parcels are not created, except when that subdivision provides permanent multiple spaces for recreational camping vehicles, mobile homes, or condominium.
4. A subdivision in which only one additional parcel is created.
6.03.07 Recreational Standards. The amount of park facilities for new residents is partly based on data and policy set forth in the comprehensive plan and the parks plan. The plans are the result of a community-wide analysis and public input, which identified short- and long-range needs for the park system in the community.
1. Location. Land donated for new parks shall be generally based and located upon the Parks and Recreation Master Plan and shall consider the design of adjacent developments and the natural features present. Land reserved for recreation purposes shall be of a character and location suitable for use as a playground, playfield, or for other recreation purposes; and shall be improved by the developer to the standards required by the city, which improvements shall be included in the performance bond. Any land that is dedicated should be buildable land (non-floodplain or non-floodway designated ground or areas of less than 15% slope) and be of sufficient size for the type of park or recreational facility designated in the master plan. A recreation site shall have a total frontage on one (1) or more streets of at least one hundred (100) feet, and no other dimension of the site shall be less than one hundred (100) feet unless it is for a designated linear park. All land to be reserved for dedication to the City of Wahoo for park purposes shall have prior approval of the city council and shall be shown marked on the plats “Dedicated for Park”. A park plan shall be required as part of the subdivision application and approval process.
2. Combination of Parks and School Lands. When possible and in the best interests of the City and impacted school district, land dedicated for parks shall be contiguous to land dedicated for a school site. When the subdivision is less than 40 acres, the land dedicated for park should be combined with other similar dedicated areas in order to promote usable park space and minimize the impact upon a particular subdivider.
Section 6.04 Developer Agreements.
The sections of this article may be implemented through a subdivision agreement between the developer and the City so long as the time and manner of compliance of this article and other provisions of these regulations are adhered to.
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 30
ARTICLE 7: IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURE
Section 7.01 Platting Costs and Improvements Financing.
In order to provide consistent information concerning the financing of required subdivision improvements; establish and equitable division of costs between the developer and City; and to insure orderly, cost effective growth in Wahoo, the City shall require that the developer pay for the following services and improvements indicated as part of the subdivision process.
7.01.01. All costs associated with the preparation and revisions to the preliminary plat including but not limited to surveying, preliminary grading, drawings, and related services.
7.01.02. Unless otherwise agreed to by the City in a Subdivision Agreement, the developer shall pay for all preparation of all items related to the final plat and those improvements and related costs contained in Article 5.
7.01.03. All costs associated with the preliminary and final subdivision plat application shall be in accordance with the City’s Fee Schedule.
Section 7.02 Subdivision Improvements Guarantees.
Prior to the final plat approval, but after approval of all improvement plans and specifications, the subdivider shall complete all improvements required for the subdivision. Final plat approval shall not be given until the dedication of all appropriate improvements and acceptance thereof by the City.
In lieu of requiring the completion of all improvements prior to the final plat approval, the City Council may enter into an agreement with the subdivider and subdivider shall guarantee to complete all improvements required by this Regulation and approved by the City in a manner satisfactory to the City. To secure this agreement, the subdivider shall provide, subject to the approval of the City Council, one or more of the guarantees set forth in Section 7.03 and 7.04 below.
Section 7.03 Surety Performance Bond.
The subdivider shall obtain a performance bond from a bonding company authorized to do business in the State of Nebraska. The bond shall be payable to the City and shall be in an amount to cover 110% of the cost of all improvements, as established by the subdivider and accepted by the City Council upon recommendations of the City Engineer. The duration of the bond shall be until such time as the improvements are accepted by the City Council in accordance with this Ordinance.
Section 7.04 Escrow Account.
The subdivider shall deposit cash or other instruments readily convertible to cash at face value, either with the City Council or in escrow with a bank. In lieu of any instrument other than cash, and in the case of an escrow account, the bank with which the funds are to be deposited shall be subject to the approval of the City Council. The amount of the deposit shall be an amount equal to 110% of the estimated cost of all required improvements as estimated by the subdivider and accepted by the City Council upon recommendation of the City Engineer.
In the case of an escrow account, the subdivider shall file with the City Council an agreement between the bank and the subdivider guaranteeing the following:
7.04.01. That the funds of said escrow account shall be held in trust until released by the City Council and shall not be used or pledged by the Subdividers as security in any other matter during that period.
7.04.02. That in the case of a default on the part of the subdivider to complete said improvements, the bank shall immediately make the funds of said account available to the City for use in completion of the improvements.
Section 7.05 Security Agreement.
The subdivider shall provide a securing agreement guaranteeing the installation of all required improvements. The security agreement must be approved by the city attorney and in an amount sufficient to guarantee the installation of all improvements.
In case of an escrow account, the subdivider shall file with the city council an agreement between the bank and themselves guaranteeing the following:
7.05.01 That the funds of said escrow account shall be held in trust until released by the city council and may not be used for pledged by the subdivider as security in any other matter during that period.
7.05.02 That in the case of a default on the part of the subdivider to complete said improvements, the bank shall immediately make the funds of said account available to the city council for use in completion of the improvements.
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 31
Section 7.06 Improvement Districts.
7.06.01 As to those portions of the subdivision that are situated within the corporate limits of the City, the developer may petition the City to create Improvement (Assessment) Districts to allow for the financing of improvements within the subdivision. Depending on the City’s financial condition, the City’s evaluation of risk of failure or delay in subdivision build-out, or other sufficient reason as determined by City, the City may or may not grant the Subdivider’s request. In the event the City creates assessment districts, the subdivider shall deposit with the City funds equal to 20% or more of the cost of improvements as determined from the City Engineer’s estimates prior to receipt of bids and award of contracts. The City may finance up to 80% of the cost of construction of said improvements. Such petition shall be in the form prescribed by the City and shall be executed by the owners of all the lots situated within the proposed improvement district. The cost of all such improvements in the district which are constructed shall be specially assessed against the land benefited thereby, to the full extent of special benefits, and unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the City prior to the time of the City’s approval of the Final Plat, the entire cost of all public improvements in said subdivision shall be deemed to be of special benefit to the property situated therein, and the full cost thereof, including engineering fees, attorney’s fees and other related costs, shall be specially assessed against such property. The City shall, in no event, be bound to form such a district, and if such a district be formed, the City shall not be required to install improvements therein until, in the opinion of the City, economic conditions warrant such installation; provided, the City shall have the right to limit the size of the final plat if the area of the tentative plat is more than ten acres.
7.06.02 As to those portions of the subdivision that are situated outside the corporate limits of the City but within the zoning jurisdiction of the City, the developer may cause such improvements to be constructed by a street improvement district or sanitary and improvement district in accordance with the appropriate state law. However, the City Engineer shall not certify to the City that the required improvements have been satisfactorily arranged for until the developer presents certified evidence that the improvement district has been duly formed and has adopted a resolution of necessity authorizing a contract for the required work in that portion of said road improvement district or sanitary and improvement district included in the Final Plat. It is further provided, however, that if the City has approved a Final Plat for a phase of the area comprised in the Preliminary Plat, the developer may submit for final platting the next phase only if the required improvements have been installed in the first phase, or have been contracted for as above provided in the phase comprised in the Final Plat theretofore approved. Subsequent applications for final platting shall be processed in the same manner.
Section 7.07 Time Limits.
Prior to the granting of Final Plat approval, the subdivider and the City Council shall agree upon a deadline for the completion of all improvements. Such deadlines shall not exceed two (2) years from the date of Final Plat approval (unless exempted herein), provided, however the City Council may extend that deadline for one (1) additional year where the subdivider presents substantial reason for doing so and provides any additional performance surety made necessary due to inflation or increased cost of completing the improvements. No building permits shall be issued until such improvements have been made.
Section 7.08 Required Submittals Prior to Construction.
Prior to construction, the developer shall submit the following to the City Engineer for review and approval.
7.08.01 Shop drawings of materials and equipment to be incorporated into the project.
7.08.02 Executed contract with construction company.
7.08.03 Approved letter of improvements from:
1. Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services
2. Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality
7.08.04 Permits
1. NPDES Permit for storm water discharges from construction sites.
2. NDOR (If applicable).
3. Other Permits (If applicable).
Section 7.09 Installation of Improvements.
Developers may select either method or combination of methods listed below to comply with the minimum improvement requirements:
7.09.01 They may install required improvements upon acceptance of plans and specifications being approved by the City Council.
7.09.02 Within the corporate limits, they may submit a petition requesting the City to construct street paving and
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 32
sanitary sewer in the proposed subdivision by the district method. In such event, the developer shall have plans and specifications prepared and pay all costs for same. The plans and specifications shall be approved by the City staff, City Engineer, and City Council for all such improvement districts. The City shall assess the cost of such improvements to the adjacent property as provided by law.
Section 7.10 Plan and Administration Review Reimbursement.
The subdivider shall reimburse the City for such costs incurred by the City for review and approval of plans, specifications and other documents as to conformance with approved City Infrastructure Standards and Specifications, as identified in the City’s fee schedule.
Section 7.11 Failure to Complete Improvements.
If any portion of the required improvements shall fail to be completed and accepted for dedication in compliance with Section 7.13 below within the required time period, either for reason of non-compliance or for reason of substandard and unacceptable construction, the City Council shall do one of the following:
7.11.01 Where improvements have been guaranteed under Section 7.03 of this Ordinance, the bond shall be forfeited to the City.
7.11.02 Where improvements have been guaranteed under Section 7.04 of this Ordinance, the City Council shall declare whatever security has been pledged as a guarantee to be forfeited.
Where the City Council is not already in possession of said security, it shall immediately take the actions necessary to obtain it. Upon receipt of the security, the City Council shall use such to finance the completion of the improvements or rebuilding of substandard improvements. Unused portions of the surety shall be returned to the subdivider without interest.
Section 7.12 Testing Requirements.
The City will retain and the Developer shall pay for the services of a certified testing laboratory to provide the following testing during construction:
1. Grading/Fill Testing
2. Trench Testing
3. Subgrade Testing
4. Concrete Testing
a. Air
b. Slump
c. Strength
5. Pavement Thickness Testing
6. Sanitary Sewer Main Testing
a. Low Pressure Air Test
b. Alignment and Deflection Test
c. TV Inspection
7. Water Main Testing
a. Bacteriological Samples
b. Hydrostatic Pressure Test
8. Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) Monitoring
a. Storm Water Construction Site Inspection Report by a certified erosion and sediment control inspector
b. Erosion and Sediment Control Maintenance Report by a certified erosion and sediment control inspector
Testing Data to be submitted to City Administrator as each element of project is completed. The project specification shall outline the required frequency of each test.
Section 7.13 Inspection and Certification.
The Subdivider shall reimburse the City for costs incurred by the City and City Engineer for testing data review, shop drawing review, construction observation, monthly progress reports, recommendation of acceptance, etc. related to the project. Such reimbursement shall be as identified in the City’s fee schedule.
The City Engineer or other authorized person shall regularly inspect condition of required improvements for defects. Upon completion of the improvements, the City Engineer or other authorized person shall file with the City Council a statement either certifying that the improvements are as approved or a statement in which conditions do not meet the requirements of the approved improvements plans and specifications.
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 33
Upon completion of the improvements, the subdivider through use of a registered professional engineer shall file with the City a statement stipulating the following:
7.12.01 That all required improvements are complete as specified in the subdivision improvement checklist and approved subdivision agreement.
7.12.02 That these improvements are in compliance with the minimum standards specified by the City.
7.12.03 That there are no known defects from any cause in the improvements.
7.12.04 That these improvements are free and clear of any encumbrances or lien.
At the completion of the project, the Subdivider shall submit as-built drawings of the improvements to the City of Wahoo.
If the City Engineer or other authorized person has certified that the improvements are complete, the City shall accept any dedication of improvements. The City Council may, at its discretion, accept the dedication of any portion of the improvements provided that all statements and agreements specified above have been received for that portion of the improvements.
Section 7.14 Reduction of Guarantees.
In those cases where improvement guarantees have been made under Section 7.03 or 7.04 of this Ordinance, the amount of the guarantee may be reduced upon acceptance in compliance with Section 7.02 of the dedication and acceptance of a portion of the improvements.
Section 7.15 Release of Guarantee.
Upon acceptance, in accordance with Section 7.01and 7.02 of the Ordinance, the City shall authorize the release of the performance bond or the remaining portion of the escrow.
Section 7.16 Operation and Maintenance.
It is the intention of the City to provide no services other than planning, zoning and subdivision regulations administration to the jurisdictional area beyond the corporate limits of the City. Therefore, it shall be the obligation of the subdivider to present to the City, a precise approach for the operation and maintenance of improvements in the subdivision. Said approach may include formation of districts, homeowners associations or other methods to operate and maintain such improvements. Said approach shall be binding on the subdivider in a form, agreement, or contract acceptable to the City.
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 34
ARTICLE 8: WAIVERS
Section 8.01 Granting of Waivers (Exceptions) and Conditions.
In addition to the exceptions contained in this Ordinance, the Planning Commission may recommend and the City Council may grant waivers from the provisions of this Ordinance, but only after determining that:
8.01.01. There are unique circumstances or conditions affecting the property that are not the result of actions by the subdivider.
8.01.02. The waivers are necessary for the reasonable and acceptable development of the property in question.
8.01.03. The granting of the waivers will not be detrimental to the public or injurious to adjacent and nearby properties.
Section 8.02 Recording of Plat.
In no case shall the requirement of filing and recording a plat for subdivision be waived.
Section 8.03 Planned Unit/Cluster Developments.
The Planning Commission and City Council may also grant reasonable waivers to this Ordinance if the subdivider concurrently submits an application for, and obtains approval of, a Planned Unit Development or cluster development. The subdivider shall indicate where the plans vary from the requirements of this Ordinance and shall present evidence to support such requests.
ARTICLE 9: ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND AMENDMENTS
Section 9.01 General.
The following apply towards administration of this Ordinance:
9.01.01 It shall be the duty of the city staff to enforce this Ordinance and to bring to the attention of the Planning Commission and City Council any violation or lack of compliance herewith.
9.01.02 No owner, or agent of an owner, of any parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any parcel before a plat of such subdivision has been approved by the Planning Commission and City Council in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, and filed for record with Saunders County Register of Deeds.
9.01.03 The subdivision, including re-subdivision, of any lot or any parcel by the use of metes and bounds description for the purpose of sale, transfer or lease which would evade this Ordinance shall not be permitted. All such subdivisions shall be subject to all the requirements contained in this Ordinance.
9.01.04 No permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a lot or parcel subdivided, sold, transferred or leased in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 9.02 Amendments
Any provision of this Ordinance may be amended, supplemented, changed, modified, or repealed from time to time by the City Council according to law, provided however, that such amendments, supplements, changes, modification or repealed provisions shall not become effective until after the study, written report and recommendation by the Planning Commission to the City Council.
Section 9.03 Violation/Penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00 plus the cost of prosecution for each violation, and in default of payment of such forfeiture and costs, imprisonment in the county jail until payment thereof for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 35
ARTICLE 10: CERTIFICATION AND DEDICATION STATEMENTS
Section 10.01 Acknowledge of Notary
ACKNOWLEDGE OF NOTARY
STATE OF NEBRASKA
COUNTY OF SAUNDERS
On the ____ day, of ____________ 20___, before me, the undersigned Notary Public, duly commissioned and qualified in a for said county approved known by me to be the identical person whose name is affixed to the dedication on this plat and acknowledge the execution thereof to be his/her voluntary act and deed as said ______________.
WITNESS my hand and Notarial Seal the day and year last above mentioned.
______________________________ (SEAL)
Notary Public
Section 10.02 Surveyor’s Certification
SURVEYORS CERTIFICATION:
I hereby certify that I am a professional land surveyor, registered in compliance with the laws of the State of Nebraska, that this plat correctly represents a survey conducted by me or under my direct supervision on , that any changes from the description appearing in the last record transfer of the land contained in the final plat are so indicated, that all monuments shown thereon actually exist as described or will be installed and their position is correctly shown and that all dimensional and geodetic data is correct.
____________________________________ ____________________________________
(Surveyor, RLS #) Date
(seal)
Section 10.03 Approval of Wahoo City Planning Commission
APPROVAL OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION OF WAHOO, NEBRASKA
This preliminary plat of was approved by the Wahoo Planning
Commission this ____ day ___________ 20___
_________________________________
Chairperson, Wahoo Planning Commission
Section 10.04 Approval of Wahoo City Planning Commission
APPROVAL OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION OF WAHOO, NEBRASKA
This final plat of was approved by the Wahoo Planning
Commission this ____ day ___________ 20___
_________________________________
Chairperson, Wahoo Planning Commission
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 36
Section 10.05 Acceptance by Wahoo City Council
ACCEPTANCE BY WAHOO CITY COUNCIL OF
This preliminary plat of was approved by the City Council
of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska on this day ___________ 20___, in accordance
with the State Statutes of Nebraska.
______________________________ (City of Wahoo SEAL)
Mayor
ATTEST _____________________________
City Clerk
Section 10.06 Acceptance by Wahoo City Council
ACCEPTANCE BY WAHOO CITY COUNCIL OF
This final plat of was approved by the City Council
of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska on this day ___________ 20___, in accordance
with the State Statutes of Nebraska.
______________________________ (City of Wahoo SEAL)
Mayor
ATTEST _____________________________
City Clerk
Section 10.07 Acceptance by the Wahoo City Engineer
This preliminary plat of ________________ was reviewed and approved by the Wahoo
City Engineer on this _____ day of ___________, 20___
_____________________________________
Wahoo City Engineer
Section 10.08 Acceptance by the Wahoo City Engineer
This final plat of ________________ was reviewed and approved by the Wahoo
City Engineer on this _____ day of ___________, 20___
_____________________________________
Wahoo City Engineer
Section 10.09 Acceptance by Saunders County Register of Deeds
Recorded on this day of , 20 .
_________________________________
Saunders County Register of Deeds (STAMP including book and Page)
Section 10.10 Review of Saunders County Surveyor
REVIEW OF SAUNDERS COUNTY SURVEYOR
This plat of ________________ was reviewed by the office of Saunders
County Surveyor on this _____ day of ___________, 20___
_______________________________________________
Saunders County Surveyor (SEAL)
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 37
Section 10.11 County Treasurer’s Certifications
COUNTY TREASURER’S CERTIFICATIONS
This is to certify that I find no regular or special taxes due or delinquent against the property described in the Surveyor’s Certificate and embraced in this plat as shown by the records of this office.
__________________________ __________________________
County Treasurer Date
(SEAL)
Section 10.12 Administrative Plat Approval
APPROVAL OF CITY OF WAHOO
This Administrative Plat was approved by the City of Wahoo This ______ Day of _______________, 20__.
_____________________________ ______________________________
City Engineer Zoning Administrator
Section 10.13 Owner’s Certification
OWNERS CERTIFICATION
I/we the undersigned owner(s) of the real estate shown and (names)
described herein, do hereby certify that I/we have laid out, platted and subdivided, and do hereby lay out, plat and subdivided, said real estate in accordance with this plat.
This subdivision shall be known and designated as , an addition to the City of Wahoo, Nebraska (delete last phrase if the subdivision is located outside of the corporate limits and will not be annexed to the City). All Streets and alleys shown and not heretofore dedicated are hereby dedicated to the public unless specifically noted herein. Other public lands shown and not heretofore dedicated are hereby reserved for public use.
Clear title to the land contained in this plat is guaranteed. Any encumbrances or special assessments are explained as follows: .
There are strips of ground shown or described on this plat and marked easement, reserved for the use of public utilities and subject to the paramount right of utility or City to install, repair, replace and maintain its installations.
(Additional covenants or restrictions and enforcement provisions therein may be inserted here or attached to the plat).
__________________ _____________________
Signature Signature
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 38
Section 10.14 Lien Holder Consent
The undersigned holder of that certain lien against the real property described in the plat known as _____________________________________________________ (hereinafter “Plat”), said lien being recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Saunders County, Nebraska as Instrument No. ________________________ (hereinafter “Lien”), does hereby consent to the dedication of and subordinate the Lien to any utility (sewer, water, electric, cable TV, telephone, natural gas) easements, or streets or roads, pedestrian way easements, and access easements and relinquishments of access, dedicated to the public, all as shown on the Plat, but not otherwise. The undersigned confirms that it is the holder of the Lien and has not assigned the Lien to any other person.
(Name of Lien Holder)
By:
(Print the Name of Individual)
Title:
WAHOO, NEBRASKA ■ SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ■ 2012 39
ARTICLE 11: ANNEXATION AND RECORDING OF PLAT
Section 11.01 Subdivision Annexation of Adjoining or Contiguous Properties.
All Subdivisions or additions laid out adjoining or contiguous to the corporate limits shall be included within the same and become part of the municipality for all purposes whatsoever, upon approval of and acceptance by resolution of the city council.
Section 11.02 Petition for Annexation.
Any subdivision in which there are lands dedicated to the city or any subdivision serviced by public utilities shall be annexed to the city. Before approval for the final plat is given, the municipal body shall receive a petition for annexation from the owners of the subdivided properties.
ARTICLE 12: LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
Section 12.01 Separability.
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
Section 12.02 Repeals.
All ordinances of the City inconsistent herewith to the extent of such inconsistency, and no further, are hereby repealed. The repeal of any of the above mentioned ordinances does not revive any other ordinances or portions thereof by said ordinances. Such repeals shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for the violation of any ordinance repealed hereby, for any offense committed prior to the repeal.
Section 12.03 Effective Date.
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and publication according to law.
Section 12.04 Adoption.
This subdivision ordinance was adopted and approved this 8th day of November, 2012 by the City Council of the City of Wahoo, Nebraska.
(seal)
_______ ______________________
Mayor
ATTESTED: _____________________________
City Clerk
 
 
 
 
 




 


