Zoning Board of Adjustment 
Town of Auburn 
Rockingham County, New Hampshire 
RULES OF PROCEDURE  
ARTICLE 1 - AUTHORITY.    
1.1 These rules of procedure are adopted under the authority of the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, Chapter 676:1, and the Zoning Ordinance and map of the Town of Auburn, New Hampshire. 
1.2 Whenever any of these Rules conflict with, state laws or the Town of Auburn Zoning Ordinance, the state laws and/or Zoning Ordinance shall govern. 
ARTICLE 2 - MEMBERSHIP, TERMS OF OFFICE AND OFFICERS. 
2.1  Members and Alternates 
(A) Five full members shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen in staggered 3 year terms pursuant to R.S.A. 673:3.  Up to four alternate members shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen, for 3 year terms.  Alternate members should attend all meetings to familiarize themselves with the workings of the Board to stand ready to serve whenever a regular member of the Board is unable to fulfill his/her responsibilities. 

(B) At meetings, alternates who are not activated to fill the seat of an absent or recused member, or who have not been appointed to fill the unexpired term of a vacancy, may participate with the Board in a limited capacity.  During a public hearing, alternates may sit at the table with the regular members and may view documents, listen to testimony, ask questions and interact with other Board members, the applicant, abutters and the public.  Alternates shall not be allowed to make or second motions.  Alternates may participate in deliberations by the Board, but may not vote.  At all times, the chair shall fully inform the public of the status of any alternates present and identify the members who will be voting on the application. 

(C) During work sessions or portions of meetings that do not include a public hearing, alternates may fully participate, exclusive of any motions or votes that may be made. 

(D) Members must reside in the Town of Auburn.  Members are expected to attend each meeting of the Board to exercise their duties and responsibilities.  Any member 


unable to attend a meeting shall notify the chairman and secretary as soon as possible.  Members, including the chairman and vice-chairman, shall participate in the decision-making process and vote to approve or disapprove all motions under consideration, unless they are absent or have been disqualified due to a conflict. 

(E) In the event of a vacancy, other than through the expiration of a term of office, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint a replacement.  The Chairperson may designate an alternate member of the Board to fill a vacancy temporarily until the Board of Selectmen are able to fill the vacancy.  If the vacancy is for an ex officio member, the Chairperson may only designate the person who has been appointed to serve as the alternate for the ex officio member. 

1.3 Officers 



 (A) A chairman shall be elected annually by a majority vote of the Board in the month of April.  The chairman shall preside over all meetings and hearings, appoint such committees as directed by the Board, and shall affix his/her signature in the name of the Board. 
(B) A vice-chairman shall be elected annually by a majority vote of the Board in the month of April.  The vice-chairman shall preside in the absence of the chairman, and shall have the full powers of the chairman on matters which come before the Board during the absence of the chairman. 
(C)         A secretary shall be part of the personnel of the Town of Auburn.  The secretary shall maintain a record of all meetings, transactions and decisions of the Board, be responsible for all public notices and mailings, shall maintain a file on all matters that come before the Board, and perform other such duties as the Board may direct by resolution. 
(D) The chairman and vice-chairman shall serve for one year and shall be eligible for re-election. 


ARTICLE 3 – MEETINGS. 
3.1 Regular meetings shall be held at the Auburn Town Hall meeting room, beginning at 7:00 p.m., on the fourth Tuesday of the month.  Other meetings may be held on the call of the chairman, provided public notice and notice to each member is given in accordance with RSA 91-A:2, II.  The Board reserves the right to change the meeting schedule to accommodate holidays, weather conditions, or unforeseen circumstances. 
 
 
3.2 Quorum.   
(A) A quorum for all meetings shall be three members, including alternates sitting in place of members. 


   (B) The chairman shall make every effort to ensure that all five members, and one or two alternates, are present for the consideration of any appeal or application. 
(C)   If any regular Board member is absent from any hearing or meeting, or disqualifies himself from sitting on a particular case, the chairman shall designate one of the alternate members to sit in place of the absent or disqualified member, and such alternate shall be in all respects a full member of the Board while so sitting. 
(D)   If there are less than five members (including alternates) present, the chair shall give the applicant the option to proceed or to continue the hearing until the next date at which 5 members can be present.  Should the applicant choose to proceed with less than five members present, that shall not constitute the sole grounds for a rehearing or appeal should the application fail. 
3.3 Disqualification.  If any member finds it necessary to disqualify himself or herself from sitting on a particular case, as provided in RSA 673:14, he shall notify the chairman as soon as possible so that an alternate may be requested to sit in his or her place.  When there is uncertainty as to whether a member should be disqualified to act on a particular application, that member or another member of the Board may request that the Board vote on the question of disqualification.  Any such request shall be made before the public hearing begins.  Such a vote shall be advisory and non-binding. 
Either the chairman or member disqualifying himself/herself before the beginning of the public hearing on the case shall announce the disqualification.  The disqualified member shall absent himself/herself from the Board table during the public hearing and during all deliberations on the case. 
3.4 Order of Business.  The order of business for regular meetings shall be as follows. 


(A) Call to order by the chairman. 

(B) Introduction of members. 


(C) Overview of hearing procedures. 
(D)  Unfinished business or continuances. 
(E) Public hearings. 
(F) New business. 
(G) Old business. 
(H) Minutes of previous meeting. 


(I) Communications and miscellaneous. 
(J)  Adjournment. 
The Chairman may deviate from this order if he or she determines that there is just cause to do so. 
ARTICLE 4 - APPLICATIONS. 
4.1 Applications. 


(A) Each application for a hearing before the Board shall be made on forms provided by the Board, and shall be presented to the Board secretary who shall record the date of receipt over his or her signature. 

(B)      


Applications for the agenda of the next regular meeting of the Board shall be closed at 3:30 p.m., on the date set as the filing dealing before the scheduled meeting date.  The schedule of filing deadlines is on the Town of Auburn website under the planning and zoning departments.  Applications received after the filing deadline will be scheduled for a hearing at the next month’s regular meeting date. 
(C) Appeals from an administrative decision taken under R.S.A. 676:5 shall be filed within 30 days of the decision. 


(D)   At each meeting, the Secretary shall present to the Board all applications received by the deadline for the meeting, as set forth above in Section 4.1(B). 
(E)   All application and appeal forms and revisions to such shall be adopted by resolution of the Board, and shall be set forth in the Appendix to these Rules of Procedure. 
 
4.2   Public Notice 


(A) Public notice of public hearings on each application shall be published in The Union Leader, and shall be posted on the town website and at the town office not less than five (5) days before the date fixed for the hearing.  Notice shall include the name of the applicant, description of property, (including tax map identification), 


action desired by applicant, provisions of zoning ordinance concerned, the type of appeal being made, and the date, time and place of the hearing. 

(B) Personal notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant and all abutters not less than five (5) days before the date of the hearing.  Notice shall also be given to the Planning Board, Town Clerk and other parties deemed by the Board to have a special interest in the application or appeal.  Said notice shall contain the same information as contained in the public notice. 

(C) The applicant shall pay in advance for all required notice costs. 


ARTICLE 5 - HEARINGS AND DECISIONS.   
5.1   Process.  The conduct of public hearings shall be governed by the following rules: 



(A) The chairman shall call the hearing in session and ask for the case to be read into the record. 
(B) If the case involves an administrative appeal of a decision by the Building Inspector, the Building Inspector may present his or her case. 
(C) The applicant shall be called to present his appeal, shall read the application into the record, and provide any supporting documentation or testimony. 
(D) Members of the Board may ask questions at any point during testimony. 
(E) Each person who appears shall be required to state his or her name and address and indicate whether he or she is a party to the case or an agent or counsel of a party to the case. 
(F) Any member of the Board, through the chairman, may request any party to the case to speak a second time. 
(G) Any party to the case who wants to ask question of another party to the case must do so through the chairman. 
(H) Those appearing in favor shall be allowed to speak. 
(I) Those in opposition to the appeal shall be allowed to speak. 
(J) The applicant and those in favor of the application shall be allowed to speak in rebuttal. 
(K) Those in opposition to the appeal shall be allowed to speak in rebuttal. 
(L) Any person who wants the Board to compel the attendance of a witness shall present his request in writing to the Chairman not later than ten (10) business days prior to the public hearing. 
(M)  The Board of adjustment will hear with interest any evidence that pertains to the facts of the case, or how the facts relate to the provisions of the Auburn Zoning Ordinance and state zoning law. 
(N) The Board may enter into deliberations prior to making a decision on the case.  During that time, only Board members and alternates are allowed to comment.  After the Board exits deliberation, the applicant will be allowed an opportunity to clarify points that were brought forth during deliberation. 
(O) If the Board wishes, it may proceed to a vote on the application. 
(P) The Chairman may deviate from the order of procedure at public hearings when, in his/her opinion, there is good cause to do so, and doing so will not harm the interests of an applicant or appealing party. 
5.2 Decisions.  The Board may elect to decide the case the night of a hearing, but shall decide all cases within 30 days of the close of the public hearing, and shall deny or approve the application with or without conditions, or grant or deny the appeal.  The secretary shall record the vote of the Board.  Notice of the decision will be made available for public inspection within five (5) business days as required by R.S.A. 676:3.  Notice will be sent to the applicant by U.S. mail.  If the appeal is denied, the notice shall include the reasons therefore.  The notice shall also be given to the planning Board, the Board of Selectmen, Town Clerk, property tax assessor and/or other town officials as determined by the Board.  Notice shall be posted at the town offices. 
5.3 Voting.  At the discretion of the chairman, the voting on all motions shall be by show of hands, voice vote or by roll call of the members, of which the yeas, nays, and abstentions shall be recorded in the minutes.  There must be at least 3 member votes in order to reach a decision. 
5.4 Reconsideration by the Board.  The Board may reconsider a decision to grant or deny an application or appeal, or to grant or deny a motion for rehearing, provided a written request for reconsideration is filed with the Board within 30 calendar days.  The Board may also reconsider a decision on its own motion.  The 30 day period for filing a request for reconsideration begins on the date following the date upon which the Board voted to approve or deny the application or appeal.  The Board will vote upon the request for rehearing within 30 days of a timely filed request.  If a request for rehearing 
is granted, the matter should be scheduled for rehearing at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Board for which sufficient public notice can be provided. 
ARTICLE 6 – RECORDS. 
6.1 The records of the Board shall be kept by the Secretary and made available for public inspection at the Town office, in accordance with R.S.A. 673:17. 
6.2 Final written decisions will be placed on file and available for public inspection within five (5) business days after the date the decision is made, in accordance with R.S.A. 676:3. 
6.3 Minutes of all meetings, including names of Board members, persons appearing before the Board, and a brief description of the subject matter, shall be open to public inspection within five (5) business days after the date of the public meeting.  See R.S.A. 91-A:2,II. 
ARTICLE 7 – AMENDMENTS. 
7.1 These Rules of Procedure may be amended by a majority vote of the members of the Board, provided that such amendment is read at two successive meetings immediately preceding the meeting at which the vote is to be taken.  A copy of the Rules of Procedures shall be on file with the Office of the Town Clerk and the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
ARTICLE 8 – WAIVERS. 
8.1 Any portion of these Rules of Procedure may be waived in such cases where, in the opinion of the Board, strict conformity would pose a practical difficulty to the applicant, and waiver would not be contrary to the spirit and intent of the rules.   
8.2 In order to grant a waiver of these rules, there must be an affirmative vote by a majority of sitting members of the Board. 
ARTICLE 9 - JOINT MEETINGS AND HEARINGS. 
9.1 In accordance with R.S.A. 676:2, the Board of Adjustment may hold joint meetings or hearings with other “land use Boards”, including the Planning Board, Historic District Commission, and the building code Board of Appeals and the building code Board code of Appeals and the Building Inspector. Each Board shall have discretion as to whether or not to hold a joint meeting with any other land use Board. 
9.2 Joint business meetings with any other land use Board may be held at any time when called jointly by the chairman of the two Boards. 
9.3 A public hearing on any appeal to the Board of adjustment will be held jointly with another Board only under the following conditions: 
(A) The joint public hearing must be a formal public hearing on appeals to both Boards regarding the same subject matter;  
(B) If the other Board is the Planning Board, R.S.A. 676:2 requires that the Planning Board chairman shall chair the joint hearing.  If the other Board is not the Planning Board, then the Board of Adjustment chairman shall chair the joint hearing; 
 (C) The provisions concerning the conduct of public hearings, set forth in these rules, together with such additional provisions as may be required by the other Board, shall be followed; and 
(D) The other Board shall concur with these conditions.  
ARTICLE 10 - CODE OF CONDUCT. 
10.1 When acting upon an application, the Board is acting in a quasi-judicial capacity.  As such, the members are expected to base their decisions upon the record of public testimony, documents submitted in connection with the application, reports of engineers and other experts, and other proceedings of duly noticed public hearings.  Members may also use their personal knowledge of the community and of the parcels of land under consideration, as input to the public deliberations and decision-making process. 
 10.2 Members should not engage in conversations about the merits of applications with interested parties or the general public except during the public hearing on the matter.  If such conversations or other exchanges of information occur, the members have an obligation to disclose the content of the communication at the next Board meeting, and to provide copies of any documents or correspondence received by the member to the Secretary and the Chairman. 
10.3 All proceedings of the Board are subject to the provisions of N.H. R.S.A. 91-A, the "Right-to-Know Law".  As such, any discussion of official business involving a quorum of the Board, whether or not at a noticed and scheduled meeting, is a “meeting,” and subject to the requirements of the Right-to-Know Law.   Members should avoid participating in any meeting as defined in R.S.A. 91-A:2 that are not duly noticed to all the members of the Board.  This includes discussion in any format, whether in-person, via telephone, or via any form of electronic media. 
10.4 The members of the Board are subject to the provisions of N.H. R.S.A. 673:14, I, with respect to the potential for a conflict of interest.  If a member has a direct or personal financial interest in the outcome of an application that is different from that of the 
general public, or if a member would be disqualified to sit on a jury hearing the subject matter of the application, the member has a conflict of interest.  If a member has expressed an opinion directly relating to the merits of an application, that member may be subjected to recusal from participation in the matter in accordance with the procedure set forth in RSA 673:14, II.  In cases of conflict of interest, the Chairperson shall appoint an alternate member to take the place of the disqualified member, in accordance with Article 3.3 of these Rules. 
10.5 No member or officer of the Board shall represent the official position of the Board in any matter, unless authorized by a resolution of the Board, approved by majority vote of the Board at a duly noticed public meeting, authorizing the member or officer to make such representations or take such actions on behalf of the Board.  Exceptions to this provision include any responsibilities specifically assigned under State Law. 
 


 
 
 
TOWN OF AUBURN, NEW HAMPSHIRE 
 
ZONING ORDINANCE 
 
MARCH 2018 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Original Ordinance Adopted:  March 1967 
 
Revised in the following years: 
March 1970, November 1970, November 1972, March 1973, June 1973, March 1975, March 1976, March 1978, March 1979, March 1983, March 1984, March 1985, March 1986, March 1987, March 1988, March 1989, March 1990, March 1991, March 1993, March 1995, March 1996, March 1997, March 1998, March 1999, March 2000, March 2001, March 2002, March 2003, March 2004, March 2005; March 2006, March 2007, March 2009, March 2010, March 2011, March 2014, March 2016, March 2017, March 2018  
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
ARTICLE 1 TITLE, AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE          PAGE 
 
 1.01 Short Title         1 
 1.02 Purpose         1 
 1.03 Authority         1 
 1.04 Applicability         1 
 1.05 Interpretation         1 
 
ARTICLE 2 DEFINITIONS 
 
 2.01 General         2 
 2.02 Words and Terms        2 
 
ARTICLE 3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
 3.01 Uses Not Defined        16 
 3.02 Conformance with Regulations      16 
 3.03 Activity in Floodway        16 
 3.04 Frontage         16 
 3.05 Non-Conforming Uses and Lots      16 
 3.06 Sanitary Protection        18 
 3.07 Utilities         19 
 3.08 Parking         19 
 3.09 Nuisance Provisions        20 
 3.10 Sign Regulations        21 
 3.11 Temporary and Permanent Storage Facilities     27 
 3.12 Underground Storage Regulation      28 
 3.13 Multi-Family Dwellings       29 
 3.14 Manufactured Housing       30 
 3.15 Travel Trailer Park/Travel Trailer      30 
3.16 Animal Husbandry        31 
 3.17 Forestry         31 
 3.18 Excavation and Soil Removal       32 
 3.19 The Use and Disposal of Sewage Sludge and Septage   32 
 3.20 Wireless Communication Facilities, Antennas and Communications 
  Towers         35 
3.21 Merger  of a Nonconforming Lot(s)      36 
3.22 Home Businesses, Offices and Shops      36 
  
ARTICLE 4 DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
 4.01 Application of Regulations       37 4.02 Districts         37 
 4.03 District Boundaries and Zoning Maps     37 
 4.04 District Regulations - General      38 
 4.05 “R” Rural District        38 
 4.06 “R-1”, Residential-One District and “R-2”, Residential-Two District 40 
 4.07 “C-1”, Commercial-One District and “C-2”, Commercial-Two District 41 
 4.08  “V” Village Center District       44 
4.09 “I” Industrial         49 
 
ARTICLE 5 WETLANDS AND WATERSHED PROTECTION REGULATIONS 
 
 5.01 Authority and Creation       51 
5.02 Administration        51 
 5.03 Findings and Purposes       51 
5.04 Delineation of Wetlands and Watershed Protection Area 5.08 Relief from One-Hundred Twenty-Five (125) Foot Setback 

1.04 Applicability 

1.05 Interpretation 





District and Boundaries        52 
 5.05 Permitted Uses        54 
 5.06 Prohibited Uses and Activities      55 
5.07 Uses Permitted by Conditional Use Permits     56 
from Level 1; Seventy-Five (75) Foot Setback from Level 2;  
and Twenty-Five (25) Foot Setback from Level 3 Wetland 
and Watershed Protection Area:        56 
 5.09 Administration of Conditional Use Permits     57 
 5.10 Minor Conditional Use Permits      62 
 5.11 Dredge and Fill Permits       64 
 5.12 Wetlands and Watershed Protection Mitigation    64 
  
ARTICLE 6 FLOOD PLAIN DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
 
 6.01 Applicability         66 
 6.02 Definition of Terms        66 
 6.03 Development         69 
 6.04 Building Permits        69 
 6.05 Sewer or Septic Systems       69 
 6.06  New or Substantially Improved Structures     69 
 6.07 Certification Requirement       70 
 6.08 Alteration or Relocation of Watercourses     70 
 6.09 Construction Requirement in “A Zones”     70 
 6.10 Variances and Appeals       72 
 
ARTICLE 7 RESERVED FOR CLUSTERED DEVELOPMENT   73   
 
 
ARTICLE 8  ELDERLY HOUSING REGULATIONS   
 
 8.01 Objectives and Characteristics      74 
 8.02 Permitted Uses        74 
 8.03 Definitions         74 
 8.04 Review         75 
 8.05 Regulations and Design Criteria      75 
 8.06 Site Ownership        77 
 8.07 Agreements, Restrictions and Provisions     77 
 8.08 Occupancy         77 
 8.09 Density         78 
 8.10 Maximum Number of Units       78 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 9 WORKFORCE HOUSING 
 
 9.01 Authority and Purpose       79 
 9.02 Definitions         79 
 9.03 Permissible Locations        80 
 9.04 Requirements for Workforce Housing Developments   80 
 9.05 Application Process        83 
 9.06 Annual Report         85 
 9.07 Fair Share Calculations       85 
 9.08 Termination and Reinstatement of Incentive System    85 
 
 
ARTICLE 10   RESERVED FOR GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS   86 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 11   SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS 
 
 11.01 Purpose         87 
 11.02 Definitions         87 
 11.03 Review Procedure        88 
 11.04 Standards         89 
 11.05 Abandonment         91 
 11.06 Violation         92 
 11.07 Penalties         92 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 12   GROWTH MANAGEMENT 
 
 12.01 Basis, Purpose and Authority       93 
 12.02 Eligibility         93 
 12.03 Issuance         93 
 12.04 Exceptions         95 
 12.05 Administration        95 
  
 
 
ARTICLE 13   BUILDING CODE AND BUILDING PERMITS 
 
 13.01 Building Permits Required       96 
 13.02 General Building Requirements      96 
 13.03 Application         97 
 13.04 Certificates of Occupancy       99 
 13.05 Other Approvals        99 13.06 Swimming Pool Barrier Requirements     99 13.07 Power Burner, Chimney, Fireplace, Furnace and Oil Tank Permits  99 
 13.08 Smoke, Fire and CO Detectors and Portable Fire Extinguishers  100 
 13.09 Enforcement         100 
 13.10 Violations and Penalties       101 
 13.11 Appeals         101 
 
ARTICLE 14   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
 14.01 Zoning Officer-Building Inspector      102 
 14.02 Enforcement         102 
 14.03 Penalty          102 
 14.04 Fees Established by Selectmen      102 
 14.05 Zoning Board of Adjustment       102 
 14.06 Appeals to Zoning Board of Adjustment     104 
 14.07 Referral to Planning Board       105 
 14.08 Motion for Rehearing        105 
 14.09 Variances         106 
 14.10 Disability Variance        107 
 14.11 Abandonment or Discontinuance of a Variance    107 
 14.12 Appeals under N.H. R.S.A. 674:41      107 
 14.13 Temporary Uses        107 
 14.14 Special Exceptions        107 
 14.15 Costs          111 
 14.16 Appeals to the Superior Court      111 
 
ARTICLE 15   AMENDMENT, VALIDITY AND EFFECTIVE DATE 
 
 15.01 Amendment         112 
 15.02 Validity         112 
 15.03 Existing Ordinances        112 
 15.04 Effective Date         112 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 APPENDIX A……Zoning Matrix of Uses and Districts 
 APPENDIX B……Zoning Table of Dimensions 
 APPENDIX C……Flood Insurance Rate Map 
 APPENDIX D……Zoning Map 
APPENDIX E……Building Permit Fee Schedule 
APPENDIX F……Fire Department Regulations 
 
ARTICLE 1 - TITLE, AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE 
 
1.01 Short Title 
 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Auburn, New Hampshire," hereinafter referred to as "this Ordinance."  This Ordinance was first adopted on March 14, 1967. 
 
1.02 Purpose 
 
This Ordinance is made generally: to promote health, safety, prosperity, convenience and general welfare; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to promote efficiency, economy, and good civic design in development that will preserve the rural character of Auburn and protect the value of its homes and lands; to ensure the wise and efficient expenditure of public funds; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; to lessen congestion in the streets; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to assure proper use of natural resources and other public requirements, and to avoid the undue and unsafe concentration of population.  This Ordinance is also intended to foster the goals of “smart growth” set forth in N.H. R.S.A. 9-B:3, including promoting the development and use of land in such a manner that its physical, visual or audible consequences are appropriate to the traditional and historic New Hampshire landscape.  This Ordinance is made with reasonable consideration for the character of the various districts and their peculiar suitability for particular uses. 
 
1.03 Authority 
 
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 674, et seq., New Hampshire Revised Statues Annotated, as amended. 
 
 
This Ordinance shall apply to: 
 
(1). All buildings or structures erected, reconstructed, altered, enlarged, or relocated after the effective date of this Ordinance or applicable amendment; 
 
(2). The use of any building, structure, or land which is different or expanded from its use prior to the effective date of this Ordinance or applicable amendment; and 
 
(3). Any land which has been subdivided after the effective date of this Ordinance or applicable amendment. 
 
No person shall use or occupy any land or buildings or permit the use or occupancy of land or buildings under his or her control, except in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
 
 
In interpreting any provision of this Ordinance, it shall be held as the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare of the Town.  Whenever any provision of this Ordinance is at variance with any other provision of this Ordinance, or with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rule or regulation, the most restrictive, or that imposing the highest standard, shall govern. 
 
ARTICLE 2 - DEFINITIONS 
 
 
2.01 General 
 
For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain terms and words shall have the meaning given herein:  
 
(1). Words used in the singular number include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular; 
 
(2). Words used in the present tense include the future;  
 
(3). The words "building", "structure", "lot", or "premises" shall be considered as though followed by the words "or any portion thereof";  
 
(4). The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory;  
 
(5). The word "used" shall be construed as though including the words "intended or designed to be used"; 
 
(6). Wherever a definition of a term or phrase is stated by example, it shall be deemed to include the words, "including but not limited to"; 
 
(7). Any specific reference to a Federal or State statute, a regulation of any Federal, State or local agency, or ordinance or regulation of the Town of Auburn, shall include any subsequent amendments thereto or replacements thereof, unless the change would clearly contravene the terms or spirit of this Ordinance, or render the context meaningless. 
 
2.02 Words and Terms 
 
(1). Abandoned: The cessation of a non-conforming use.  Abandonment is indicated by the stated intention or otherwise apparent action of an owner to discontinue a non-conforming use of a structure or lot, such as the removal of the characteristic equipment or furnishings used in the performance of the non-conforming use, without its replacement by similar equipment or furnishings, or the replacement of a non-conforming use by a conforming use. See Section 3.05(1)(c).  In its context, abandonment shall also be deemed to have occurred when an owner has failed to timely act on any necessary permit or approval.  See also Sections 14.11, 14.14(8) 
 
(2). Accessory Building or Use:  See separate definitions at Section 2.02 (12) and 2.02 (98). 
 
(3). Agricultural, Farm Farming:  As defined in NH RSA 21:34-a. and as may be further amended.    A single family detached dwelling shall be a permitted accessory use. 
 
(a). Agritourism and marketing as defined under NH RSA 21:34-a (b) (5) shall require a Special Exception in accordance with Article 14.14 of the Auburn Zoning Ordinance and be subject to Site Plan Review through the Auburn Planning Board. 
 
(b). Farm Roadside Stand shall remain an agricultural operation and not be considered commercial (Agritourism), provided that at least 35 percent of the product sales in dollar volume is attributable to products produced on the farm or farms of the stand owner.  The floor area of the Farm Roadside Stand shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet. 
 
(4). Alteration:  Any construction or other action resulting in a change in the external and/or internal structural parts, height, number of stories, size, use, or location of a building or other structure. 
 
(5).    Wireless Communications Facility (Antenna and Communications Towers):  A tower, pole, and/or related structure(s) used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving, or relaying radar, radio waves, cellular or radio telephone communications, television signals, satellite signals, data signals, microwaves, or any other electronic signals.  This definition shall not include towers or antennas that are less than twenty-five (25) feet in height from the ground and which are accessory to a principal use, nor shall this definition include antennas used exclusively in the amateur radio services or antennas otherwise permitted by federal or state preemption.  See Section 3.20. 
 
(6). Automobile and Similar Vehicle Sales Facility:  A building and/or lot used principally for the sale of new or used automobiles or other motor vehicles, with or without an accessory use for the repair or reconditioning of such vehicles. No lot used for a Vehicle Sales Facility may be located any closer than 2,500 feet in any direction to another lot used for Vehicle Sales Facility. 
 
(7). Automobile Repair Garage:  A building and/or lot used principally for the repair and/or servicing of passenger and other light duty motor vehicles.  Outdoor storage shall be governed by the Site Plan Review Regulations of the Town of Auburn. 
 
(8). Automobile Service Station:  A building and/or lot used principally for selling of gasoline, oil and related products for motor vehicles.  Also, an accessory use for the repair and/or servicing of passenger and other light duty motor vehicles.  If the station contains more than two (2) service bays, it shall be classified as an automobile repair garage. 
 
(9). Boarding or Rooming House:  A building principally containing boarding units. 
 
(10).  Boarding Unit:  One or more rooms used for the semi-permanent residence of one or more persons not living as a single housekeeping unit and not having individual cooking facilities. 
 
(11).  Building:  A structure having a roof, fixed to the land and constructed for the shelter of person, animals or property. 
 
(12).  Building, Accessory:  A detached or attached building, the use of which is customarily incidental and subordinate to that of the principal building, and which is located on the same lot as that occupied by the principal building.  An accessory building may include, but is not limited to, a utility shed, porch, barn or garage.   
 
(13).  Building Area:  The percentage of lot area or square footage, as applicable, covered by a building exclusive of cornices, eaves, gutters, chimneys, porches without roofs and bay windows.  In determining building area, principal and accessory buildings shall be included. 
 
(14).  Building or Structure Height:  Vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building or structure to the highest point. 
 
(15).  Cellar:  A portion of a building partly or entirely below the finished grade of the ground adjoining the building.  A cellar is not deemed a story unless its’ ceiling is six (6) or more feet above the finished grade at the front of the building.  The word “basement” shall be defined in the same manner. 
 
(16).  Church:  A building and/or other structure used principally by a body or organization of religious believers to regularly assemble for worship. 
 
(17).  Clustered Development: Two or more buildings, whether single family detached or multi-unit or commercial/industrial, "clustered" or "grouped" on a lot or group of contiguous lots, closer than would otherwise be permitted by the minimum lot size, frontage and yard requirements of this Ordinance, all as more particularly defined by the provision of this Ordinance. 
 
(18).  Commercial Service Establishment:  A building and/or other structure used principally for providing commercial services to the public, such as a beauty shop, shoe repair shop, dry cleaner, laundry, electrician, plumber, repair service, installation service, general contractor, rental shop and the like.  No accessory use for residential purposes shall be permitted.  This definition does not include a sexually-oriented business. 
 
(19) Conservation Easement (Conservation Land):  Any open space designation or other restriction which is part of a cluster development, planned unit development, village plan alternative subdivision, or other proposal approved under innovative land use controls, or which is lawfully imposed by either the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment as a condition of subdivision, site plan, variance or other type of approval, and which is filed with the records of either the Planning Board or Zoning Board as part of the board’s established procedure.   
 
(20).  Conversion Apartment:  A single family detached dwelling existing prior to March 14, 1967, consisting of more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of floor area, and converted after the first effective date of this Ordinance, to contain two dwelling units. 
 
(21).  Cultural Facilities:  A building used for a museum, local historical society, library, non-commercial art gallery, planetarium, science education center and the like. Any such facility shall be subject to site plan review and approval by the Auburn Planning Board. 
 
(22).  Day Care Center:  A building used principally or as an accessory use to a single family attached dwelling to provide "baby-sitting" type care for children or adults without a teacher or formal educational program.  A day care center shall not be permitted in the Industrial Zone unless it is accessory and incidental to another permitted business. 
 
(23).  Development:  The construction of improvements on a tract or tracts of land for nonresidential use, multi-family residential use, and/or multiple single-family residences. 
 
(24).  District:  A zoning district, in which only those uses may hereafter occur which are either permitted by right or allowed by special exception under this Ordinance. 
 
(25).  Driveway:  A space located on a lot, which may not be more than twenty-four (24) feet in width at the lot line, built or used for vehicular access by automobiles or trucks to a garage, parking space or service area. 
 
(26).  Dwelling:  A building used primarily as the home residence or regular sleeping place of one or more persons.  The term dwelling shall not include a motel, hotel, boarding house, hospital, travel trailer or dormitory. 
 
(27).  Dwelling Unit:  One or more rooms providing complete separate living facilities for the use of one or more persons constituting a single housekeeping unit, with permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
 
(28).  Dwelling Unit, Accessory:  Residential living unit that is within or attached to a single-family dwelling, and that provides independent living facilities for one or more persons, include provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation on the same parcel of land as the principal dwelling unit it occupies.     
 
Accessory Dwelling Units shall be permitted by Special Exception as governed under Article 14.14 of the Auburn Zoning Ordinance in all zoning districts that permit single family detached dwellings. 
 
A Special Exception shall be required for construction and or change of occupancy for creation of an Accessory Dwelling Unit. 
 
The Accessory Dwelling Unit shall meet the following requirements. 
 
(a).   An accessory dwelling unit shall have no more than two bedrooms. and shall not exceed seven hundred fifty (750) square feet in living area and shall be attached to a single-family dwelling.  Attached means sharing a common habitable space wall.   
 
(b).   An interior door shall be provided between the principal dwelling and the accessory dwelling unit, but it shall not be required that it remain unlocked.  The accessory dwelling unit shall have a door with direct access to the exterior, or common space to hallway or exterior door. 
 
(c).   The accessory dwelling unit shall have interconnecting smoke/carbon monoxide/heat detectors with the principal dwelling unit.   
 
(d).   There shall be adequate provisions for water supply and sewage disposal for the accessory dwelling unit in accord with NH RSA 485-A:38, but separate systems shall not be required for the principal and accessory dwelling units.  
 
(e).   An accessory dwelling unit shall meet all zoning setbacks and all applicable building codes.  There shall be adequate parking to accommodate an accessory dwelling unit. 
 
(f).   The property owner must occupy one of the dwelling units as his/her principal place of residence.  
 
(g). Only one accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted for any single-family dwelling.   
 
(h) Detached Accessory Dwelling Units are not permitted. 
 
 
(29).  Dwelling, Unit:   
 
(a). Multi-Family: A residential structure containing three or more attached dwelling units, such as apartment house, multi-family town house or condominium occupied exclusively for residential purposes.  Multi-family dwellings do not include commercial accommodations for transient occupancy.  Multi-family unit shall require Site Plan Review Approval. 
 
(b).   Duplex:  A residential structure that contains two (2) attached dwelling units.  The dwelling units must share a common wall or common floor/ceiling assembly, have separate access to each dwelling and meet all current building code standards. 
 
(30).  Elderly Housing:  Elderly Housing shall mean a development, including housing and allowed support facilities, developed in accordance with any Elderly Housing Regulations adopted by the Town of Auburn., whether or not adopted at the same time as this Ordinance. 
 
(31).  Excavation and Soil Removal:  The excavation and/or removal of soil material shall be considered a commercial or industrial activity and shall include the removal of soil material such as loam, sand, gravel, and other fill material for sale, or for use in another location, as governed by N.H. R.S.A. 155-E and the Town of Auburn Excavation Regulations.  “Excavation and Soil Removal” as defined and regulated herein shall not include the excavation and/or removal of soil material incidental to approved development activities.  See Section 3.18. 
 
(32).  Floodway:  The area subject to regular flooding, the limits of which are determined by the normal annual high-water mark of any lake, pond, river or other major waterway.  With respect to special flood hazard areas, the term "floodway" shall be defined by Article 6, “Flood Plain Development Regulations.” 
 
(33).  Floor Area:  The area of livable floor space on all stories of a building measured between the faces of the interior walls. 
 
(34).  Frontage:  The width of a lot bordering on a street measured along its front lot line. 
 
 
 
 
(35).  Hazardous Substance:  All elements and compounds currently designated and designated subsequent to the enactment of this Ordinance as hazardous in accordance with Section 311 (b) (2) (A) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972, (P.L. 92-500), currently codified at 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq. 
 
(36).  Heliport:  A landing pad with a capacity for no more than one helicopter and which is used only as an accessory use to a conforming principal use. 
 
(37).  Home Business:  The manufacture and/or sale of products such as jewelry, pottery, furniture or similar items that has been customarily carried out in a single family detached dwelling, is conducted by the residents thereof, is clearly an accessory use to the residential purposes of the dwelling and does not change the character thereof. In such cases only one employee from outside of persons living in said dwelling will be permitted. This definition does not include a sexually-oriented business.  See also Section 3.22. 
 
(38).  Home Office:  An office such as used by a lawyer, doctor, accountant, realtor or other professional or service person that has been customarily carried out in a single family detached dwelling, is conducted by the residents thereof, is clearly an accessory use to the residential purposes of the dwelling and does not change the character thereof.  In such cases only one employee from outside of persons living in said dwelling will be permitted.  See also Section 3.22. 
 
(39).  Home Shop:  A shop such as used by an electrician, plumber or similar tradesperson that has been customarily carried out in a single family detached dwelling, is conducted by the residents thereof, is clearly an accessory use to the residential purposes of the dwelling and does not change the character thereof.  In such cases only one employee from outside of persons living in said dwelling will be permitted.  See also Section 3.22. 
 
(40).  Hospital:  A building used principally to provide organized inpatient diagnosis and treatment to persons suffering from acute or chronic illness, injury or deformity. 
 
(41).  Hotel:  A building principally containing rooms without individual cooking facilities used for transient occupancy, including an inn, motel, motor inn or tourist court, but not including a boarding or rooming house.  A restaurant is a permitted accessory use. 
 
(42).  Indoor Commercial Recreation Facility:  A building used principally for indoor commercial recreation such as a bowling alley, pool hall, indoor pool, tennis court, gymnasium, roller or ice skating rink, indoor movie theater and the like.  This definition does not include a sexually-oriented business. 
 
 
 
 
(43).  Industrial Establishment:  A structure and/or lot used principally for the manufacturing, refining, assembling or processing of raw materials or components through the systematic use of machinery and labor, to produce durable and/or non-durable finished goods, component parts, chemicals, foodstuffs or other products.  This definition shall not include a power plant, Bio Mass facility or incineration facility.  Outdoor storage of goods shall be governed by the Site Plan Review Regulations of the Town of Auburn. 
 
(44).  Industrial Establishment - Light:  A structure and/or lot used principally for the assembling of components, which are themselves produced off site, and which as a final product or by-product do not create any noxious or hazardous substance of any kind, whether the operation is provided with a sophisticated scrubbing, cleaning or reducing process or not. 
 
(45).  Industrial Repair Garage:  A structure and/or lot used principally for the repair of heavy duty vehicles, such as front-end loaders, tractor trailer cabs, dump trucks, or similar vehicle types. 
 
(46).  Junk Yards:  As defined by N.H. R.S.A. 236:112, and as governed by N.H. R.S.A. 236, Sections 111-129.  All junk yards shall be subject to State and local permitting, as well as Site Plan review and approval.   
 
(47).  Lot:  A separate area or parcel of land, not including water area, in single or common ownership.  For purposes of this Ordinance, a parcel is considered “separate” if it is described by a separate deed of record, if it is separately described as one of several parcels in a single deed of record, or if it is separately defined in a plan of subdivision approved by the Planning Board and recorded in the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds. 
 
(48).  Lot, Corner:  A lot at the point of intersection of and abutting on two or more intersecting streets, where the interior angle of intersection of the street lot lines (or in case of a curved street, extended lot lines) is not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
 
(49).  Lot, Interior:  A lot, no lines of which intersect with a street right-of-way. 
 
(50).  Lot Line, Front:  The property line dividing a lot from a street right-of-way.  In the case of a corner lot, each line with street frontage shall be considered a front lot line. 
 
(51).  Lot Line, Rear:  The lot line opposite from the front lot line. 
 
(52).  Lot Line, Side:  Any lot line, which is not a front, or rear lot line. 
 
(53).  Lumber Treatment Establishment:  A structure and/or lot used principally for the treatment and preparation of lumber, such as planing mills, sawmills and the like.  Outdoor storage shall be governed by the Site Plan Review Regulations of the Town of Auburn. 
 
(54).  Manufactured Housing:  As defined by N.H. R.S.A. Chapter 674:31.  This definition includes “Mobile Home”, as referred to in this Ordinance.  See also N.H. R.S.A. 205-C and 205-D, regarding State of New Hampshire statutes governing manufactured and modular housing. 
 
(55).  Merger:  Voluntary merger of two or more contiguous lots may be accomplished by the process set forth in Article 3.21(2) of this Ordinance.   
 
(56).  Mobile Home Park:  A lot upon which two or more mobile homes are parked for use for residential purposes, whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. 
 
(57).  Motel:  See “Hotel” definition at Section 2.02(41). 
 
(58).  Multi-Unit Commercial Establishment:  A building or buildings on the same parcel, or more than one parcel, consolidated as a single development, containing two (2) or more non-residential units or condominiums used principally for providing commercial services, such as a sales establishment, commercial service establishment, warehouse establishment and the like. 
 
(59).  Municipal Building:  A building used principally for governmental functions such as town offices, fire department, police department and the like. 
 
(60).  Non-Conforming Building or Structure:  A structure, as defined in this Ordinance, lawfully existing at the effective date of this Ordinance, which is not in accordance with all of the requirements pertaining to buildings or structures for the District in which it is located.  This shall include a building or structure for which a building permit was lawfully issued prior to the posting of the first required legal notice of the adoption of this Ordinance or any subsequent amendment thereto, and for which the construction was completed within one year of the effective date of this Ordinance, or any subsequent amendment thereto, or within the time limit prescribed by the building permit or other approval, whichever is shorter. 
 
(61).  Non-conforming Lot:  A lot lawfully used or existing at the effective date of this Ordinance, or any subsequent amendment thereto, which is not in accordance with all the area, yard, height and frontage requirements of this Ordinance, or any subsequent amendment thereto, for the district in which it is located.  This shall include a lot for which a building permit was lawfully issued prior to the posting of the first required legal notice of the adoption of this Ordinance, or any subsequent amendment thereto, and for which the construction is complete within one year of the effective date of this Ordinance, or any subsequent amendment thereto, or within the time limit prescribed by the building permit or other approval, whichever is shorter. 
 
(62).  Non-Conforming Use:  A use lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, or any subsequent amendment thereto, which does not conform to one or more of the use provisions of this Ordinance or any subsequent amendment thereto.  This shall include a use for which a building permit was lawfully issued prior to the posting of the first required legal notice of the adoption of this Ordinance, or any subsequent amendment thereto, and for which the construction is completed within one year of the effective date of this Ordinance, or any subsequent amendment thereto, or within the time limit prescribed by the building permit or other approval, whichever is shorter. 
 
 
(63).  Nursery School:  A building used principally, or as an accessory use to, a single-family detached dwelling, for pre-elementary, non-public education, where there exists a curriculum and teacher to provide an educational program for children.  A Nursery School shall not be permitted in the Industrial District unless it is accessory and incidental to another permitted business. 
 
 
 
 
(64).  Office Establishment: 
 
(a). Small: A building used principally for offices and/or by those providing professional and quasi-professional services, such as engineers, doctors, bankers, lawyers, accountants, realtors, insurance agents and the like, having less than three thousand (3,000) square feet in floor area. 
 
(b). Large: A building used principally for offices and/or by those providing professional and quasi-professional services, such as engineers, doctors, bankers, lawyers, accountants, realtors, insurance agents and the like, having in excess of three thousand (3,000) square feet in floor area. 
 
(65).  Open Space:  Land unencumbered by any roadway, parking space, service area, impervious surface, individual lot, building or other substantial structure, and designated as open space on a subdivision or site plan. 
 
(66).  Outdoor Commercial Recreation Facility:  A lot and/or structure used principally for outdoor commercial recreation, such as golf courses, miniature golf, fish and game clubs, tennis courts, swimming pools, race tracks, outdoor movie theaters and the like.  If located in a Residential-One (R-1) zone, the use of an outdoor commercial recreation facility shall be limited to a minimum lot size of fifteen (15) acres and shall not include race tracks or outdoor movie facilities. 
 
(67).  Parking Space:  An off-street space, plus access and maneuvering space, whether inside or outside a structure, for use principally as a parking stall for one motor vehicle. 
 
(68).  Permitted Uses:  Use of lots and/or structures that are specifically allowed by this Ordinance without a special exception or variance. 
 
(69).  Permanent Storage Facility: Any carton, freight container, shed, portable storage unit, mobile trailer, tractor trailer, tent or enclosure used for the storage of any material, product or similar item, including household goods, which is either untowable or has been rendered untowable, or, if towable, has remained on the site for an uninterrupted time in excess of three hundred sixty-five (365) days.  All storage facilities and structures, whether temporary or permanent, shall conform to the setbacks within the zoning district and all permanent storage facilities or structures shall require a building permit prior to being located on the site.  Sheds which are not located on a concrete foundation, and which are portable, may be located in the side and rear yard setback, with a building permit, provided they do not exceed one hundred and twenty (120) square feet in area. 
 
(70).  Private Airstrip:  A lot that is used for the landing and takeoff of aircraft and for receiving and discharging passengers and/or cargo, and which is used only as an accessory use to a conforming principal use.  A private airstrip may not involve the conveyance of passengers or cargo for hire. 
 
 
 
 
(71).  Private Education Facility:  Any school, which is not a public educational facility and is not a nursery school, such as a private school offering education for students in any grades K – 12, dance studio, music school, or craft facility.  Any private educational facility shall be subject to site plan review.  A private educational facility shall not be permitted in the Industrial District, unless it is accessory and incidental to another permitted business. 
 
(72).  Produce Stand:  See definition of "Agricultural Use – Produce Stand"  at Section 2.02 (3)(c). 
 
(73).  Public Education Facility:  A building used principally to educate any child of the Town of Auburn, where attendance at such school at the public expense is a right of that child, and any public charter school approved in accordance with N.H. R.S.A. 194-B. 
 
(74).  Public Recreation Facility:  Any lot and/or structure used principally for recreation, built or maintained at the public expense and open generally to the public, such as public tennis courts, ball fields, and parks. 
 
(75).  Public Utility:  A public or private company or governmental agency under the control of the New Hampshire Public Utilities Commission, involved in supplying utility services through erection, construction, alteration or maintenance of gas, electrical, communication, steam or water transmission or distribution systems. 
 
(76).  Repair:  Any construction which replaces materials and does not change the external structural part, height, number of stories, size, use of, or location of a structure. 
 
(77).  Restaurant:  A building or other structure used principally to provide refreshments or meals to the public for consumption principally on the premises, including cafes, lunchrooms, cafeterias, tea rooms, sandwich shops and the like, but not including a fast food restaurant.  This definition does not include a sexually- oriented business. 
 
(78).  Restaurant, Fast Food:  A building used principally to dispense prepared food and/or beverages to the public for consumption on or off the premises, the major attributes of which are assembly line preparation of food and speed of dispensing, self-service by the customer by standing in line, and/or service to the customer in automobiles, and which generates a large volume and rapid turnover of entering and exiting motor vehicle traffic. 
 
(79).  Roadway:  The travel portion of any street, whether paved or unpaved, not including unpaved shoulders, but including paved breakdown lanes. 
 
(80).  Sales Establishment:  A structure and/or lot used principally for the sale of products to the public or at wholesale, such as grocery, drug store, general merchandise store, book store, distributor of goods/products and the like.  Outdoor storage of goods shall be governed by the Site Plan Review Regulations of the Town of Auburn.  This definition does not include a sexually-oriented business. 
 
 
 
(81).  Service Area:  An area of a lot used principally for vehicles to make deliveries to or pick-ups from any structure except a single family detached dwelling.  Parking spaces and driveways shall not be considered part of a service area. 
 
(82).  Sexually-Oriented Business: A business where ten (10%) percent or more of the gross revenues, the stock in trade, or the goods or paraphernalia displayed are of a sexually-oriented or sexually explicit nature.  Other examples of sexually-oriented businesses, include, but are not limited to: theaters or the like where sexually explicit materials are shown depicting sexual conduct; nude modeling studios depicting sexual conduct; sexually-oriented massage parlors; businesses, including restaurants and bars, which offer live nude-dancing, nude wrestling, video booths, adult book stores, or any form or depiction of sexual encounter or conduct; and any escort service offering sexual conduct.  As used in this definition, the term “sexually-oriented goods or paraphernalia” shall have the same meaning as the term “material” defined in N.H. R.S.A. 650:1(III), and the term “sexual conduct” shall have the same meaning as defined in N.H. R.S.A. 650:1(VI). 
 
(83).  Sign:  Any display surface, which is designed to inform or attract attention and contains verbal, graphic or pictorial representations. 
 
(84).  Sign, Area of:  The entire surface area of a sign within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme writing, representation, emblem or figure, but excluding the supports on which the sign is placed.  The area of the largest side of a multi-faced sign shall be regarded as the total area of the sign. 
 
(85).  Single Family Detached Dwelling:  A dwelling which stands apart from other buildings, except accessory buildings, and which is used for residence by a single housekeeping unit, with permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
 
(86).  Site Plan:  A plan showing the location of all buildings, parking areas, abutters, traffic access and circulation drives, open spaces, landscaping and any other pertinent information that the Auburn Planning Board deems necessary in exercising its review of non-residential development, clustered residential development, and multi-unit dwelling site plans, in accordance with N.H. R.S.A. 674. 
 
(87).  Social Facility:  A structure and/or lot used primarily by clubs of a fraternal, social or non-profit nature, to provide a meeting place and/or to conduct the business of said club. 
 
(88).  Special Exception:  A use of a structure or lot which may be allowed under this Ordinance only upon application to, and approval by, the Zoning Board of Adjustment as a Special Exception.  See Section 14.14. 
 
(89).  Stream:  A body of water, including ponds, brooks and wetlands. 
 
(90).  Story:  The portion of a building which is between one floor level and the next higher floor level or the roof.  If a mezzanine floor area exceeds one-third of the area of the floor immediately below, it shall be deemed to be a story.  An attic shall not be deemed to be a story if unfinished and without human occupancy. 
 
 
(91).  Street:  Street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway and other public ways. 
 
(92).  Street Line:  Boundary line of a street right-of-way as dedicated by subdivision plat or deed of record.  Where the boundary line of the street is not established, the street line shall be considered to be twenty-five (25) feet from the centerline of the roadway. 
 
(93).  Structure:  A combination of materials for occupancy or use, such as a building, bridge, trestle, tower, framework, antenna, retaining wall, tank, tunnel, tent, stadium, reviewing stand, shed, in-ground pool, above-ground pool, gazebo, platform, greenhouse, deck, pier, wharf, bin, fence, temporary storage facility, sign or the like, said term to be interpreted in the broadest sense and meaning. 
 
(94).  Subdivision:  The division of a lot into two or more lots, plats, sites or other divisions of land, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, rent, lease, condominium conveyance or building development.  It includes re-subdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or territory subdivided.  The division of a lot held in common and subsequently divided into parts among the several owners shall be deemed a subdivision under this Ordinance.  No development shall be permitted on unlawfully subdivided land without subdivision approval to ensure conformity with the Ordinance and the Subdivision Regulations, plus payment of all applicable civil fines. 
 
(95).  Travel Trailer:  A vehicular, portable structure designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation or vacation, built on or propelled on its own chassis.  This includes pickup coaches, motor homes, recreational vehicles and camp trailers. 
 
(96).  Travel Trailer/Campground:  A lot designed to be used exclusively for the sitting of more than one travel trailer and/or campsite for vacation or recreation purposes. 
 
(97).  Use:  A purpose defined by this Ordinance for which a structure or lot is used, occupied or maintained, or for which it is designated or intended to be used, occupied or maintained. 
 
(98).  Use, Accessory:  A use secondary and subordinate to and customarily incidental to, the principal use of a structure or lot.  An accessory use shall not exceed twenty-five (25%) percent of the total floor area and/or lot area of the structure and/or lot in question, as may be applicable.  Non-commercial agriculture shall not, however, be limited in percentage of lot coverage.  (continue next page) 
 
 
(a). The outdoor storage of products on a lot is solely an accessory use.   
 
(b). Aircraft takeoffs and landings shall be subject to all zoning requirements that pertain to the use of land as a private airstrip. (See definition at 2.02(70).    
 
(c) . In the Industrial District, a private educational facility, a nursery school, or a day care center shall only be permitted as an on-site accessory use to a permitted business and shall be limited to providing services to the children of employees of the permitted business. 
 
 
(99).  Use, Principal:  The main or primary use of a structure or lot, and all activities customarily and directly incidental to and associated with such main use.  The preparation and provision of food primarily for consumption on the premises by the occupants or patrons of a structure or lot, and not generally to the public at large, shall be considered customarily incidental to the principal use thereof. 
 
 
(100).  Utility Substation:  A building and/or other structure, owned and/or operated by a public utility, which is principally used for sheltering, mounting and/or supporting utility equipment, machinery or the like, including electrical relay or generating, telephone switching, sewage pumping stations or the like, but not including the transmission lines alone for gas, electrical, telephone, etc. 
 
 
(101).  Variance:  Such departure from the terms of this Ordinance as the Zoning Board of Adjustment, upon appeal in specific cases, is empowered to authorize as a variance under N.H. R.S.A. 674.33. 
 
 
(102). Veterinary Clinic:  A building and/or other structure used by a licensed veterinarian solely for the practice of veterinary medicine, and not as a kennel. 
 
 
(103).  Warehouse Establishment:  A building or other structure used principally for the storage of products, including finished goods, fuels, lumber, food and chemicals, whether or not involving the wholesaling or retailing of such products principally off the premises. 
 
 
 (104). Water Supply Works:  Any building and/or other structure used by a public utility principally for the supply of water to the public, including a filtration plant, pumping station or the like, but not including water transmission lines alone. 
 
 
(105).  Wetlands:  Pursuant to N.H. R.S.A. 482-A:2.X, an area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal conditions does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. 
 
 
 
(106). Yard:  A portion of a lot, whether for landscaping or open purposes, that immediately abuts any building located on said lot. 
 
(a). Front Yard:  A yard extending for the full width of the lot between the nearest building wall and the front lot line. 
 
(b). Side Yard:  A yard extending for the full width of the lot between the nearest building wall and the side lot line. 
 
(c.) Rear Yard:  A yard extending for the full width of the lot between the nearest building wall and the rear lot line. 
 
 
ARTICLE 3 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
3.01  Uses Not Defined 
 
Any existing or proposed use of a structure or lot that is not specifically defined by this Ordinance shall be deemed to be the same as the use to which it is most closely analogous.  In the event that the use is not clearly analogous to a permitted use, as defined by this Ordinance, it shall be a prohibited use. 
 
3.02 Conformance with Regulations 
 
In any district, no structure or lot shall hereafter be originally used and no building shall be erected or altered until a Building Permit and a Certificate of Occupancy have been issued in accordance with the provisions of Article 13 of this Ordinance. 
 
3.03 Activity in Floodway 
 
In any district, there shall be no development, within a floodway, as such is defined in Article 6, “Flood Plain Development Regulations.” 
 
3.04  Frontage 
 
All building lots within the Town of Auburn shall have their minimum required road frontage upon a Class V or better road within the Town of Auburn.  All new building lots within the Town of Auburn shall have their minimum required road frontage upon a Class V or better paved road within the Town of Auburn. 
 
3.05 Non-Conforming Uses and Lots 
 
(1). Non-Conforming Use 
 
Any non-conforming use may be continued indefinitely, but it shall not be: 
 
 (a). Altered except as provided herein in Section 3.05(2); 
 
(b). Changed to another non-conforming use without approval by the Zoning Board of Adjustment as a special exception; or 
 
(c). Reestablished if such use has been abandoned for a continuous period of one (1) year. 
 
(2). Repair and Expansion of Non-Conforming Uses and Structures 
 
(a).  Removal and replacement of a non-conforming structure, including a building, shall comply with all applicable requirements of this Ordinance and the current Building and Life Safety Codes for the Town of Auburn, unless the owner receives a variance from the Zoning Board of Adjustment.  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent normal maintenance and repair of a non-conforming structure, provided that such repair or maintenance does not increase the degree of nonconformity. 
 
(b).   As a special exception the Zoning Board may allow up to a ten (10%) percent expansion in the building area of a conforming building subject to a non-conforming use, provided it is not located on a non-conforming lot.  The Zoning Board may impose conditions on the expansion which include, but are not limited to, bringing the entire structure into conformity with existing Building and Life Safety codes.  The percentage expansion permitted in this subparagraph (b) shall not be cumulative with subparagraph (c) and any percentage allowed under subparagraphs (b) and (c) shall not exceed ten (10%) percent in the aggregate. 
 
 (c). As a special exception, the Zoning Board may allow up to a ten (10%) percent expansion of a non-conforming use on a conforming lot which is not contained in a building, provided the proposed expansion otherwise meets the criteria for a special exception, and conforms with all other requirements for the District.  The percentage expansion permitted in this subparagraph (c) shall not be cumulative with subparagraph (b) and any percentage allowed under subparagraphs (b) and (c) shall not exceed ten (10%) percent in the aggregate. 
 
(d).   Any expansion of a non-conforming use or non-conforming structure on a non-conforming lot shall require a variance from the Zoning Board.  See also 3.05(4)(b). 
 
(e). Any expansion of a non-conforming use or non-conforming structure other than that of a single-family residence and its accessory uses, shall be subject to Site Plan review and approval. 
 
(3). Non-Conforming Mobile Homes 
 
All mobile homes shall be located in the Residential-Two (R-2) zoning district.  Any non-conforming mobile home use may be continued indefinitely, subject to the restrictions of Sections 3.05(1) and 3.05(2) herein, except that any movement of the mobile home from the lot upon which it is located shall constitute abandonment. 
 
(4). Non-Conforming Lots 
 
(a). Existing:  Any lawful use of a non-conforming lot existing at the effective date of this Ordinance, or any amendment thereto, whether a conforming use or a non-conforming use, may be continued indefinitely, subject to the restrictions of Sections 3.05(1) and 3.05(2) of this Ordinance.   
 
(b). Expansion:   Expansion of a conforming building, or construction of a new conforming building on a non-conforming lot, (provided the use is conforming), shall be permitted if all structures in the aggregate do not 
exceed five (5%) percent of the area of the lot, the expansion or new building meets all current Building and Life Safety Codes, and the non-conforming lot meets all zoning requirements except for frontage and lot size.  Buildings on a non-conforming lot which exceed the five percent (5%) area requirement, which do not meet all current Building and Life Safety Codes, or where the non-conforming lot does not meet all zoning requirements except for frontage and lot size, shall require a variance from the Zoning Board of Adjustment.   
 
(5). Wetland Lots 
 
(a). Any lot which is a non-conforming lot by reason of its inability to comply with the sewage disposal system requirements of this Ordinance, or to the minimum yard requirements for the district in which it is located, due solely to the effect of wetlands; or 
 
(b). which, if created by subdivision after the effective date of this Ordinance, or any amendment thereto, would have to consist of five (5) acres or more in order to conform to the sewage disposal system requirements of this Ordinance, or to the minimum yard requirements for the district in which it is located, due solely to the effect of wetlands, may be also used for any of the following purposes, regardless of the district in which it is located: 
 
(i). Commercial Agriculture - Forestry only; and 
 
(ii). Water Supply Works. 
 
3.06 Sanitary Protection 
 
(1). All sewage disposal systems within the Town of Auburn shall make disposal in a manner which will not be a nuisance or detrimental to public health.  In addition, the following criteria must be met: 
 
(a). The construction of septic systems for new single family detached dwellings shall be designed to handle a minimum of three bedrooms. 
 
(b).  All septic systems must be at least one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from a dug private well, surface water and any wetland, and at least seventy-five (75) feet from a drilled private well, except when a lesser set back will provide protection of these areas and their uses, provided conclusive evidence of that protection has been submitted to and approved by the Planning Board.   
 
(c).   If a state approved non-conforming septic system is in failure, it may be replaced with a system which is in the same location, provided the system has been approved by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services and meets the criteria for replacement in kind. 
 
(2). No sewage disposal system shall be constructed, altered or replaced without a building permit from the Auburn Building Inspector.  The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a design sketch of dwellings, wells and other sources of water.  The permit shall not be issued until the system has been approved by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services. 
 
(3). No building permit shall be issued for a new structure which involves the generation of sewage waste until the sewage disposal system has been approved by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services. 
 
(4). No building permit shall be issued for the expansion of an existing structure that would require enlarging the on-site septic system, unless the system is approved by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services. 
 
3.07 Utilities 
 
(1). The developer shall coordinate development design with the appropriate utility companies to ensure adequate and suitable area for underground installations. 
 
(2). The developer shall be responsible for providing for water mains, manholes, sanitary services, culverts and catch basins, if required. 
 
3.08 Parking 
 
(1). General Requirements 
 
Parking spaces for all uses subject to Site Plan Review shall be as prescribed by the Auburn Planning Board in accordance with its Regulations.  All residential uses shall be provided with at least three (3) parking spaces per dwelling. 
 
(2). Temporary 
 
Travel trailers, boats, or other automotive accessory equipment not used for human occupancy except on weekend trips and the like may be parked but not occupied in any district in any parking space, provided it does not interfere with the parking required on that premises. 
 
(3). Commercial Parking 
 
No motor truck or tractor-trailer and/or semi-truck or trailer as defined in N.H. R.S.A. 259 shall be parked overnight in any Residential Zone, including on the public streets. 
 
(4). Screened Service Area Requirement 
 
All service areas for any building or land use shall be screened from external view by a wall, a solid fence and evergreens, or the like, to a height of at least six (6) feet above grade level on each side of the service area, except for the entrance. 
 
(5). Off- Street Parking Requirements 
 
In any district, if any structure is constructed, enlarged, or extended, and any use of land established, or any existing use is changed, after the effective date of this Ordinance, parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the Auburn Site Plan Review Regulations.  An existing structure which is enlarged or an existing use which is extended after the effective date of this Ordinance shall be required to provide parking spaces in accordance with the Site Plan Review Regulations for the entire structure or use, unless the increase in number of units or square footage measurement amounts to less than ten (10%) percent, regardless of whether such increase occurs at one time or in successive stages. 
 
(6). Location of Parking Spaces 
 
Required off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot as the principal use they are required to serve; or, when practical difficulties as determined by the Planning Board prevent their establishment upon the same lot, they shall be established no farther than two hundred (200) feet from the lot upon which is located the principal use which they are to serve. 
 
(7). Parking Space Standards 
 
All parking areas containing over five (5) spaces shall be either contained within structures, or subject to all of the following: 
 
(a). The area shall be effectively screened on each side which adjoins or faces the side or rear lot line of an adjacent lot situated in any Residential District; 
 
(b). The area, access driveways and service areas thereto shall be surfaced with bituminous or cement concrete material and shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water accumulation;  
 
(c). A substantial bumper of masonry, steel or heavy timber, or a concrete curb or berm curb which is backed shall be placed at the edge of surfaced areas, except access driveways, in order to protect abutting structures, properties and sidewalks; and  
 
(d). Parking spaces shall be so arranged as not to necessitate backing of automobiles onto any street. 
 
 (8). Parking of Vehicle for Sale from Residential Property 
 
  The parking of vehicles for sale from a residential property is restricted to one 
 vehicle to which the property owner holds title. 
 
3.09 Nuisance Provision 
 
(1). Any use or other establishment which is persistently and materially obnoxious, or that may be injurious or obnoxious because of the production or emission of smoke, fumes, dust, odor, refuse material, noise, vibration, radiation or like condition, or that endangers the health, safety, peace or enjoyment of the community, or tending to its disturbance or annoyance, is prohibited.   
 
(2). The accumulation of junk, as defined in N.H. R.S.A. 236:112, et seq., without a certificate of approved location from the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a current license from the Board of Selectmen, or in non-conformity with the New Hampshire statutes pertaining to junk yards, is hereby deemed a nuisance in the Town of Auburn.  The Board of Selectmen administer the licensing procedures for junkyards, set forth in N.H. R.S.A. 236:111, et seq. The Board of Selectmen shall require site plan approval from the Planning Board as part of the application process. 
 
(3). No privately owned and/or privately operated commercial collection facility, transfer station, trans-shipment facility, compaction facility, landfill, incineration facility or other facility for the commercial handling, transfer, treatment, disposal or other use or disposition of solid waste, refuse, trash, garbage, and/or other putrescible material shall be a permitted use anywhere in the Town of Auburn. 
 
3.10 Sign Regulations 
 (1). Purpose 
The purpose of this section is to provide reasonable uniformity in the size and treatment of signs used to call attention to the existence of a business or activity.  These regulations are intended to prevent signs from detracting from the overall rural character of the Town.  These regulations are intended to preserve the Town’s character, protect the safety and welfare of the public, and recognize the need for adequate business identification in advertising. 
(2).  Definitions 
  
a) A-Frame /Sandwich Board Sign:   A self-supporting, free standing sign, sized a maximum of 4 feet in height and 2 feet in width, shaped like an “A” that is easily moveable and temporary in nature.     

b) Awning Sign:  Any visual message (letters, words, logos) incorporated into an awning attached to a building.  If the awning only contains a street address and no other letters or words it is not considered a sign. 

c) Changeable Copy Sign:  A sign on which the visual message may be manually changed (example, reader board) 

d) Complex:  Either commercial or industrial structure(s) with two or more tenant spaces or divisions. 

e) Directional Sign:  A sign limited to providing directional or guide information on the most direct or simple route for on-site public safety and convenience. Directional signs may be located adjacent to driveways. Examples, “IN”, “OUT”, “ENTRANCE”, “EXIT”, and “PARKING”.  Directional signs may not contain business names, slogans, or logos, unless the business is not directly visible from the public way. 


f) Electronic Reader Board:  A sign, or portion thereof, with characters, letters or illustrations that can be electronically changes or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign. 

g) Freestanding Sign:  Any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure. 

h) Historic Plaque:  A marker, erected by federal, state or local authority identifying a historic place, name or date. 

i) Illuminated Sign:  Any sign illuminated from the interior or exterior of the sign. 

j) Projecting Sign:  Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than twelve inches beyond the surface of such building or wall. 

k) Roof line:  Shall be the lower border of a roof that overhangs the wall (the projecting edge of the roof) 

l) Roof Sign:  Any sign that extends above the roof line of a building to which it is attached. 

m) Seasonal Agricultural Sign:  Sign displayed during the harvest season of the item advertised. 

n) Sign:  any words, lettering, parts of letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs, trade names, or trademarks by which anything is made known, such as are used to designate an individual, a firm, an association, a corporation, a profession, a business, or a commodity or product, which are visible from a public street or right of way and used to attract attention. 

o) Sign Area:  Shall be that contiguous image area of the sign that could be used to communicate visually the advertised message; support structures and embellishments used to enhance the visual look of the sign shall not be counted in the sign area calculations so long as they are no more than 15% of the total sign area. 

p) Unit:  Shall consist of only one primary structure per lot with one and only one tenant space. 

q) Wall Sign:  Any sign attached parallel to, but within twelve inches of a wall, painted on the wall surface, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign. 

r) Window Sign:  illuminated and non-illuminated signs placed in the windows of a structure and viewed or intended to be viewed from outside the structure. 3.20 Wireless Communication Facilities, Antennas and Communications Towers 





 
 
 
(3). Signs Permitted in Any District 
(a). One sign per lot not exceeding two (2) square feet in area and bearing only property numbers, post office box numbers, names of occupants of the premises or other non-commercial identification. 
(b). One temporary sign per lot not exceeding four (4) square feet in area advertising the sale or lease of, or construction on, the premises on which it is located.  A temporary sign for such purposes greater than four (4) but less than twenty (20) square feet in area may be permitted by Special Exception.  Such temporary signs shall not be permitted for longer than a one (1) year period except by a subsequent Special Exception.  A temporary sign naming a residential development not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area may be permitted by the Planning Board as part of Site Plan or Subdivision Review, until such time as the development has been substantially completed or a permanent sign has been erected, whichever is sooner. 
(c). Legal notices and signs erected or authorized by any public agency having jurisdiction thereof. 
(d). One sign per lot not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area, bearing only the identification of and information concerning the occupant or activity of premises used for religious, charitable, educational or philanthropic purposes. 
(e). Political Signs.  These are subject to NH RSA 664:14-664:18, as may be amended and enforcement shall be through the office of the NH Attorney General. 
(f) “Open” flags measuring 15 sq. ft. in size and attached to the building or a permanent base shall be allowed in all districts.  Only one flag is allowed per business.  National, State, and US military flags are exempt. 
(4). Signs Permitted in the Rural and Residential Districts 
 
(a). In addition to those signs permitted by Section 3.10(3), one sign not exceeding four (4) square feet in area shall be permitted for each home office, home business, or home shop on any single lot in the Rural or Residential districts, to identify the occupant or activity of the lot on which it is located. 
(b). One sign conforming to the requirements of Section 3.10(6) of this Ordinance may also be allowed by Special Exception on any single lot in a Rural or Residential district. 
(c).  One unlit sign naming a residential development may be approved by the Planning Board as part of subdivision or site plan review approval.  The sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet, shall be durably constructed, solidly erected, and provisions shall be made, to the satisfaction of the Planning Board, for future maintenance of the sign.  No such sign shall be placed within the public right of way, unless such placement has been approved by both the Planning Board and the Town 
Road Agent.  Any approval by the Planning Board and the Town Road Agent for placement of such a sign shall be deemed a temporary license, which may be revoked without cause at any time by either the Town Road Agent and/or the Planning Board. 
(5). Signs Permitted in the Commercial and Industrial Districts 
(a).  In addition to those signs permitted by Section 3.10(3), one sign not exceeding forty (40) square feet in area shall be permitted on any single lot in a Commercial or Industrial district, to identify the occupant or activity of the lot on which it is located.  For those uses subject to Site Plan Review, the Planning Board may allow additional such signs conforming to the requirements of Section 3.10(6) of this Ordinance. 
For those uses in the Commercial and Industrial zones subject to Subdivision or Site Plan Review, the Planning Board may, upon application, waive the dimensional requirement of forty (40) square feet in area or permit more than one sign on a single lot, upon a showing to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that an additional sign or increase in square footage is appropriate for the particular development, is consistent with the nature of the proposed use, will not detract from the overall appearance of the development, and is in keeping with the zone.  Any increase in total combined square footage beyond sixty (60) square feet, and any increase beyond two signs, shall require a Special Exception from the Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
(b). One sign conforming to the requirements of Section 3.10(6) of this Ordinance shall also be permitted on any single lot in a Commercial or Industrial district. 
(6). General Requirements 
(a). All signs (except for pre-existing non-conforming signs) must conform to these regulations and the most recently adopted Building Code. 
(b). Signs placement from property lines and edge of traveled roadway shall comply with Sign Specification Chart.(c ). Each sign must have its own support.  Posting of signs on trees, utility poles, vehicular control standards, (stop signs, etc.), or fences is expressly prohibited. 
(c). Only one sign shall be permitted on a single lot unless specified otherwise within this article.  
 
(d). Signs shall be durably constructed, solidly erected and properly maintained at all times. 
 
(e). No sign shall be erected in or project over any public right-of-way, unless such sign is erected or authorized by a public agency having jurisdiction over the right-of-way. 
 
(f). No new sign shall materially impair the visibility of any previously erected sign. 
 
(g).  No permanent special attention getting devices, such as pennants, strings, or flags, (other than the United States flag or State of New Hampshire flag), shall appear on or near any sign. 
 
(h). Any sign illuminator, whether temporary or permanent, other than gaseous tube letter signs, shall be so placed or hooded that the lighting source itself shall not be directly visible at any point beyond the lot lines of the premises illuminated.  Any illuminated sign shall be lighted only during the hours when the associated establishment is open for business. 
 
(i). No sign or its illuminator shall, by reason of its location, shape or color, interfere with traffic or be confused with or obstruct the view or effectiveness of any public traffic sign, traffic signal or traffic marking. 
 
(j). Signs for uses allowed in any district only as a Special Exception shall be subject to such additional requirements as the Zoning Board may impose. 
 
(7). Non-Conforming Signs. 
(a). Any conforming sign advertising and located on the same premises with a non-conforming use, may be maintained, repaired and replaced during the life of the non-conforming use, but shall not be altered. 
(b). Any other non-conforming sign may be maintained, however replacement of sign must conform with provisions of the most current Zoning Ordinance provisions 
 
(8). Prohibited Signs 
    
The following signs shall be prohibited within all zoning districts of the Town. 
  
(a). Beacon or flashing signs. Signs which feature flashing or rotating lights, strobes strands of lights, animation, scrolling or moving parts. 
 
  (b).  Electronic Reader Boards. 
 
  (c.) Hazardous signs.  Signs that interfere with pedestrian or vehicular  
traffic, distract or confuse motorists, are in the state of disrepair, or  
are otherwise potentially hazardous to the public. 
 
  (d).  Inflatable signs.  Any sign of flexible material that maintains its shape  
   by means of inflation. 
 
(e).  Offsite signs.  Signs or billboards advertising or identifying businesses not located on the same parcel or lot as the sign. 
  
  (f)   Signs on vehicles/trailers.  No sign affixed to a transportation vehicle  
either independently propelled or towable which is parked on a location for the purpose of advertising shall be allowed except where allowed by other sections of this ordinance.  
 
  (g) No sign shall extend above the roof line of the building to which it is  
   attached.  Roof signs are not allowed. 
 
(9).   Temporary Signs. 
 
  (a). Temporary signs shall not require a permit. 
 
(b)  Temporary signs shall be securely anchored at a stationary location, shall be non-motorized and non-moving, and shall not be lit or illuminated in any way. 
 
(c).  Temporary signs shall not be displayed for more than 30 consecutive days.  
    
(d).  One (1) temporary A Frame sandwich board sign, maximum 4’ in height and 2’ in width is permitted per commercial business and does not require a temporary sign permit.  The sign must be placed on the parcel on which the business is located.  The sandwich board shall be removed when the business is not in operation, or when weather conditions, such as wind, create potentially hazardous situations. 
 
(e) Any Auburn civic organization, non-profit group, religious, educational or other similar entity, may place a temporary sign, a maximum of 24 square feet in area, which advertises an event for that meeting or group. 
 
(f) One unlighted temporary sign (no larger than 32 sq. ft. in size) advertising “Coming Soon”,“Grand Re-Opening” or similar event may be displayed while a business is under construction and until its opening.  The “Coming Soon”, “Grand Re-Opening” or similar sign must meet the setback requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
 
(g)  Per state law, no temporary sign may be placed on State-owned property or within the State right-of-way, as referenced by NH RSA 236:69-89, and enforcement shall be through the NH Department of Transportation. 
 
 
 
 
Zoning District 
 I 
 C-1 
 C-2 
 V 
 R-1 
 R-2 
 R 
  
 

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Minimum  Setback (ft.) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
front lot line 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 10' 
 10' 
 10' 
  
 
side lot line 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 20' 
 20' 
 20' 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Maximum Height  (ft.) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
From Grade  (Artificial grading of landscape is not allowed for the purpose of enhancing the sign's height) 
 
Total Achieved Height 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Free Standing Sign 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 15' 
 15' 
 15' 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Maximum Sign Area (sq. ft.) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Free standing sign (structure) 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 NP 
 NP 
 NP 
  
 
Free standing sign (complex) 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 NP 
 NP 
 NP 
  
 
Wall sign 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 NP 
 NP 
 NP 
  
 
home occupation 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 4 
 4 
 4 
  
 
Changeable Copy  (sq. ft.) 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 * 
 NP 
 NP 
 NP 
  
 
Legend 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
NP = Not Permitted 
*  = To Be Determined 
      By Site Plan Review 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 


3.11 Temporary and Permanent Storage Facilities 
 
The use of any structure, (including but not limited to cartons, tents, tractor trailers, mobile trailers, portable storage units and freight containers), for permanent storage shall require a building permit and shall meet all zoning district setback requirements.  For purposes of this Article, “permanent” usage is defined as more than 180 days. 
 
The use of portable structure, (including but not limited to cartons, tents, tractor trailers, mobile trailers, portable storage units or freight containers), for less than 180 days will be considered temporary, it need not meet zoning district setback requirements, and no building permit will be required, unless the storage structure is permanently affixed to the ground. 
 
Temporary storage in a portable structure which does not meet zoning district setback requirements may be permitted by the Building Inspector for construction purposes, but only for such time as the property is under active construction. 
 
3.12  Underground Storage Regulation 
 
(1). Purpose:  The purpose of these rules is threefold: 
 
(a). To regulate facilities which may significantly and adversely affect the ground waters of the Town of Auburn; 
 
(b). To set forth the regulatory requirements which apply to certain underground storage facilities in the Town of Auburn; and 
 
(c).  To minimize contamination of the waters of the Town due to the storage and handling of hazardous substances, motor fuels, heating oils and lubricating oils. 
 
(2).  Applicability:  These rules apply to all new, modified or replacement residential and non-residential underground storage facilities where the capacity of any one tank or cumulative volume of all tanks is one hundred (100) gallons or greater. 
 
(3). Minimum Standards for New Underground Storage Facilities:  These minimum standards are supplemental to the regulatory requirements of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services [N.H.D.E.S.].  Any new, modified or replacement residential and/or non-residential underground storage facilities shall also comply with the N.H. D.E.S. regulations. 
 
Prior to commencing construction or installation, substantial modification, or replacement of existing facilities, an owner shall submit three (3) copies of plans and specifications to the Planning Board, at a duly notified public hearing, and obtain approval of said plans.  One copy shall go to the Auburn Volunteer Fire Department, one copy to the Auburn Building Inspector and one copy to the Auburn Planning Board.  All facilities shall be designed by an engineer licensed to practice in the State of New Hampshire.  All new underground storage facilities shall be designed and constructed to provide the maximum practicable protection against failure, and shall, at a minimum, conform to the following standards: 
 
(a). Tanks shall be constructed of fiberglass-reinforced plastics or stainless steel; 
 
(b). A leak detection system shall be installed; 
 
(c). Secondary containment shall be installed; and 
 
(d). Pipe fittings shall be made of non-corrosive materials. 
Leak monitoring shall be accomplished by an in-tank monitoring system consisting of in-tank equipment which provides continuous monitoring of any leakage from the tank two-tenths (0.2) of a gallon per hour or larger, or an approved equal.  All piping shall be equipped with a UL approved line leak detector on the discharge side of the pump. 
 
Secondary containment shall consist of a concrete vault, water tight and impervious to leakage.  The vault shall be a continuous structure with a chemical resistant water stop at any joint.  Only top entry manholes are allowed.  The vault shall be designed to withstand all expected internal and external forces.  At least one port shall be provided for pumping leakage. 
 
 
3.13  Multi-Family Dwellings  
 
 
(1). New Construction and Conversions of Existing Buildings to Multi-Family Dwelling Units 
 
All new construction of multi-family dwellings and conversions of existing buildings, except for conversion apartments, shall be subject to Town of Auburn Site Plan Review Regulations and the following requirements: 
 
(a). multi-unit dwellings shall have minimum lot sizes no less than the acreage requirement per dwelling unit for the zoning district in which the dwelling is to be located.  (March 2018) 
 
(b) For each unit of a multi-family dwelling, the floor area per unit shall not exceed five (5%) percent of the minimum lot size, nor be less than eight hundred (800) square feet. 
 
(c). Each multi-family dwelling shall have a sufficient communal water system and communal sewage system approved by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services and the Auburn Building Inspector pursuant to Section 3.06 of this Ordinance. 
 
(d). No multi-family dwelling shall be closer than eighty (80) feet to another building, except an accessory building. 
 
(e). A timetable for completion of the development shall be established, and provision made to indemnify the occupants of the development or the Town, should the development not be completed to the satisfaction of the Planning Board. 
 
(f). Unless identified on the site plan as land available for future development, all areas designated on the site plan as open space shall be permanently maintained as such, and shall be guaranteed as such by a restrictive covenant describing the established open space area. 
 
(g.) The following uses shall be permitted in designated open space areas: 
 
(i). Outdoor recreation such as golf, swimming, tennis, skating, hiking and riding trails, and all other forms of predominantly outdoor recreation, except shooting ranges; 
 
(ii). Accessory buildings and other structures incidental to outdoor recreation, as set forth above, where said accessory structures are necessary to the pursuit of a permitted recreational use on the premises; 
 
(iii). Where an open area is designated on the Site Plan as a "natural area" or “conservation area,” no recreation other than passive uses such as fishing, swimming, hiking and canoeing shall be permitted if it will alter any of the natural features. No land improvements, accessory buildings or other structures shall be permitted in a natural or conservation area. 
 
(2). Conversion Apartments: 
 
(a). The minimum lot size for a conversion apartment shall be at least two (2) acres, but shall be larger if necessary to adequately support expanded use of water, sewage, parking and other related demands, as determined by the Planning Board after a preliminary determination by the Building Inspector. 
 
(b). Existing structures being converted may not be expanded more than the lesser of either twenty-five (25%) percent beyond existing floor area or two hundred (200) square feet.  The proposed expansion beyond said guidelines shall result in the project being treated as one for a multi-unit dwelling, and subject it to the requirements of Section 13.02 (1) of this Ordinance. 
 
(c).  Sewage disposal systems shall be expanded if necessary to meet the requirements of any additional use of the system, as determined by the Planning Board after a preliminary determination by the Building Inspector. 
 
3.14 Manufactured Housing 
 
Manufactured Housing shall be permitted in the R (Rural), R-1 (Residential-One) and R-2 (Residential-Two) Districts.  The Manufactured Housing shall be sited on the lot such that it conforms to all zoning requirements for a single-family dwelling.  Additionally, it shall be positioned to obtain the most benefit from natural screening.  Only permanent installation where the travel wheels have been removed shall be allowed.  Permanent foundations shall be provided in the same manner as for a dwelling.  All Manufactured Housing shall comply with and be sited in accordance with N.H. R.S.A. 205-D, Manufactured Housing Installation Standards, Article Six of this Ordinance, (Flood Plain Development Regulations), and the National Plumbing Code.  In the event of a conflict in the above statutes or codes, the more stringent provision(s) shall apply. 
 
 
3.15 Travel Trailer Park/Travel Trailer 
 
(1).  Travel trailers shall not be used for permanent living or housekeeping purposes. 
 
 (2).  Travel trailer parks may be allowed by Special Exception, provided that travel trailers shall be used only for vacation and recreational purposes.  All travel trailer parks shall require site plan approval by the Planning Board and shall 
have a density of no more than eight (8) units per acre, excluding wetlands, lakes, brooks, streams, slopes in excess of twenty (20%) percent and other unusable areas.  Opening and closing dates shall be determined at the time of site plan review.   
  
 (3).  An individual travel trailer may be stored on land owned by the owner of such travel trailer, provided that it shall not be used for living or housekeeping purposes and its condition, appearance and the place where it is stored shall not be detrimental to the neighborhood or other property in the vicinity.   
 
3.16 Animal Husbandry 
 
Animal husbandry shall be conducted in accordance with the restrictions and regulations of the Town of Auburn and State Health and Sanitary Codes and the Best Management Practices for animal husbandry as published by the State of New Hampshire Department of Agriculture, Food and Markets, most recent edition. For further protection of the health and general welfare of the community, and of water supplies, the following shall apply. 
 
(1). Waste manure shall be stored or stockpiled at a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet from wetlands, water bodies, and/or drainage swales, and a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet from abutting houses, and in such a way as to prevent runoff from reaching such areas. 
 
(2). A minimum of one (1) contiguous dry acre of land, available to the livestock, shall be required for any animal husbandry.  No livestock shall be housed or grazed in a wet area. 
 
3.17 Forestry:   
 
(1). Purpose:  The Town of Auburn acknowledges the statement by the New Hampshire Legislature that forestry, when practiced in accord with accepted silvicultural principles, constitutes a beneficial and desirable use of New Hampshire’s forest resource.  The Town of Auburn also acknowledges the importance of its forested area and wetlands in preserving the rural and open character of the Town.  Poor forestry practices can damage wetlands and degrade the quality of the watershed. 
 
(2).   Planning Board Review:  Prior to the commencement of timber harvesting, the landowner or designated agent shall submit a written plan to the Town of Auburn Planning Board identifying any wetlands that will be impacted by the timber harvesting and outlining any site restoration and wetlands protection that will be necessary in order to protect the impacted wetlands.  The owner or designated agent shall then meet with the Planning Board for the purpose of reviewing and discussing site restoration and wetlands protection.  The meeting shall take place prior to the commencement of timber harvesting activity. 
 
 
(3).   The Building Inspector shall be authorized to enforce this provision, to issue cease and desist orders, and to pursue all available legal remedies in the event the applicant fails to honor the site restoration and wetlands protection plan. 
 
(4). The provisions of the section shall not apply to timber harvesting activities of two (2) acres or less.   
 
 
3.18 Excavation and Soil Removal 
 
Excavation and soil removal is permissible as a commercial and industrial activity provided that a permit is issued pursuant to the Town of Auburn Excavation Regulations and that site plan approval is secured from the Planning Board.  No permit or site plan approval shall be issued without independent studies confirming that the activity will have no negative impact on the surrounding area, which may be evidenced by, but not limited to: diminution in surrounding property values; unreasonable change in the character of the neighborhood; unreasonable acceleration in the deterioration of highways; creation of health or safety hazards; negative impact on water supplies, (including aquifers and aquifer recharge areas); and/or negative impact on wetlands or other natural environmental conditions.  In addition, no permit or site plan approval shall be issued where the activity would create a general nuisance.  
3.19 The Use and Disposal of Sewage Sludge and Septage 
(1).   Purpose and Intent 
 
The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the public health and safety of the citizens of the Town by imposing additional requirements for the land application and surface disposal of sewage sludge, as well as requirements which are more stringent than the requirements set forth in 40 United States Code of Federal Regulations 503.1, et seq.  See 40 C.F.R. 503.5(b).  If at any time the Federal Government, State of New Hampshire, or the County of Rockingham adopts a more stringent requirement than the corresponding requirement of this Ordinance, the more stringent requirement shall control.  The words and terms of this Ordinance shall be defined as set forth in the 1994 edition of 40 C.F.R. 503.1, et seq. 
(2).   Residential, Commercial and Industrial Districts 
 
The use and disposal of sewage sludge, including, but not limited to, the stockpiling, treatment, and land application of sewage sludge is hereby prohibited in the Residential, Commercial and Industrial Districts of the Town of Auburn.  The stockpiling and treatment of septage for land application, and land application of the same, are hereby prohibited in the Residential, Commercial and Industrial Districts of the Town of Auburn. 
(3).   Rural District 
 
The land application of Class A Sewage Sludge is permissible in the Rural District provided that any person who stockpiles, hauls, treats, or land applies Class A Sewage Sludge must meet the requirements which are set forth in this Ordinance, as well as any and all State and Federal standards or requirements, including the applicable requirements of 40 C.F.R. 503.1 et seq. 
 
No other class of sewage sludge, including Class B, C, or any lesser class, shall be stockpiled, treated, or applied in the Rural District.  Class A Sewage sludge suitable for land application shall be limited to sewage sludge from municipal secondary or advanced waste water treatment facilities.  Under no circumstances will sewage sludge generated from incineration, grit, screenings or industrial facilities be deemed suitable for land application.  Under no circumstances will sewage sludge containing hazardous waste be deemed suitable for land application in the Town of Auburn.  The stockpiling 
and treatment of septage for land application, and land application of the same, are prohibited in the Rural District. 
 
In order to safeguard against adverse water quality and public health effects, all sludge transported into, stockpiled within, or land applied in a Rural District must meet both the Class A pathogen requirements of 40 C.F.R. 503.32 (a) and the vector control requirements of 40 C.F.R. 503.33 (a) (1), before it is transported into the Town of Auburn. 
(4).   Reporting Requirements 
 
In addition to complying with all record keeping and reporting requirements imposed by the State of New Hampshire and the United States Government, any person planning to transport to, stockpile on, treat, or land apply sewage sludge in the Rural District shall submit all of the following information to the Planning Board for Site Plan Review and approval, at least ninety (90) days in advance of taking receipt of the sewage sludge: 
 
(a).  A site map that illustrates the following with respect to any area in which sludge is to be stockpiled, treated or applied to land: 
 
 (i). The location of the stockpiling area(s); 
 (ii). The location and limits of the land application area(s); 
(iii). All wetlands areas, streams and open bodies of water within two hundred and fifty (250) feet of the stockpiling, treatment and land application area(s); 
 (iv). All adjacent wells, including the wells of all abutters; 
(v). All previous adjacent stockpiling, treatment, and land application sites; 
(vi). All haul roads; and 
(vii). All property boundaries. 
 
(b).  A written report containing: 
 
(i). The name, address, telephone number, and the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit number of the sludge generating facility; 
(ii). The name address, telephone number, and the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit number of any and all sewage sludge treatment facilities, if different from the generating facility; 
(iii). The name, address, and telephone number of the sewage sludge hauler; 
(iv). Laboratory reports of all test results; 
(v). The planned delivery date, or delivery dates; 
(vi). The planned stockpiling time period and location; 
(vii). A description of any planned treatment; 
(viii). A narrative description of the treatment method used to meet Class A Sewage Sludge requirements; 
(ix). The total surface area of the planned application(s); 
(x) . The total sludge volume to be applied; 
(xi). Previous land application data, including the cumulative site loading to date, and the site loading from the previous two (2) 
years; 
(xii). The number of land applications that can be performed without exceeding the cumulative pollutant loading rate set forth in Table Two (2) of 40 C.F.R. 503.13; 
(xiii). The name, address and telephone number of the person planning to stockpile, treat, or land apply the Sewage Sludge; and 
(xiv). If the applicant does not own the land, evidence in writing that the owner of land in the Rural District consents to the stockpiling, treatment, and/or application of Sewage Sludge to the land by the applicant. 
 
No applicant shall take delivery of any Sewage Sludge until such time as the Planning Board, or its duly authorized representative, has provided the applicant with approval in writing.  Such approval shall not be automatically given by the Board, but rather shall only be given once the Board has been fully satisfied that the applicant has met the reporting requirements of this Section, and has demonstrated to the Board that the proposed application will not present a general nuisance, health, or public safety risk to the applicant, the abutters of the applicant and any parcels which will be subject to land application. 
(5).  Stockpiling, Treatment and Land Application 
 
(a). The stockpiling of all Class A Sewage Sludge shall be done in conformance of all State of New Hampshire and United States government requirements, including the requirements of 40 C.F.R. 503.1, et seq.  In addition, Class A Sewage Sludge may only be stockpiled on site if it is properly contained and covered to prevent airborne dispersal of sludge from the pile, storm water transport of the sludge and infiltration of leachate from the Sewage Sludge into the ground water.  Sewage sludge shall not be stockpiled for more than ninety (90) days from the first date of receipt. 
 
(b). Any and all Sewage Sludge must arrive on site in a Class A condition.  No treatment will be permitted on the site, except for that treatment which has been pre-approved by the Planning Board or its duly authorized representative. 
 
(c). The land application of all Sewage Sludge shall be done in accordance with the general requirements and management practices set forth in 40 C.F.R. 503.12 and 503.14, respectively.  In addition to meeting State and Federal Vector Attraction Reduction Requirements (VARRS), including those set forth in 40 C.F.R. 503.33, (including at least one of the VARRS in Section 503.33 (b) (1) through 503.33(b) (8)), which must have been conducted at the generation site), all Sewage Sludge applied to the land must be incorporated into the soil within eight hours of the application, unless a specific exemption has been granted by the Planning Board. 
(6). Additional Testing Requirements 
 
In addition to all testing required by the State of New Hampshire and 40 C.F.R. 503.1, et seq. (including the total recoverable analysis of the metals listed in Table 3, Section 503.13), testing shall also be conducted for pH, total volatile solids, total nitrogen, total phosphorus, and fecal coliform bacteria.  These test results shall be submitted to the 
Planning Board as part of the Site Plan review and approval process before the applicant takes delivery of any Sewage Sludge in the Town of Auburn.  These tests shall be conducted for each and every generation site.  During the time period from delivery through the completion of land application these tests shall be repeated on a bi-monthly basis. 
A scan shall be conducted for the one hundred and twenty-five (125) priority pollutants, (as designated by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, see 40 C.F.R. 122, Appendix D, Tables II and III), and the results shall be furnished to the Planning Board as a precondition to Site Plan approval.  The priority pollutant scan shall have been performed within three (3) months prior to the date the results are submitted to the Planning Board.  For those land application projects of three months or longer in duration, (with the project start date being measured from the date the application is accepted by the Planning Board), the Board shall be provided with an updated scan for the one hundred and twenty-five (125) priority pollutants no less than every three (3) months. 
The results of all testing shall be promptly submitted to the Planning Board or its duly authorized representative for its ongoing review.  The Planning Board shall have the discretion to order further testing as a condition of its approval.  The costs of all testing shall be borne by the applicant. 
(7). Watershed and Wetlands Protection 
 
Consistent with the sanitary protection provisions of this ordinance, no sewage sludge shall be placed within one hundred and twenty-five (125) feet of streams, tributaries, ponds, lakes, seeps or wetland areas.  Wetland areas shall be determined by a licensed professional wetland scientist and shall include, but not be limited to, areas designated as having Hydric A soil characteristics. 
 
 
(1).   An antenna(s) or tower may be allowed in the Industrial District by special exception and shall be prohibited in all other zones.  In determining whether or not to grant the application for special exception, the Zoning Board shall also consider: whether the proposed antenna(s) will detract from the rural character of the Town; whether the proposed antenna or related structures will significantly diminish the quality of any view within the Town; and whether the proposed antenna presents any safety risks to the Town, or to existing or proposed airports.  In addition, any such tower or antenna permitted by special exception shall comply with all state and federal regulatory requirements, as well as require site plan approval by the Planning Board.   
 
(2).   Any antenna, tower or other structure governed by this section that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned and hazardous to the public health and safety.  The owner shall remove the abandoned structure within ninety (90) days of receipt of a notice of declaration of abandonment from the Town.  A declaration of abandonment notice shall only be issued following a public hearing, noticed per town regulations, with notice to abutters and the last known owner and/or operator of the structure.  If the abandoned structure is not removed within ninety (90) days, the Town may execute the security for the structure and have it removed. 
 
 
 
3.21 Merger of a Nonconforming Lot(s) 
 
(1). Lots merged for zoning purposes may not be subdivided without the approval of the Planning Board in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations.  This provision applies to all lots which have been voluntarily merged.  This provision also applies to all lots deemed merged, on or before September 17, 2010, by the provisions of prior versions of the Auburn Zoning Ordinance. 
 
(2). Any owner of (2) two or more contiguous preexisting approved or subdivided lots or parcels, who wishes to merge them for municipal regulation and taxation purposes, may do so by applying to the Planning Board.  Except where such merger would create a violation of this Ordinance, the Town of Auburn Subdivision Regulations, or the Town of Auburn Site Plan Regulations, all such requests shall be approved, and no public hearing or notice shall be required.  No new survey plat need be recorded, but a notice of the merger, sufficient to identify the relevant parcels, and endorsed in writing by the Planning Board, shall be filed in the Registry of Deeds, and a copy mailed to the Office of the Selectmen.  No such merged parcel shall thereafter be separately transferred without subdivision approval. 
 
3.22 Home Businesses, Offices and Shops 
 
(1).   Permissible home businesses, offices, and shops are as defined in Article 2.02(37) – (39).  Any home business, office or shop shall be conducted within the dwelling, shall not utilize outdoor storage visible to surrounding properties, and shall not be a source of undue nuisance to neighbors by reason of noise, dust, glare, traffic, vibration or other disruptive influences.   
 
 
ARTICLE 4 - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
4.01 Application of Regulations 
 
Subsequent to passage of this Ordinance, and any applicable amendments, buildings or land shall hereafter be used, constructed, altered, or enlarged only in conformity with the regulations specified herein for the zoning district in which the building or land is located.  A permit for the construction, alteration, enlargement, moving, demolition or use of a building or structure shall not be issued by the Building Inspector, unless the requested action complies with the provisions of this Section, or the applicant has been granted a variance or special exception by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
 
4.02 Districts 
 
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the Town of Auburn is divided into seven (7) districts as follows: 
 
 Full Name    Short Name 
 
 Rural     R 
 Residential-One   R-1 
 Residential-Two   R-2 
 Commercial-One   C-1 
 Commercial-Two   C-2 
 Village Center    V 
 Industrial     I 
 
4.03  District Boundaries and Zoning Maps 
 
The location and boundaries of the Auburn zoning districts are shown on "The Zoning Map of the Town of Auburn, New Hampshire," dated December 8, 2006, and signed and certified by the Town Clerk, which is part of this Ordinance.  Where any uncertainty exists with respect to the boundary of any District as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
 
(1). Where a boundary is indicated as a highway, street, railroad, watercourse or Town boundary, it shall be construed to be the centerline thereof, or such Town boundary. 
 
(2). Where a boundary is indicated as approximately parallel to a highway, street, railroad, watercourse or Town boundary, it shall be construed to be parallel to the centerline thereof or such Town boundary. 
 
(3). Where a boundary coincides within ten (10) feet or less with a lot line, the boundary shall be construed to be the lot line. 
 
(4).  If no natural boundary is given, the location of any boundary shall be determined by use of coordinates identified by permanent bounds. 
 
(5). If a boundary runs through any lot and such lot is of sufficient size to permit conforming lots in each district, the lot may be subdivided so as to create lots in each district, subject to the approval of the Auburn Planning Board, in accordance with the Auburn Subdivision Regulations.  If no subdivision is sought or obtained, the entire lot shall be deemed to be in the more restrictive district. 
(6).  If the land in question cannot be divided to permit conforming lots in the two or more adjoining districts, the entire lot shall be deemed to be in the more restricted district, provided that a minimum of twenty (20%) percent of the lot area falls within the more restrictive district.  If less than twenty (20%) percent of the total lot area falls within the more restrictive district, the entire lot shall be considered to fall within the less restrictive area.  For purposes of this section, the order of most restricted to least restricted is as follows:  R, R-1, R-2, V, C-2, C-1, I. 
 
4.04 District Regulations – General 
 
(1). Unless already specified as an accessory use in its definition, any permitted use or use allowed by special exception in the district regulations of this Ordinance shall be only for use as a principal use.  It may, however, be allowed by special exception as an accessory use to any principal use which is permitted or allowed by special exception in that district, unless such combination of uses is otherwise prohibited by this Ordinance. 
 
(2). Any and all uses allowed herein shall also be subject to all other applicable ordinances and regulations of the Town of Auburn including, but not limited to, Article 6, Flood Plain Development Regulations, and to the statutes and regulations of the State of New Hampshire. 
 
(3). All non-residential, commercial and industrial uses, all clustered residential developments and all multi-unit dwellings consisting of more than two dwelling units, regardless of the district in which they are built, shall be subject to Site Plan Review by the Auburn Planning Board prior to the issuance of a building permit.   
 
(4). The minimum lot sizes, yard and frontage dimensions and maximum heights  
specified in the district regulations for any particular use are subject to any more restrictive provisions required elsewhere in this Ordinance.  No structure or dwelling shall be constructed within the yard setbacks except for lawful fences, retaining walls, above ground swimming pools, aprons surrounding in ground pools and Patios.  Sheds, gazebos and greenhouses up to Two Hundred (200) Square Feet in area must maintain a minimum building setback of fifteen (15) feet from side and/or rear property lines.  Maximum building/lot coverage and front setback requirements under appropriate district regulation(s) must still be enforced.   Within a Cluster Subdivision, all structures larger than one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area, except lawful structures as listed above, shall maintain no less than sixty (60) feet from structures on abutting lots. (03/2018) 
 
4.05   "R" Rural District 
 
(1). Objectives and Characteristics 
 
The Rural District (“R”) is designed to permit uses that are compatible with and protective of certain areas that have been and are being used for agricultural and forestry uses, water quality preservation, residential use and public use.  This district encompasses those remote areas where intensive development would be premature, given the high public service costs associated with development there. 
(2).  Permitted Uses 
 
(a).  Agriculture,  
(b). Farm Roadside Stand 
(c). Home Shop 
(d). Home Office 
(e). Home Business 
(f). Public Educational Facility 
(g). Church 
(h). Public Recreation Facility 
(i). Day Care Center-1 to 6 persons 
(j). Day Care Center-over 6 persons 
(k). Nursery School 
(l). Single Family Detached Dwelling 
(m). Utility Substation 
(n). Water Supply Works 
(o) . Manufactured Housing/Mobile Home 
(p). Municipal Buildings 
(q). Elderly Housing 
 
(3). Uses Permitted by Special Exception 
 
(a). Private Education Facility 
(b). Outdoor Commercial Recreation Facility 
(c). Indoor Commercial Recreation Facility  
(d). Hospitals 
(e). Conversion Apartments 
(f)      Travel Trailer Park/Campground 
(g).     Cultural Facilities 
(h) Accessory Dwelling Unit 
(i) Agritourism 
 
(4). Lot Size, Frontage, Yards and Height 
 
Minimum Lot Size:    3 acres 
Minimum Frontage:    300 feet 
Minimum Yard Dimensions: 
 Front:       50 feet 
 Side:     50 feet 
 Rear:     50 feet 
Maximum Height: 
 Feet:     35 feet 
 Stories:    3 stories 
 Maximum Building Area:  5 % 
 
(5).  Clustered Residential or Elderly Housing Development 
 
The following uses shall only be permitted by special exception when located within a clustered residential, elderly or workforce housing development: home shop; home business; day care center - over six children; nursery school; and farm roadside stand. 
 
 
 
4.06  "R-1", Residential-One District and "R-2", Residential-Two District  
 
(1).  Objectives and Characteristics 
 
Residential districts are designed for the protection of areas that have been and are being developed predominantly for residential dwellings and where road systems can accommodate high traffic volumes.  The R-1 District is intended to be primarily residential in character with very limited accessory uses.  The R-2 District is a somewhat more rural area with a greater variety of residential and accessory uses permitted.  The two districts have the same density and dimensional requirements, but different uses. 
 
(2).   Permitted Uses in the R-1 District 
 
a. Utility Substation 
b. Single Family Detached Dwelling 
c. Public Educational Facility 
d. Church 
e. Public Recreational Facility 
f. Day Care Center-1 to 6 persons 
g. Home Office 
h. Agriculture 
i. Water Supply Works 
j. Manufactured Housing/Mobile Home 
k. Municipal Buildings 
l. Workforce Housing 


 
(3).   Uses Permitted by Special Exception in the R-1 District 
 
a.  Conversion Apartments 

b.  Home Shop 

c.  Home Business 

d.  Day Care Center-over 6 persons 

e.  Nursery School 

f.  Agritourism 

g.  Farm Roadside Stand 

h.  Cultural Facilities 

i.  Private Education Facilities 

j.  Veterinary Clinic 

k.  Elderly Housing 

l.  Dwelling Unit – Duplex 

m.  Accessory Dwelling Unit 


 
(4). Permitted Uses in the R-2 District 
 
a. Single Family Detached Dwelling 
b. Manufactured Housing/Mobile Home 
c. Home Shop 
d. Home Office 
e. Home Business 
f. Agriculture 
g. Commercial Agriculture-Forestry only 
h. Farm Roadside Stand 
i. Public Educational Facility 
j. Church 
k. Public Recreation Facility 
l. Day Care Center-1 to 6 persons 
m. Day Care Center-over 6 persons 
n. Nursery School 
o. Utility Substation 
p. Water Supply Works 
q. Municipal buildings 
r.       Elderly Housing 


 
(5).   Uses Permitted by Special Exception in the R-2 District 
 
a. Agritourism 
b. Conversion Apartment 
c. Travel Trailer Park 
d.  Cultural Facilities 
e.  Private Education Facility 
f.  Veterinary Clinic 
g.  Workforce Housing 
h.  Dwelling Unit – Duplex 
i.     Accessory Dwelling Unit 
 
(6).    Lot Size, Frontage, Yards and Height 
 
Minimum Lot Size:    2 acres 
Minimum Frontage:    200 feet 
Minimum Yard Dimensions: 
 Front:     50 feet 
 Side:     30 feet 
 Rear:     50 feet 
Maximum Height 
 Feet:     35 feet 
   Stories:    3 stories 
  Maximum Building Area:   5% 
 
4.07   "C-1", Commercial-One District and "C-2", Commercial-Two District 
 
(1).    Objectives and Characteristics 
 
The Commercial Districts are designed for the purpose of centralizing the provision of basic goods and services.  The Commercial One (C-1) District is intended to allow for regional commercial needs.  The Commercial Two (C-2) District is intended to allow for local commercial needs of a low intensity, in keeping with the Village character.  The two districts have the same density and dimensional requirements, but different uses.  Lot coverage by impervious material in both commercial districts shall be a maximum of forty (40%) percent. 
 
(2).    Uses Permitted in the C-1 District 
 
a.  Motels/Hotels 

b.  Sales Establishment 

c.  Restaurant 

d.  Fast Food Restaurant 

e.  Commercial Service Establishment 

f.  Office Establishment-less than 3,000 square feet of floor area 

g.  Multi-Unit Commercial Establishment 

h.  Office Establishment-over 3,000 square feet of floor area 

i.  Automobile Service Station 

j.  Automobile Repair Garage 

k.  Automobile or Similar Vehicle Sales Facility 

l.  Warehouse Establishment 

m.  Utility Substation 

n.  Water Supply Works 

o.  Outdoor Commercial Recreation Facility 

p.  Indoor Commercial Recreation Facility 

q.  Farm Roadside Stand 

r.  Municipal Buildings 

s.  Cultural Facilities 

t.  Private Education Facility 

u.  Veterinary Clinic 


 
(3).   Uses Permitted by Special Exception in the C-1 District 
 
a.  Agritourism 

b.  Day Care Center-1 to 6 persons 

c.  Day Care Center-over 6 persons 

d.  Nursery School 

e.  Social Facility 

f.  Light Industrial Establishment 

g.  Heliport 

h.  Sexually Oriented Business (See added requirements of Section 4.07 (7) below.) 


 
(4).    Uses Permitted in the C-2 District 
 
a.  Home Shop 

b.  Home Office 

c.  Home Business 

d.  Sales Establishment 

e.  Restaurant 

f.  Commercial Service Establishment 

g.  Office Establishment-less than 3,000 feet of floor area 

h.  Automobile Service Station 

i.  Utility Substation 

j.  Water Supply Works 

k.  Public Education Facility 

l.  Day Care Center-over 6 persons 

m.  Nursery School 

n.  Indoor Commercial Recreation Facility 

o.  Hospitals 

p.  Agritourism 


q.  Farm Roadside Stand 

r.  Municipal Buildings 

s.  Churches 

t.  Public Recreation Facility 

u.  Cultural Facilities 

v.  Private Education Facility 

w.  Veterinary Clinic 

x.  Elderly Housing 


      
(5).   Uses Permitted by Special Exception in the C-2 District 
 
a.  Fast Food Restaurant 

b.  Multi-Unit Commercial Establishment 

c.  Automobile Repair Garage 

d.  Automobile or Similar Vehicle Sales Facility 

e.  Day Care Center-1 to 6 persons 

f.  Outdoor Commercial Recreation Facility 

g.  Social Facility 

h.  Agriculture 

i.  Dwelling Unit - Multi-Family 

j.  Dwelling Unit - Duplex 

k.  Boarding House 

l.  Conversion Apartments 


m. Mixed Residential /Commercial Use 
n. Workforce Housing 
 
(6).    Lot Size, Frontage, Yards and Height 
 
Minimum Lot Size:    2 acres 
Minimum Frontage:    200 feet 
Minimum Yard Dimensions  
  *** (also see below) 
 Front:     50 feet 
 Side:     30 feet 
 Rear:     50 feet 
Maximum Height:    
 Feet:     35 feet 
 Stories:    3 stories  
Maximum Lot Coverage:   40% 
 
 ***Where a commercially zoned lot abuts an R, R-1 or R-2 zone, the minimum side yard requirements shall be increased to 50 feet, and all yards shall be measured from any building, parking space or service area. 
 
(7). Sexually-Oriented Businesses 
 
In addition to meeting the criteria set forth in this Ordinance for a special exception, the following conditions shall also be met by an applicant proposing a sexually-oriented business as part of an application for a special exception in the C-1 zone, and if not met, the use(s) shall be deemed to be a prohibited use: 
 
(a).  No sexually oriented business shall be located within one thousand (1000) feet of the property line of a church, cemetery, private educational facility, public or private school, senior center, day care center, hospital, municipal facility, public park, playground, public recreational facility, or dwelling unit;  
 
(b).  No sexually-oriented business shall be located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the right-of-way of Route 101 (including on and off ramps) or Route 28 By-Pass; 
 
(c)   No sexually-oriented business shall be located in a multi-use commercial development; 
 
(d)   No sexually-oriented material shall be visible from the outside of the building; and 
 
(e) No private rooms or booths shall be constructed as part of the sexually-oriented use. 


 
(8) Addition or Expansion of Single Family Detached Dwelling: 


 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 3.05, an addition or expansion to a single family detached dwelling which was lawfully in existence as of March 10, 2009, shall be permitted within the C-2 District, subject to all area and dimensional requirements of Section 4.07(6). 
 
4.08 “V”  Village Center District  
 
(1). Objectives and Characteristics:  The Village Center District is designed to promote and encourage the most efficient, cost effective and beneficial consolidation of land development which will: preserve open space; create more cost-efficient roads, utilities, and other public and private infrastructures; and improve the ability of the Town to provide more rapid and efficient delivery of public safety services.   This District is also created to provide private property owners with a method for realizing the inherent value of their real property in a manner conducive to the creation of substantial benefit to the environment and to the Town’s property tax base.  The Village Center District is also intended to promote a “town center” area which will provide for the harmonious and aesthetically pleasing development of the Town, and where, through the consolidation of municipal services, small-scale retail/commercial development, limited residential use, and mixed-use development, the Town’s rural charm and character is preserved.   
 
(2).   Boundaries:  The Village Center District is an overlay district with the following boundaries: 
 
The land between Eaton Road and Raymond Road; the land on the Northwest corner of the intersection of Manchester Road and Raymond Road, and the land along Route 121 to Bunker Hill Road, (current underlying zone Commercial – Two (C-2). 
 
(3).    Permitted Uses 
 
(a).    Existing Uses:  Subject to any existing requirement for site plan approval by the Planning Board, any use which is permitted in either underlying district, (Commercial - 2 or Residential - 2) is permitted, except that the following uses are not permitted: 
 
 (i).  Agritourism 
(ii).  Manufactured Housing Park 
(iii).  Mobile Home Park (single dwellings permitted) 
(iv).  Travel Trailer Park 
 
(b).   Additional Uses:  Subject to any existing requirement for site plan approval by the Planning Board, the following uses are permitted in the Village Center District, even if they are not permitted in the existing underlying district: 
 
(i) Workforce Housing  -  by Special Exception only 

(ii) Dwelling Unit – Multi-Family – by Special Exception only 

(iii) Dwelling Unit – Duplex – by Special Exception only 


 
 (4). Dimensional Requirements 
 
  (a).  Minimum Lot Size:   1 acre 
 
(b).  Minimum Frontage:  100 feet 
 
  (c).    Minimum Yard Dimensions: 
 
 (i) Front:  50 feet 
 (ii) Side:    20 feet 
 (iii) Rear:    20 feet 
 
(d).  Maximum Height: 
 
 (i) Feet:  42 
 (ii) Stories: 3 
 (iii) Maximum Building Area: To be determined by lot coverage      limitations in the underlying zone. 
 
  
 (5). Architectural Design Standards 
 
(a).  General Purpose:  In order to maintain a consistent and aesthetically pleasing appearance in the development of the Village Center District, commercial buildings and structures must comply with design standards guidelines which will be administered by the Planning Board in its exercise of site plan review.  The purpose of the guidelines is to provide design standards which assist with the development, renovations and restorations of commercial properties to complement the overall traditional, rural New England-style appearance of the community.   The guidelines are not intended to restrict innovation or variety in construction, restoration or renovation of commercial buildings and structures.  Rather, the guidelines are intended to improve the aesthetic appeal of the Village Center District, to conserve and/or increase property values, and to encourage the type of development envisioned for the Village Center District. 
 
(b).    Architectural Plans:  No building permit or site plan approval shall be granted for a commercial or multi-family building unless the applicant submits an architectural plan drawn to scale that meets all of the requirements of the Planning Board.  The Architectural Plan shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 
 
(i)  floor plan; 
   (ii) building elevation (all four sides); 
   (iii)  type of windows and doors to be installed on building; and    (iv)  type of building material to be used on the exterior of building; 
(v)  any other details, which the Planning Board may, in its discretion, request be included with the Architectural Plan. 
 
(c).  Evaluation Factors:  The Planning Board shall consider the following factors in its determination of whether a proposed site and building design is acceptable: 
 
(i)  Conformance to the general purpose of the architectural design guidelines; 
   (ii)  Architectural character; 
   (iii)  Building materials and subdued color considerations; 
   (iv)  Vehicular and pedestrian circulation and parking; 
(v)  Harmony and compatibility of project compared to existing site and neighborhood; 
(vi)  Lighting design; 
   (vii)  Integration of landscape and buffer areas; and 
(viii)  Retention, alteration, or removal of existing structures and site features.    
 
(d)  Specific Architectural Requirements:  The Planning Board may, in its discretion, determine that one or more the following requirements should not apply to a particular project, or that one or more factors should be waived for a particular project.  The Planning Board will at all times consider whether environmentally responsible building practices require that the Board change or waive any of the requirements. 
 
(i)  The building’s orientation, setback, alignment with the street, and spacing relative to other buildings will be considered in the overall design.  Reuse of existing structures and landscape features is encouraged.  An overall design which will create harmony with the area surrounding the project is the goal.  To the extent feasible, a project should be designed to allow for ease of access between commercial uses located adjacent to or nearby the project. 
 
(ii)  Windows should comprise a minimum of five percent (5%) of the exterior wall surface of a building facing a public street, right-of-way, parking area or developed area.  All windows and doorways should be encased with trim. 
 
(iii)  Site lighting must conform to the specifications in this Ordinance and the Town of Auburn Site Plan Regulations.  No light should spill or reflect on to adjacent properties.  In accordance with the sign regulations of this Ordinance, illuminated signs should be lit only when the premises is open for business. 
 
(iv)  Exterior colors of buildings and accessories are encouraged to be muted and to blend with surrounding buildings.  Bright colors are generally discouraged. 
 
(v)  All rooftop mechanical equipment units should be located so that they are not visible from the street level or from other public areas at ground level.  Wall or ground mounted equipment shall be screened from public view with fences or vegetation. 
 
(vi) All existing man-made and natural features of the site should be integrated into the site to the extent feasible.  Buildings should, where feasible, be clustered to encourage the preservation of open space.  Sidewalks and pedestrian pathways should be included where feasible. a. Outdoor Commercial Recreation Facility 

b. Indoor Commercial Recreation Facility 

c. Sales Establishment 

d. Commercial Service Establishment 

e. Office Establishment – less than 3,000 square feet of floor area 

f. Junk Yard 

g. Excavation and Soil Removal* 

h. Heliport 

i. Private Airstrip 

j. Antenna and Communication Towers 

5.02 Administration: 





 
(vii)  Variation in detail, form and siting of roof lines is encouraged.  Long horizontal roof lines and warehouse style designs are discouraged.  Buildings should have pitched or gabled roofs where practical.  Shed, gambrel and barn style roofs are also acceptable.  Roofs must have appropriate overhangs.   
 
(viii)   All building facades will receive design consideration.  A facade unrelated to the rest of the building or the architecture in the surrounding area will not be accepted. 
 
(ix)  Exterior surfaces of materials should be covered with traditional materials or products which simulate natural materials, including but not limited to clapboards, shingles, stone, brick, architecturally treated concrete, vinyl siding or similar materials.  Exposed plain cinder block, corrugated steel, sheet plastic or sheet fiberglass are not acceptable.  Pitched roofs should be constructed of shingles, metal roofing, or other materials traditionally used in roofing in small towns of New England. 
 
(x) Illuminated or brightly colored awnings are not acceptable.  Awnings should be made of transparent materials such as glass or clear Plexiglass type products.  Awning covers designed for shade should be made of fabric or simulated fabric-type material. 
 
(xi)  Fences should be used only where necessary.  Fences should be constructed in traditional New England style and constructed of traditional materials, such as picket, split rail, wrought iron, brick or stone.  Chain link fences are discouraged. 
 
4.09   "I" Industrial District  
 
(1).    Objectives and Characteristics 
 
The Industrial District is designed for the purpose of providing a rationally planned location for industrial uses where vehicular access and future utility service can accommodate such use.  Lot coverage by impervious material shall be a maximum of forty (40%) percent. 
 
(2).   Permitted Uses 
 
(a). Industrial Establishment 
(b). Lumber Treatment Establishment 
(c). Industrial Repair Garage 
(d). Utility Substation 
(e). Water Supply Works 
(f). Restaurant 
(g). Fast Food Restaurant 
(h). Office Establishment-over 3,000 square of floor area 
(i). Light Industrial Establishment 
(j). Automobile or Similar Vehicle Sales Facility 
(k). Warehouse Establishment  
(l). Municipal Buildings 
(n)       Veterinary Clinic 
      
(3). Uses Permitted by Special Exception 
 
k. Employee Amenities, including but not limited to: fitness center; dry cleaner; personal services or bank machine, when established as part of a permitted use under Section  4.09(2). 
 
*Excavation and/or soil removal requires a permit from the Planning Board and must be done in accordance with the Auburn Excavation Regulations. 
 
(4).    Lot Size, Frontage, Yards and Height 
  
 Minimum Lot Size:    *3 acres 
 Minimum Frontage:    300 feet 
 Minimum Yard Dimensions:          ** (also see below) 
  Front:     50 feet 
  Side: (To be determined by Site Plan Review) 
  Rear: (To be determined by Site Plan Review) 
 Maximum Height:        ***(also see below) 
  Feet:     42 feet 
  Stories:    3 stories 
 
* If the lot is serviced by municipal water and/or sewer service, the Planning Board may, in its discretion, and upon request, grant a reduction in the lot size requirement. 
 
** Where an industrially zoned lot abuts an R, R-1 or R-2 zone, the minimum yard requirements shall be increased to 50 feet and all yards shall be measured from any building, parking space or service area. 
 
***Height restrictions shall not apply to necessary appurtenant structures such as spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, smokestacks, flagpoles, antennae or similar structures. 
 
(5).   Permitted Accessory Uses: 
 
 In addition to those uses allowed as accessory uses in the Industrial District, a “private educational facility,” a “nursery school,” and a “day care center” may be allowed in the Industrial District if it is accessory to, and incidental to, another permitted business in the District, and it is limited to providing services to the children of employees or owners of the permitted business. 
 
On-site employee housing may be allowed as an accessory use provided the housing is incidental to, and necessary for, the operation of a permitted business in the zone. 
 
 ARTICLE 5 -  WETLANDS AND WATERSHED PROTECTION REGULATIONS   
 
5.01 Authority and Creation: 
 
This Article creating a wetlands and watershed protection overlay district is enacted pursuant to the general authority granted by N.H. R.S.A. 674:16, and the specific authority granted by R.S.A. 674:21,(j), Innovative Land Use Controls, as environmental characteristics zoning.    
 
The Planning Board is charged with administering these regulations and with granting conditional use permits in accordance with Sections 5.09 and 5.10 of this Article.   
 
5.03 Findings and Purposes: 
 
(1) Findings: 


 
Wetlands, vernal pools, ponds, lakes, and streams are significant natural resources of the Town because of their size or functional values, such as flood storage, wildlife habitat, and the enhancement of water quality and/or quantity. The preservation of these water resources promotes the general public health, safety, welfare and convenience in the Town of Auburn.  
 
(2) Purposes: 
 
It is intended that these water resource areas remain undisturbed to the extent practical.  To further the goal of preserving these water resources, these regulations are intended to: 
 
(a) Maintain and enhance the quality and quantity of surface waters and groundwater by preserving the ability of wetlands and adjacent upland areas to filter pollution, trap sediment, retain and absorb chemicals and nutrients, and produce oxygen;  

(b) Prevent unnecessary expense, or minimize any necessary expense, to the Town and the public in providing and maintaining essential services and utilities, such as wastewater collection and treatment, drainage facilities, and public water supply, which may arise because of the inappropriate use of land within the wetlands and watershed areas;  

(c) Minimize impacts to existing land uses and lots;  

(d) Prevent the destruction of, or significant changes to, those wetland areas, related water bodies and adjoining land which provide flood protection, protect persons and property against the hazards of flood inundation by assuring the continuation of the natural flow patterns of streams and other watercourses, and provide for nutrient attenuation and augmentation of stream flow during dry periods;  

(e) Encourage those uses that can be appropriately and safely located within the wetlands and watershed areas; and 


(f) Protect native wildlife habitat and natural vegetation upon which a variety of upland and aquatic species are dependent for purposes of breeding or sustenance.  


 
5.04 Delineation of Wetlands and Watershed Protection Area District and Boundaries: 
 
(1)  Wetlands and Watershed Protection Overlay District:  This overlay district shall consist of all wetlands, as defined in Section 2.02(105) of this Ordinance, as well as the applicable buffer zone, as defined below: 
 
(a)  Wetlands and Watershed Protection Area – Level 1:  Those areas which meet the definition of wetland as set forth in section 2.02(105) of this Ordinance, and a buffer zone of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet setback from the edge of: 
 
(i) Wetlands indicated as Tiers 1, 2a, 2b, and 3 on the Wetlands Inventory Map prepared by West Environmental on file at the Auburn Town Clerk’s Office and Planning Department; and 
 
(ii)  All other wetlands greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet in size that have been determined to have one or more of the following functions and/or values per ACOE-HM: 
 
 (A) Groundwater recharge/discharge; 
 (B)  floodflow alteration; 
 (C)  sediment/toxicant retention; 
 (D)  nutrient removal/retention/transformation; 
 (E)  wildlife habitat; 
 (F)  uniqueness heritage; 
 (G)  endangered species; and 
 
(iii)  Bodies of water, brooks and streams; and 
 
(iv)  Vernal pools as established by a New Hampshire Certified Wetlands Scientist. 
 
(b)  Wetlands and Watershed Protection Area – Level 2:  Those areas which meet the definition of wetland as set forth in section 2.02(105) of this Ordinance, and a buffer zone of seventy-five (75) feet setback from the edge of: 
 
(i)  All other wetlands not meeting the criteria of Section 5.04(1)(a)(i) above; and 
 
(ii)  All other wetlands greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet in size that do not meet the criteria set forth in Section 5.04(1)(a)(ii) above and that are not contiguous with surface waters as established by a New Hampshire Certified Wetlands Scientist. 
 
(c)  Wetlands and Watershed Protection Area – Level 3:  Those areas which meet the definition of wetland as set forth in section 2.02(105) of this Ordinance, and a buffer zone of twenty-five (25) feet setback from the edge of: 
 
(i)    Isolated wetlands less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in size and determined not to be a vernal pool by a New Hampshire Certified Wetlands Scientist; 
 
(ii) Drainage basins and/or treatment swales constructed under an approved project unless they contain a perennial stream; and 
 
(iii)  Private ponds constructed under an approved project. 
 
 (2)  Method of Evaluation: 
 
When a wetland is not defined on the Wetlands Inventory Map prepared by West Environmental, as referenced above in Section 5.04(i)(a)(i), the United States Army Corps of Engineers, Highway Methodology Workbook Supplemental (ACOE-HM), shall be used to evaluate and determine the wetland values and functions when evaluation of such is necessary. 
 
(3)  Application of Buffers: 
 
 Buffers are applied without regard to lot lines and municipal boundaries, except that when a wetland is bounded by a Town Class V or better roadway, or a State or federal highway existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, buffers are not applied to properties directly across the right of way. 
 
(4)  Boundary Location: 
 
(a) If a boundary of the Wetlands and Watershed Protection Area (WWPA) is disputed by either the Planning Board or an applicant, the exact location of the boundary shall be determined by the Planning Board, in consultation with the Conservation Commission.  


 
(b) The Planning Board, at the applicant's expense, may engage a wetland scientist and/or certified soil scientist to determine the precise location of the WWPA boundary, using the methodology consistent with N.H. Administrative Rules Wt 100-800, and in accordance with the "1987 Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual," or the most current 


methodology accepted by the New Hampshire Wetlands Bureau. As an alternative, the applicant may retain such a scientist, acceptable to the Planning Board and Conservation Commission, to make such determination. A report of the scientist's findings shall be submitted to the Planning Board and the Conservation Commission, and shall include, if warranted, a revised wetland map of the area in question, along with a written report of the results of the investigation, together with any data forms completed. 


 
(5)   Boundary Dispute: 
 
If a landowner chooses to question the boundaries of a given wetland, the landowner shall submit documentation prepared by a certified wetlands scientist in accordance with Section 5.04(b). The Planning Board shall consider the documentation at a public hearing, and may require review of said documentation, at the applicant’s expense, by an independent New Hampshire certified wetlands scientist. 
 
(6)  Minimum Lot Size and Density:  
 
Except as otherwise provided in this Section, the creation of the Wetlands and Watershed Protection District is not intended to affect the minimum lot size requirements or density calculations required for the underlying zoning district, as such requirements are set forth in Article 4 of the Auburn Zoning Ordinance.  However, the land area outside of the Wetlands and Watershed Protection Area must be sufficient to support all intended development in accordance with the terms of the Auburn Zoning Ordinance.  
 
5.05 Permitted Uses: 
 
The following proposed uses are permitted in the Wetlands and Watershed Protection Area: 
 
(1) Wildlife habitat development and management; 


 
(2) Conservation areas and nature trails, using Best Management Practices for Erosion Control during trail maintenance and construction, provided that the Planning Board, in consultation with the Conservation Commission, reviews and approves plans for such areas and trails prior to their development; 


 
(3) Recreation, including open-air recreational uses consistent with the purpose and intent of Section 5.03, such as cross-country skiing, ice skating, and hiking; 


 
(4) Education, including natural and environmental sciences walks, wildlife and botanical studies and similar activities; 


 
(5) Seasonally permitted hunting and fishing, as regulated by the State of New Hampshire; 


 
(6) Production, cultivation, growing, and harvesting of any fruit, vegetable, floricultural or horticultural crops, except turf grasses, conducted in accordance with Best Management Wetlands Practices for Agriculture, (July 1993, amended September 1998), but not within seventy-five (75) feet of the edge of wet of the adjacent wetland.  Fertilization shall be limited to lime and wood ash within the boundary of the WWPA; 


 
(7) Removal of hazardous trees; 
 
(8) Removal of “invasive” vegetation conducted in accordance with the then-current Best Management Practices for Erosion Control; 
 
(9) Accessory structures of two hundred (200) square feet or less, that do not require clearing, excavation, filling or grading for the installation or placement of the accessory structures.  Such accessory structures cannot be located within seventy-five (75) feet of any area meeting the requirements of a Level 1 Wetlands and Watershed Protection Area, within fifty (50) feet of a Level 2 Wetlands and Watershed Protection Area, or within twenty-five (25) feet of a Level 3 Wetlands and Watershed Protection Area. 
 
(10) WWPA mitigation, as outlined in Section 5.12 of this Article. 
 
Any uses not listed in this Section are expressly prohibited in the Wetlands and Watershed Protection Area. 
 
5.06 Prohibited Uses and Activities: 
 
(1) No septic system, lawn, yard, parking lot or landscaping shall be constructed within the WWPA and no structure shall be constructed within the WWPA, except for minor accessory structures expressly permitted under the terms of Section 5.05(9) and structures permitted by a conditional use permit issued by the Planning Board, subject to applicable buffer zones, and structures which are normally associated with use in or near water or relate to transportation over water.   
 
(2) In addition, no storage of petroleum products, hazardous chemicals or material shall occur within the WWPA.  No chemical fertilizers, pesticides, insecticides, or herbicides shall be used within the WWPA. 
 
5.07 Uses Permitted by Conditional Use Permits:  
 
The Planning Board may grant conditional use permits for the following uses within the Level 2 and Level 3 WWPAs: 
  
(1).  Roads and other access ways;  
(2).  Drainage ways;  
(3).  Pipelines, power lines and other transmission lines;  
(4).  Docks, boat launches, and piers;  
(5).  Domestic water wells, and associated ancillary pipes and equipment;  
(6).  Replacement septic tanks and leach fields where evidence is submitted that     
        no alternative location is available on the property; 
(7).  Expansion of existing single-family dwelling which was in existence as of     
        March 10, 2009; 
(8).  Miscellaneous trimming and pruning of forestry stock according to good  
        forestry practices;  
(9).  Tree farming and forestry according to practices approved by the Planning  
        Board;  
(10). Agriculture;  
(11). Ponds planned and executed under the direction of the N.R.C.S. (formerly  
         known as USDA-SCS); 
(12). Wildlife refuge and/or conservation area; 
(13.  Wharves, boathouses, and bridges;  
(14). Wetlands mitigation, remediation, restoration and protection activities;  
(15.   Fire ponds, cisterns and dry hydrants; and  
(16). Retention basins and drainage systems. 
 
5.08. Relief from One-Hundred Twenty-Five (125) Foot Setback from Level 1; Seventy-Five (75) Foot Setback from Level 2; and Twenty-Five (25) Foot Setback from Level 3 Wetland and Watershed Protection Area:   
 
(1). Variance Required: 
(a) Wetlands and Watershed Protection Area – Level 1:  There will be no conditional use permits issued for relief from the one-hundred twenty-five (125) foot setback from a Level 1 Wetland and Watershed Protection Area, except for those uses permitted under the Minor Conditional Use Permit process set forth in Section 5.10 for this Article.  Any other request for relief within the one-hundred twenty-five (125-foot setback from a Level 1 Wetland and Watershed Protection Area shall require a request for a variance from the Auburn Zoning Board of Adjustment, pursuant to Article 14.09 of this Ordinance. 


 
(b) Wetlands and Watershed Protection Area – Level 2:  Except for the allowable activities set forth in Section 5.05, any request for relief from the seventy-five (75) foot setback of the Level 2 Wetland and Watershed 


Protection Area shall require a request for a variance from the Auburn Zoning Board of Adjustment, pursuant to Article 14.09 of this Ordinance. 


 
(c) Wetlands and Watershed Protection Area – Level 3:  Except for the allowable activities set forth in Section 5.05, any request for relief from the twenty-five (25) foot setback of the Level 3 Wetland and Water Protection Area shall require a request for a variance from the Auburn Zoning Board of Adjustment, pursuant to Article 14.09 of this Ordinance. 


 
(2) Conservation Committee:   Prior to holding a hearing on a request for a variance for relief from the requirements of Article 5, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall require that the variance application, and all materials submitted in support of the application, be reviewed by the Auburn Conservation Committee.  The Zoning Board shall review and consider the Conservation Committee’s comments prior to granting any such variance.  
 
5.09. Administration of Conditional Use Permits: 
 
(1). Application 
 
(a)  Application Form:  An application for a conditional use shall be initiated by filing an application with the Planning Board.  The Planning Board is authorized to produce an application form for Conditional Use Permit Applications and Minor Conditional Use Permit Applications, which may provide for additional submission requirements as the Planning Board deems necessary.   
 
(b).  Subdivision and Site Plan Review:  In the event that the applicant is also seeking subdivision and/or site plan approval from the Planning Board, the conditional use permit application hearing may occur simultaneously with a hearing on a subdivision or site plan application for the same project. 
 
(2) Summary of Process: 
 
(a) The Planning Board shall refer the conditional use permit application to the Conservation Commission for review and comment prior to the public hearing on the application.  In acting on the application, the Board shall consider any written comments or reports received from the Conservation Commission, as well as any verbal comments made by Conservation Committee members at any conditional use permit hearing.   
 
(b). After holding a duly noticed public hearing on the application, at which the Planning Board determines that the application is complete, and then considers the factors set forth herein in Section 5.09(5)(6), the Planning 
Board shall then vote to approve the application as presented, approve it with conditions, or deny it.  
 
(c). Any decision of the Planning Board granting a conditional use permit shall be noted on the recorded plan.  
 
(d). The duration of a conditional use permit shall be one (1) year.  The Planning Board may grant extensions for an additional year, not to exceed four (4) years in total.  
 
(e). Any person aggrieved by a Planning Board decision on a conditional use permit may appeal that decision to the Superior Court in the manner provided by RSA 677:15.  
 
(3) Application Requirements: 
 
 (a) Required Documents: 
 
(i) Completed Application Form 


 
(ii) Plot Plan: The applicant shall submit a plot plan showing actual dimensions relative to: 


 
(A) proposed improvements; 


 
(B) distance to the nearest wetland; and 


 
(C) delineation of wetland and classification of wetland level status, (under Section 5.04), which may require a determination by a New Hampshire Certified Wetlands Scientist. 


 
(iii) Copy of Town of Auburn Tax Map 


 
(iv) Copy of Town of Auburn Prime Wetlands Map 


 
(v) List of Abutters with Mailing Addresses (abutters include all properties within 200 feet of subject parcel property lines); and 


 
(vi) Appropriate Application Fees (see Conditional Use Permit Application Form). 


 
(b) Optional – Investigative or Scientific Studies: 
 
 An applicant may submit the results of any special investigative or scientific studies prepared in association with the proposed development, with evidence that may include a functional analysis prepared by a person or firm experienced in evaluating wetlands and watershed protection areas.  The Planning Board may, in appropriate cases, require such investigations or studies when it deems such necessary to evaluate an application for a conditional use permit under this Section.  The cost of such investigation or study shall be borne by the applicant. 
 
(4).  Hearing Procedure: 
 
 (a) Burden of Proof: 
  
The applicant for a conditional use permit bears the burden of persuasion, through the introduction of sufficient evidence through testimony or otherwise, that the development and any mitigation, if completed as proposed, will comply  
with the terms of this Ordinance and will satisfy the specific requirements for the use which are contained in this Ordinance.   
 
(b).  Required Criteria:   
 
The applicant for a conditional use permit must prove, through the application form, written submissions and testimony and evidence at the hearing, that all of the following conditions exist:  
 
(i). The proposed construction is essential to the productive use of land not within the WWPA; 
  
(ii). Design and construction methods will be such as to minimize impact upon the WWPA, and will include restoration of the site consistent with the permitted use; 
  
(iii). The proposed development design avoids and minimizes the environmental impact the development shall have on the WWPA, to the greatest extent practical; 
 
(iv). There is no feasible alternative route on land controlled by the applicant that does not cross the WWPA, nor one that has less detrimental impact on the WWPA; 
 
(v). There will be, to the extent possible, mitigation of the proposed impacts to the Wetlands and Watershed Protection Area; and 
 
(vi). Economic advantage is not the sole reason for the proposed location of the construction. 
 
(5) Review Factors: 


 
In reviewing an application of a conditional use permit, the Planning Board shall consider the following information in its deliberations, as may be applicable to the case: 
 
 (a) Application, Plot Plan, and any other Submissions by Applicant. 
 
(b). N.H. D.E.S. Jurisdiction: Impacts to wetlands, and all other areas under jurisdiction of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services – Wetlands Bureau (N.H.D.E.S.-W.B.), requiring a permit approved by N.H.D.E.S.-W.B.; 
 
(c). N.H. R.S.A. 483-B:  Impacts to areas under the jurisdiction of N.H. R.S.A. 483-B, the New Hampshire Comprehensive Shoreland Protection Act, (C.S.P.A.), requiring a permit approved by N.H. D.E.S.; 
 
(d). Reports or Analyses of Town Departments, Boards, Officers, Counsel or Consultants: Special reports or analyses of the project or its impacts prepared by the Town's departments, boards, commissions, officers, counsel or consultants;  
 
(e). Conservation Committee:  Comments or recommendations from the Town of Auburn Conservation Committee. 
 
(f). Master Plan:  The findings, goals and objectives of the most recent edition of the Town of Auburn Master Plan; 
 
(g). Capital Improvements Plan:  The relationship of the development to the timing, location and cost of public improvements scheduled in the Auburn Capital Improvements Program; 
 
(h). Auburn Zoning Ordinance: The findings, goals and objectives of the Auburn Zoning Ordinance; and 
 
(i). Testimony and Hearing Evidence:  Testimony and evidence introduced at the public hearing on the application.  
 
 (6) Required Findings: 
 
In order to approve the application, the Planning Board must find, based on the application, information and testimony submitted by the application, that: 
 
(a). If completed as proposed by the applicant, the development in its proposed location will comply with all requirements of this Article, including the required criteria set forth above in Section 5.09(4)(b), and with the specific conditions or standards established in this Zoning Ordinance for the particular use; 
 
(b). The proposed mitigation, if any, is in accordance with the spirit and intent of this Article; 
 
(c). The use will not materially endanger the public health or safety; 
 
(d). The use will be compatible with the neighborhood and with adjoining or abutting uses in the area in which it is to be located; 
 
(e). The use will not have a substantial adverse impact on highway or pedestrian safety; 
 
(f). The use will not have a substantial adverse impact on the natural resources of the town;  
 
(g). The use will be adequately serviced by necessary public utilities and community facilities and services of a sufficient capacity to ensure the proper operation of the proposed use and will not necessitate excessive public expenditures to provide sufficient additional capacity or services. 
 
(7).  Conditions of Approval 
 
(a) Written Conditions: All conditions of approval shall be stated in writing in the permit. 
 
(b) Boundary Marker: In granting a conditional use permit, as a standard condition, the Planning Board will stipulate that the WWPA boundary shall be delineated with a plastic snow fence or similar obvious barrier during any development phase, such that no land clearing or forest harvesting shall take place within the WWPA except as approved under this Section. The Owner will be required to post the boundary at intervals of no greater than fifty (50) feet, in a manner approved by the Planning Board under this Section, before the lot is offered for sale or resale.   
 
(c) Applicant’s Representations: Representations made at a public hearing or in material submitted to the Planning Board by an applicant to obtain a conditional use permit shall be deemed conditions of the issuance of the permit. 
 
(d) Additional Conditions: The Planning Board may attach other reasonable conditions to its approval, including but not limited to, performance guarantees and the phasing of a development, where such conditions are shown to be necessary to further the objectives of this Ordinance or the Master Plan, or which would otherwise allow the general conditions of this Article to be satisfied.  
 
(e) Recording Conditions: The Planning Board may require that such conditions be annotated on a site plan or subdivision plan, or otherwise recorded at the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds. 
 
5.10 Minor Conditional Use Permits: 
 
(1) Purposes: Minor Conditional Use Permits may be issued for timber harvesting, forestry and brush clearing, certain driveways, as well as for minor accessory structures, as set forth below in this Section. 
 
(2) Procedure: Minor Conditional Use Permits may be issued without a public hearing, but all other procedural requirements, including notice to abutters, consultation with the Conservation Commission, and the findings of Section 5.09 shall remain in effect.  
 
(3) Appeals: Appeals of the Planning Board’s decisions on such Minor Conditional Use Permit applications shall be made to the Planning Board within thirty (30) days of the date the Planning Board issues a decision on a Minor Conditional Use Permit application. 
 
(4) Timber Harvesting/Forestry and Brush Clearing:   8.01 Objectives and Characteristics: 

8.02 Permitted Uses 





 
(a) Permission Required: Except to the extent necessary to prevent imminent personal injury or property damage, no cutting or removal of living trees or shrubs shall be permitted in the WWPA without obtaining a minor conditional use permit.  The Planning Board shall grant a minor conditional use permit for such purpose after having ascertained the proposed cutting or removal is to be conducted in a fashion that is consistent with the purposes of this Section, and will have as limited an effect on the WWPA as is reasonably possible.   
 
(b) Best Management Practices: Forestry, including both logging operations and tree farming subject to New Hampshire R.S.A. § 227-j:9, logging, and any associated road building and/or skid trail construction, shall be conducted in accordance with the then-current Best Management Practices for erosion control on timber harvesting operations in New Hampshire, published by the University of New Hampshire Cooperative Extension and the New Hampshire Department of Resources and Economic Development and the New Hampshire Division of Forests and Lands.  
 
(5). Accessory Structures: 
 
(a) Permitted Structures: Accessory structures of five hundred (500) square feet or less upon an existing single family residential lot of record after January 1990, and located within the one hundred twenty-five (125) foot setback of a Level 1 Wetland, or within the seventy-five (75) foot setback of a Level 2 Wetland, or within twenty-five (25) feet of a Level 3 Wetland, (in which there is no storage of petroleum products, hazardous chemicals or materials within any portion of the WWPA), that do not require clearing for the installation or placement of the accessory structure(s).   
 
(b) Buffer Required: No structure, excavation, filling or grading for the installation or placement of an accessory structure shall be allowed within seventy-five (75) feet of a Level 1 Wetland, within fifty (50) feet of a Level 2 Wetland, or within twenty-five (25) feet of a Level 3 Wetland.   
 
(c) Plan Required:  The applicant shall provide a to-scale and sufficiently detailed plan with supporting information, such as wetland delineation, to the Building Department and Zoning Officer, that demonstrates compliance with this limited activity, which shall be submitted for approval by the Planning Board.   
 
(d) Compliance Determination: The Owner of an existing single family or two-family residence may submit a written request to the Planning Department for a determination of compliance, to be conducted by the Town with the understanding that all fees encumbered by the Town for the determination by a designated third party, (fee not to exceed $500), shall be paid by the applicant prior to the issuance of a building permit.  
 
(6). Certain Driveways: Construction of driveways with Minimum Impact Applications for access to single family houses on lots of record as of March 10, 2009 or as part of Planning Board review process for subdivision approval.  
 
5.11.  Dredge and Fill Permits  
 
(1).  Conservation Committee: 
 
Prior to filing an application for a New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (N.H. D.E.S.) Dredge and Fill Permit, the applicant is strongly encouraged to meet with the Conservation Commission to ensure that the proposed dredge and fill is consistent with the intent of this Ordinance. 
  
 (2).  Boundary Change:  
 
An approved N.H. D.E.S. Dredge and Fill Permit, once acted upon, will change the Wetlands and Watershed Protection boundary, which will be applied from the new edge of wetland.  
 
5.12   Wetlands and Watershed Protection Mitigation:  
 
If the Planning Board requires Wetlands and Watershed Protection mitigation, it shall be provided in one or more of the following manners:  
  
(1). Expansion of the buffer width greater than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet of a Level 1 Wetland or seventy-five (75) feet of a Level 2 Wetland around the remaining portion of the impacted region within the subject lot or lots under the application. 
 
(2). Expansion of the buffer width greater than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet of a Level 1 Wetland or seventy-five (75) feet of a Level 2 Wetland around other WWPAs within the subject parcel under the application. 
  
(3). Preservation of upland areas adjacent to other WWPAs by easement and/or deed restrictions for wildlife habitat development and management within the subject parcel or adjacent parcels, in a format acceptable to the Conservation Commission and the Planning Board. 
 
(4). Preservation of upland areas adjacent to other WWPAs by easement and/or deed restrictions for wildlife habitat development and management within the Town of Auburn, in a format acceptable to the Conservation Commission and the Planning Board. 
 
(5). Development of conservation areas and nature trails within the subject parcels, provided that the Planning Board, in consultation with the Conservation Commission, reviews and approves plans for such areas and trails prior to their development.  
 
(6). Development of conservation areas and nature trails elsewhere within the Town of Auburn, provided that the Planning Board, in consultation with the Conservation Commission, reviews and approves plans for such areas and trails prior to their development. 
 
(7). Other suitable mitigation, such as costs or fees to remediate the effects of impact upon wetlands and watershed protection areas, whether on or off-site, wetlands restoration, wetlands construction, etc. or combination thereof, meeting the intent of the regulations and acceptable to the Planning Board and the Conservation Commission. 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 6 – FLOOD PLAIN DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
 
6.01 Applicability  
 
The following regulations in this Ordinance shall apply to all lands designated as special flood hazard areas by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its “Flood Insurance Study for Rockingham County, State of New Hampshire” dated May 17, 2005 and as amended from time to time, together with the associated Flood Insurance Rate Map Panels numbered 33015C0145, 33015C0165, 33015C0170, 33015C0307, 33015C0309, 33015C0328, 33015C0330, 33015C0335, 33015C0337, and 33015C0341, dated May 17, 2005 and as amended from time to time, which are hereby declared to be part of this Ordinance and incorporated herein as reference.  If any provision of these regulations differs or conflicts with any provision of this Zoning Ordinance or other applicable ordinance or regulations, the provision imposing the greater restriction or more stringent standard shall control. 
 
6.02 Definition of Terms: 
 
The following definitions shall apply to this Flood Plain Development Regulation and shall not be affected by the provisions of any other ordinance or regulation of the Town of Auburn. 
 
(1). Area of Special Flood Hazard:  The land in the flood plain within the Town of Auburn subject to a one-percent or greater possibility of flooding in any given year.  The area is designated as Zone A on the FHBM and is designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (“FIRM”) as Zone A. 
 
(2).  Base Flood:  The flood having a one-percent possibility of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
 
(3).  Basement:  Any area of a building having its floor subgrade on all sides. 
 
(4).  Building:  See "structure" at Section 6.02(22). 
 
(5).  Development:  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operation. 
 
(6).  "FEMA":  The Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
 
(7). Flood or Flooding:  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
 
(a). The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or 
 
(b). The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
 
(8). Flood Insurance Rate Map (“FIRM”):  An official map incorporated within this ordinance as Appendix C, on which FEMA has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the Town of Auburn. 
 
(9).  Flood Plain or Flood-Prone Area:  Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "Flooding", at Section 6.02(7)). 
 
(10).  Flood Proofing:  Any combination of structural and/or non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities, structures and their contents. 
 
(11).  Floodway:  See definition of “Regulatory Floodway” at Section 6.02(20). 
 
(12). Functionally Dependent Use:  A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water.  The term includes only docking and port facilities that are necessary for the loading/unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building/repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
 
(13).  Highest Adjacent Grade:  The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
 
(14).  Historic Structure:  Any structure that is: 
 
(a). Listed individually in the National Register of Historic places (a listing maintained by the United States Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
 
(b). Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
 
(c). Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
 
(d). Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
 
(i). By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
 
(ii). Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
 
(15). Lowest Floor:  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement).  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance. 
 
(16). Manufactured Home:  A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.  For flood plain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) days. 
 
(17). Mean Sea Level:  The National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
 
(18). 100-year Flood:  See definition of "Base Flood" at Section 7.02(2). 
 
(19). Recreational Vehicle:  A vehicle which is (a) built on a single chassis; (b) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c) designed to be self propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but for camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
 
(20). Regulatory Floodway:  The channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation.  These areas are designed as floodways on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map. 
 
(21). Special Flood Hazard Area:  An area having flood, mud slide, and/or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, A0, A1-30, AE, A99, AH.  (See definition of "Area of Special Flood Hazard" at Section 7.02(1)). 
 
(22).  Structure:  For flood plain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
 
(23). Start of Construction:  Includes substantial improvements, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date.  The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction or a structure on site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.  Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. 
 
(24).  Substantial Damage:  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50%) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
 
(25). Substantial Improvement:  Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50%)percent of the market value of the structure.  The market value of the structure should equal: (a) the appraised value prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or (b) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.   
 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.  This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of actual repair work performed.  The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code conditions, or any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
 
(26).  Water Surface Elevation:  The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the flood plains. 
 
6.03. Development: 
 
All proposed development in any special flood hazard areas shall require a permit. 
 
6.04. Building Permits: 
 
The Building Inspector shall review all building permit applications for new construction or substantial improvements to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.  If a proposed building site is located in a special flood hazard area, all new construction or substantial improvements shall: 
 
(1). Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
 
(2).  Be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
 
(3). Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages; and 
 
(4). Be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities, that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
 
6.05.  Sewer or Septic Systems: 
 
Where new or replacement water and sewer systems (including on-site systems) are proposed in a special flood hazard area, the applicant shall provide the Building Inspector with assurance that these systems will be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems, and discharges from the systems into flood waters.  On-site waste disposal systems will be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during period(s) of flooding. 
 
6.06.  New or Substantially Improved Structures: 
 
For all new or substantially improved structures located in special flood hazard areas, the applicant shall furnish the following information to the Building Inspector: 
 
(1). The as-built elevation (in relation to NGVD) of the lowest floor (including basement) and include whether or not such structure(s) contains a basement; 
 
(2). If the structure has been flood proofed, the as-built elevation (in relation to NGVD) to which the structure was flood proofed; and 
 
(3).  Any certification of flood proofing 
 
The Building Inspector shall maintain this information for public inspection and shall furnish such information upon request. 
 
6.07. Certification Requirement:   
 
The Building Inspector shall not grant a building permit until the applicant certifies that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U. S. C. 1334. 
 
6.08. Alteration or Relocation of Watercourses: 
 
In riverine situations, prior to the alteration or relocation of a watercourse, the applicant for such authorization shall notify the Wetlands Board of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services and submit copies of such notification to the Building Inspector, in addition to the copies required by N.H. R.S.A. 482-A:3.  Further, the applicant shall be required to submit copies of said notification to those adjacent communities, as determined by the Building Inspector, including notice of all scheduled hearings before the Wetlands Board. 
 
The applicant shall submit to the Building Inspector certification provided by a registered professional engineer, assuring that the flood carrying capacity of an altered or relocated water course can and will be maintained. 
 
The Building Inspector shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any flood way data available from Federal, State, or other sources as criteria for requiring that all development located in Zone A meet the following floodway requirement: 
 
"No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development are allowed within the floodway that would result in any increase in flood levels within the community during base flood discharge." 
 
6.09.  Construction Requirement in "A Zones": 
 
In unnumbered A Zones the Building Inspector shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any 100-year flood elevation data available from any Federal, State or other source, including data submitted for development proposals submitted to the community (i.e., subdivisions, site plan approvals). 
 
The Building Inspector's 100-year flood elevation determination will be used as criteria for the following requirements in Zone A: 
 
(1). All new construction or substantial improvement of residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to above the 100-year flood elevation. 
 
(2). All new construction or substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the 100-year flood level; or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall: 
 
(a).  Be flood proofed so that below the 100-year flood elevation the structure is water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
 
(b). Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and 
 
(c). Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards or practice for meeting the provisions of this section. 
 
(3). All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within special flood hazard areas shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the 100-year flood elevation; and shall be securely anchored to resist floatation, collapse, or lateral movement.  Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or from ties to ground anchors.  This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
 
(4). Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE shall either: 
 
(a).  be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
 
(b).  meet all standards of Section 60.3 (b) (1) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations and the elevation and anchoring requirements for “manufactured homes” in paragraph (c) (6) of Section 60.3 of those regulations. 
 
(5).  For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are permitted provided they meet the following requirements:   
 
(a).  the enclosed area is unfinished or flood resistant, usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage;  
 
(b). the area is not a basement; and  
 
(c). the area shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood water.  Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
 
(i). A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided; and 
 
(ii). The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit automatic entry and exit of flood water. 
 
6.10.  Variances and Appeals: 
 
(1). Any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Building Inspector made under Article 6 of this Ordinance may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment as set forth in N.H. R.S.A. 676:5. 
 
(2).  If the applicant, upon appeal, requests a variance as authorized by N.H. R.S.A. 674:33, I(b), the applicant shall have the burden of showing, in addition to the usual variance standards under state law: 
 
(a). That the variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense; 
 
(b). That if the requested variance is for activity within a designated regulatory floodway, no increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge will result; and 
 
(c). That the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
 
(3).  The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall notify the applicant for a variance in writing, that:   
 
(a). the issuance of a variance to construct below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and  
 
(b). such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property.  Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. 
 
(4).  The Town of Auburn shall:  
 
(a). maintain a record of all variance actions, including the justification for their issuance; and  
 
(b). report such variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to FEMA's Federal Insurance Administrator. 
 
ARTICLE 7 – RESERVED FOR CLUSTERED DEVELOPMENT 
 
Clustered Development language removed 
by town vote on March 8, 2016.
ARTICLE 8  RESERVED FOR ELDERLY HOUSING REGULATIONS 
 
 
The Elderly Housing Regulation is designed to permit an increased residential density, greater than allowed with conventional development in the Rural (R), Residential – One (R-1), and Commercial – Two (C-2) districts.  This section is intended to set criterian that assure a project for the elderly will address the needs specific to the residents of the project.  These Elderly Housing regulations supersede conflicting regulations as to dimensional requirements, (including but not limited to lot size, frontage requirements, setbacks and buffer zones), and design standards found in the Town of Auburn Zoning Ordinance or other Town Regulations, with the exception of any requirement pertaining to architectural design that is intended to create uniformity in appearance or design of building style or façade. 
 
All elderly housing developments under this section must be proposed as cluster housing developments in accordance with Article 7 of the Auburn Zoning Ordinance and must be established and maintained in compliance with the United States Fair Housing Act, as amended, 42 U.S.C. Sec. 3602, et seq.  The Planning Board may require assurance of compliance with the Act by deed restriction or other instrument as a condition of approval.  Such assurance may consist of a written plan submitted by the developer, which sets forth: (a) the regulations under the Fair Housing Act whereby a project may lawfully discriminate in favor of elderly residents; and (b) how the developer complies with, or proposes to comply with, such requirements, including covenants and other deed restrictions and other to-be-recorded agreements. 
 
 
(1) Elderly Housing Units, and 


 
(2) Elderly Housing Support Facilities 8.03 Definitions: 

8.04 Review 

8.05 Regulations and Design Criteria 





 
 
The following words and terms pertain only to the Elderly Housing Regulations set forth herein.  All words and terms not defined here will assume the definition found elsewhere in the Auburn Zoning Ordinance. 
 
(1) Home Site: That portion of the Elderly Housing Project upon which dwelling units are constructed.  The area of land for each home site shall be shown on the site plan, but shall not require metes and bounds or be recorded as a separate deed, unless the lot is owned with the dwelling unit. 
 
(2) Open Space: Open space is that portion of the Elderly Housing Project open and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, excluding land occupied by buildings, structures, roads, drives, sidewalks and delineated home sites.  Where no separate right-of-way is delineated for private streets, only the pavement areas of the street, curbs and sidewalks are excluded.  Walkways and trails integral to the open space areas that are not curbside sidewalks shall be considered open space.  A minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the required open space shall be useable lands.  Up to fifty percent (50%) of the required open space can be wetlands or water bodies. 
 
(3) Useable Land: Land which is not a water body, wetland, or steep slope exceeding twenty-five (25%) percent. 
 
 
Any proposed elderly housing development shall be subject to the Town of Auburn Non-Residential Site Plan Review Regulations and the Subdivision Regulations, as amended. 
 
 
(1) Rural (R) District: Multi-unit structures shall not be permitted in the Rural District. 
 
(2) Project Size: The minimum size of tract land for an elderly housing development shall be twenty-five (25) useable acres.  The tract shall have a minimum of fifty (50) foot frontage on a Class V or better road.  If, in the discretion of the Planning Board, a second access or exit road is required for traffic circulation or safety, then the Planning Board shall require a minimum of fifty (50) feet of additional frontage on a Class V or better road. 
 
(3) Open Space: Open space shall be greater than fifty percent (50%) of the Elderly Housing Project tract or lot. 
 
(4) Building Set Back: Each multi-unit building shall have a minimum separation of sixty (60) feet from any other building unless there is an accessible fire hydrant located in accord with fire codes, in which case each multi-unit building able to access a hydrant shall have a minimum separation of twenty (20) feet.  Each building shall have a minimum setback of thirty (30) feet from the edge of pavement of the internal road system.  There shall be a set back of fifty (50) feet from existing public roadways for all support structures and one hundred (100) feet for all Single Family and Multi-Unit structures. 
 
(5) Buffers: The Planning Board shall establish criteria for a buffer zone around the entire perimeter of the Elderly Housing Project site based on the following: 
 
(a) Topographic features of the site and adjacent sites; 

(b) Use or zoning classification of abutting land; 

(c) Degree of visual barrier provided by the proposed buffer; and 

(d) Degree of screening provided by the developer. 


 
In no event shall the buffer zone be less than the following: 
 
Adjacent Zone or Use   Single Family  Multi-Unit 
 
R, R1, R2     Fifty (50) feet  One Hundred (100) feet 
C1, C2      Fifty (50) feet  One Hundred (100) feet 
I      Fifty (50) feet  One Hundred (100) feet 
 
(6) Parking: There shall be two (2) parking spaces per dwelling unit.  The Planning Board shall carefully consider the location of the parking spaces and the parking area’s access to the unit it serves with consideration of use by the elderly. 
 
(7) Building Height: Building height shall be limited to one story unless the following criteria are met: 
 
(a) The second floor has an at-grade access; or 

(b) The second and third floor is served by an elevator. 


 
The maximum building height shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet for single-family and multi-family and support facilities. 
 
(8) Dwelling Units: The standard dwelling unit will have a maximum of two (2) bedrooms.  The minimum dwelling size shall be nine hundred seventy (970) square feet.  The maximum dwelling size shall not exceed one thousand five hundred twelve (1512) square feet.  A site-specific floor plan shall be part of the approval process. 
 
(9) Allowed Support Facilities: During the Planning Board’s plan review hearings, the needs of the elderly shall receive priority consideration when allowing any support facilities.  Support facilities for the Elderly Housing Project may include, but shall not be limited to the following: 
 
(a) Church, chapel, or other place of worship; 

(b) Neighborhood market, not to exceed three thousand (3000) square feet; 


(c) Recreational facilities, such as card rooms, swimming pool, meeting room, video room, music room and the like; 

(d) Postal sub-station; 

(e) Medical sub-station such as first aid, pharmacy, circuit health care and the like; 

(f) Library; 

(g) Circuit veterinary care; 

(h) Florist; 

(i) Coffee shop, not to exceed three thousand (3000) square feet. 8.06 Site Ownership 

8.07 Agreements, Restrictions and Provisions 

8.08 Occupancy 





 
(10) Road Construction: All roads, sidewalks and drives shall be privately owned and maintained.  Street construction shall be in accordance with the Town of Auburn Subdivision Regulations.  Easements for emergency access and relief from liability shall be given to the Town in a form acceptable to Town counsel.  Sidewalks shall be included in a manner satisfactory to the Planning Board. 
 
 
At the time of application, the entire site shall either be under one owner, or documents shall be submitted with the application that show all owners of record have applied to the Planning Board for consolidation, pending approval of the site plan. 
 
 
All deed restrictions, condominium documents, homeowner association documents, organization provisions and other agreements for the methods of management and maintenance of common lands, roads, utilities and support facilities shall be approved by the Planning Board.  The site must be made subject to permanent recorded covenants describing the occupancy of each household.  The authority and obligation of enforcement is left to the owner or owners’ association.  Additionally, the authority, but not the obligation, to enforce deed restrictions or other agreements referred to in this Section shall be granted to the Town of Auburn Building Inspector. 
 
 
The recorded covenants shall describe the occupancy of the development as one of the following: 
 
(1) The development shall be recorded as having one hundred (100%) percent of the dwelling units occupied with at least one person fifty-five (55) years or older and no one under eighteen (18) years of age; or 


 
 
 
 
(2) The development shall have eighty (80%) percent of the units occupied with one person fifty-five (55) years of age or older and no one under eighteen (18) years of age.  The remaining twenty (20%) percent may be occupied by persons eighteen (18) years of age or older; or 


 
(3) The development shall have eighty (80%) percent of the units occupied with one person fifty-five (55) years of age or older and no one under eighteen (18) years of age.  The remaining twenty (20%) percent may be occupied by any age person(s). 8.09 Density 





 
 
Maximum density shall be determined as follows: 
 
(1) From the gross tract area subtract the following: slopes greater than twenty-five (25%) percent, wetlands, streams and bodies of water.  The remaining tract area is the “net tract area” and shall be used for density calculations. 


 
(2) Elderly Project developments with Public Utility Commission regulated public water system and sewer may have a density of no greater than six (6) dwelling units per acre of “net tract area.” 


 
(3) All projects without regulated sewer and water shall have a maximum density calculated based on using the State of New Hampshire criteria for flowage for housing for the elderly on a per bedroom basis, and dividing the result into the capacity of the site and adding a safety factor of eighty (80%) percent.  An area or areas shall be set aside in perpetuity and designated for sewage disposal.  Its capacity shall be determined for acceptance of leachate on a site-specific basis. 8.10 Maximum Number of Units 

(i) Twenty (20%)  percent or more of the total number of units proposed within the development, including all units allowed by density bonuses under any section of the Auburn Zoning Ordinance, shall be affordable as defined in Section 9.02(1); 

(ii) Fifteen (15%)  percent or more of the units constructed will be rented for a price that can be afforded by a household with an income of no more than one hundred (100%)  percent of the median income for a 4-person household for counties and metropolitan areas of the State of New Hampshire, applicable to Auburn, as published annually by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development;  





 
 
The total number of elderly housing units approved under the provisions of this Ordinance shall not exceed ten (10%) percent of the total number of non-elderly housing units then currently existing in the Town.  This requirement shall be reviewed by the Planning Board on an annual basis to determine the need for elderly housing in the region and the Town’s proportionate share. 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 9   -   WORKFORCE HOUSING 
 
9.01 Authority and Purpose 
 
This section is enacted pursuant to the requirements of  N.H. R.S.A. 674:59, (effective July 1, 2009), which requires municipalities to provide reasonable and realistic opportunities for the development of workforce housing, as defined by N.H. R.S.A. 674:58, IV, including rental and multi-family housing.  The purpose of this section is to fulfill Auburn’s requirements to provide reasonable and realistic opportunities for workforce housing in order to meet its fair share of the current and reasonably foreseeable need for such housing.  At the same time, the Town enacts this section to assure that any such housing meets reasonable standards and conditions for approval related to environmental protection, water supply, sanitary disposal, traffic safety and fire and life safety protection.   
 
9.02 Definitions 
 
(1).  “Affordable”:  Housing with combined rental and utility costs or combined mortgage loan debt services, property taxes, and required insurance that do not exceed thirty (30%) percent of a household’s gross annual income. 
 
(2). “Multi-Family Housing”: For the purpose of workforce housing developments, means a building or structure containing five (5) or more dwelling units, each designed for occupancy by an individual household. 
 
(3). “Workforce Housing”:   All workforce housing developments shall be proposed as cluster housing developments in accordance with Article 7 of this Ordinance.  Workforce housing developments may consist of: 
 
(a).    Housing which is intended for sale and which is affordable to a household with an income of no more than one hundred (100%) percent of the median income for a 4-person household for counties and metropolitan areas of the Sate of New Hampshire, applicable to Auburn, as published annually by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development; and 
 
(b).   Rental housing which is affordable to a household with an income of no more than sixty (60%) percent of the median income for a 3-person household for counties and metropolitan areas of the Sate of New Hampshire, applicable to Auburn, as published annually by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.  Housing developments that exclude minor children from more than twenty (20%) percent of the units, or in which more than fifty (50%) percent of the dwelling units have fewer than two (2) bedrooms, shall not constitute workforce housing for the purposes of this article. 
 
(c).   The terms “workforce housing” and “affordable housing” are used interchangeably throughout this Article. 
 
9.03 Permissible Locations 
 
Workforce housing developments shall be permitted in the Residential 1 District, and shall be permitted by special exception in the Residential 2, Commercial 2, and Village Districts.  Workforce housing developments are prohibited in all other districts. 
 
9.04 Requirements for Workforce Housing Developments 
 
(1).  Design Requirements  
 
(a).   A site plan of the entire development shall be submitted to the Auburn Planning Board and the development shall conform to all of the Town’s regulations and ordinances in effect at the time of submittal. However, if the applicant complies with the procedural requirements set forth in Section 9.05 below, an application for a workforce housing development may be granted a density bonus as set forth in this Article. 
 
(b).   Affordable units which are part of a clustered development may be clustered within a discrete portion of such development, if the quality of construction and appearance of the structures is the same throughout the development. 
 
(c).   Units constructed under an incentive for affordable or workforce housing must be finished in their entirety and may not be expanded in a manner which will exceed the income/resale cap established by this Article and applicable published income data.  This limitation shall be noted on any Site or Subdivision Plan and included as a deed restriction in all conveyances. 
 
(d).   During construction of an approved development qualifying as workforce housing, the developer must maintain at least the proportionate share of affordable units proposed as a percentage of total units during the build-out phase.  
 
(2).  Phasing   Each workforce housing development shall be phased so that no more than seven (7) dwelling units per development shall be permitted in any one calendar year. 
 
(3). Density Bonus Incentive   
 
(a).  Affordable Housing Sales: A density bonus of fifteen (15%) percent above the standard density, (and above any other density bonus awarded under other provisions of the Auburn Zoning Ordinance), will be allowed for developments that guarantee: 
 
 
(ii)    Fifteen (15%)  percent or more of the units constructed will be sold at initial sale for a price that can be afforded by a household with an income of no more than one hundred (100%) percent of the median income for a 4-person household for counties and metropolitan areas of the State of New Hampshire, applicable to Auburn, as published annually by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development; and 
   
(iii)   Five (5%)  percent or more of the units constructed will be sold at initial sale for a price that can be afforded by a household with an income of no more than eighty (80%) percent of the median income for a 4-person household for counties and metropolitan areas of the State of New Hampshire, applicable to Auburn, as published annually by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development; and 
 
(iv)   Units will be sold with deed restrictions and a recorded housing agreement, in a form satisfactory to the Planning Board, that limits, for a period of thirty (30) years renewable upon sale or transfer, the resale value of the unit to not more than the purchase price multiplied by a factor of 1, plus the percentage increase in median income from the year of initial occupancy until the year in which the unit is resold, plus the cost of property improvements, other than normal maintenance, made by the owner. 
 
(b).  Affordable Housing Rentals: A density bonus of fifteen (15%) percent above the standard density, (and above any other density bonus awarded under other provisions of the Auburn Zoning Ordinance), will be allowed for developments that guarantee: 
 
(i)   Twenty (20%)  percent or more of the total number of units proposed within the development, including all units allowed by density bonuses under any section of this Ordinance, shall be affordable as defined in Section 9.02(1); 
 
 
(iii)   Five (5%)  percent or more of the units constructed will be rented for a price that can be afforded by a household with an income of no more than sixty percent (60%) of the median income for a 4-person household for counties and metropolitan areas of the State of New Hampshire, applicable to Auburn, as published annually by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development; and 
   
(iv)  Units will be rented with deed restrictions and a recorded housing agreement, in a form satisfactory to the Planning Board, that limits, for a period of thirty (30) years, renewable upon each rental, the rental price for each unit to an affordable price as determined by the formula set forth above in Section 9.02(3)(b), updated to the year in which the subsequent tenant assumes occupancy, unless no such tenant is found after a sixty (60) day good faith effort.  Total gross rent to be charged to subsequent tenants shall not exceed the gross rent at the time of initial occupancy times a factor equal to 1 plus the percentage increase in the median area income, updated to the year in which the subsequent tenant occupies the unit. 
 
(c).    Density Bonus Cap:  The density bonuses set forth above as incentives for the development of affordable housing are not cumulative of each other, and no project shall receive more than a fifteen (15%) percent overall density bonus based on affordability. 
 
(4).   Administration of Units – Sales or Rentals 
 
(a).   In the event of a unit sale or transfer of an owner-occupied unit, the buyer will be certified for income eligibility under this Article by an agency with expertise acceptable to the Town, prior to the sale or transfer.  A copy of said certification will be provided to the seller. 
 
(b). In the event of a rental or renewal of an affordable rental unit, the renter will be certified for income eligibility under this Article by an agency with expertise acceptable to the Town, prior to the rental or renewal.  A copy of said certification shall be provided to the landlord.  Rental units cannot be sub-let to a third party by the current renter of record. 
 
(c). In the event rental units are sold, the requirements set forth in Section 9.02(3)(b)(iv), pertaining to deed restrictions and recorded housing agreements, will apply.  
 
(d).  A certification fee will be charged for each sale, transfer or rental term for a unit.  The fee will be paid by the purchaser or renter of the unit, as designated by the Town. 
 
(e).  Ongoing responsibility for monitoring compliance with resale and rental restrictions on affordable housing units shall be the responsibility of the Auburn Board of Selectmen or its designee.  The Planning Board may adopt regulations to aid in the implementation and administration of Article 9 pertaining to workforce housing developments. 
 
9.05 Application Process 
 
(1). Application: Any person who proposes to develop workforce housing within the Town of Auburn shall submit application to the Auburn Planning Board, in the same manner as with an application for approval of a standard housing development, except that the applicant for approval for a workforce housing development shall provide with the initial application(s) a statement of intent for the development to qualify as workforce housing.  Failure to file such a statement of intent at the time of submission of the initial application to the Planning Board shall constitute a waiver of the applicant’s appeal rights under N.H. R.S.A. 674:61, but shall not preclude an appeal under other applicable laws.     
 
(2).  Approval:  
 
(a).   If the Planning Board approves an application to develop workforce housing subject to certain conditions or restrictions, the Planning Board shall notify the applicant in writing of such conditions and restrictions and give the applicant an opportunity to establish the cost of complying with the conditions and restrictions and the effect of compliance on the economic viability of the proposed development.  The Planning Board’s notice of the conditions and restrictions shall constitute a conditional approval solely for the purpose of complying with the requirements of N.H. R.S.A. 676:4, I(c)(1).  It shall not constitute a final decision for any other purpose, including the commencement of any applicable appeal period. 
 
(b).  If the applicant notifies the Planning Board at any time that the applicant accepts the conditions and restrictions of approval, the Planning Board may issue its final decision without further action. 
 
(c).  Upon receiving notice of conditions and restrictions of approval, the applicant may submit, within forty-five (45) days, evidence to establish the cost of complying with the conditions and restrictions and the effect on economic viability. 
 
(d).  When the Planning Board receives, in compliance with the time frame set forth in Section 9.05(2)(c), evidence from the applicant establishing the cost of compliance with the Planning Board’s conditions and restrictions and the effect on economic viability, the Planning Board shall allow the applicant to review such evidence at the next Board meeting for which ten (10) days notice can be given.  At such meeting, the Planning Board may also receive and consider evidence from other sources. 
 
(e).  After the meeting described in the preceding paragraph, the Planning Board may affirm, alter, or rescind any or all of the conditions or restrictions of approval.   
 
(f).  The Planning Board shall not issue its final decision on the application before the conclusion of the meeting described in section 9.05(2)(d), unless the applicant fails to submit the required evidence within the period designated by the Planning Board, in which case the Board may issue its final decision any time after the expiration of the period for submitting evidence. 
 
9.06 Annual Report 
 
The owner of a project containing affordable units for rent shall prepare an annual report certifying that the gross rents of affordable units and the household incomes of tenants of affordable units have been maintained in accordance with the income restrictions set forth in this Article.  Such reports shall be submitted to the Board of Selectmen or its designee, and shall list the contract rent and occupant household incomes of all affordable units for the calendar year, and the dates of initial occupancy for each household.  Failure to file a complete report with sworn certification by the owner shall be considered a violation of the Auburn Zoning Ordinance. 
 
9.07 Fair Share Calculation 
 
A calculation of Auburn’s fair share of affordable housing units shall be provided to the Board of Selectmen by the Planning Board, or its designee, after a public hearing.  The fair share calculation shall be determined in accordance with the Master Plan of the Town of Auburn and other appropriate federal and state guidelines.  The fair share accommodation of income qualified individuals shall be recalculated every five (5) years, according to the most current data available.  A previous unmet fair share accommodation balance, if any, should not be carried over to the next five (5) year period.   Each fair share housing calculation determined by the Planning Board shall be filed with the Town Clerk. 
 
9.08 Termination and Reinstatement of Incentive System 
 
The incentive system allowing density bonuses for affordable housing shall remain in effect until Auburn’s fair share of affordable housing units have been approved by the Planning Board.   If, after recalculation during any five (5) year interval, Auburn is deemed to have met its fair share of affordable housing units, the density bonus system shall terminate.  The density bonus system for affordable housing units shall be reinstated if a fair share housing need is determined to exist after any recalculation by the Planning Board. 
ARTICLE 10 – RESERVED FOR GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 11 -  SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS 
 
11.01. Purpose: 
 
This Article is enacted in accordance with N.H. R.S.A. 674:62-66, and the purposes outlined in RSA 672:1-III-a.  The purpose of this Article is to accommodate distributed generation/small wind energy systems in appropriate locations, while protecting the public’s health, safety and welfare.  In addition, this Section provides a permitting process for small wind energy systems to ensure compliance with the requirements and standards established herein. 
 
11.02. Definitions: 
 
(1). Meteorological tower (Met tower):  Includes the tower, base plate, anchors, guy wires and hardware, anemometers (wind speed indicators), wind direction vanes, booms to hold equipment for anemometers and vanes, data loggers, instrument wiring, and any telemetry devides that are used to monitor or transmit wind speed and wind flow characteristics over a period of time for either instantaneous wind information or to characterize the wind resource at a given location.  For the purpose of this Article, Met towers shall refer only to those whose purpose is to analyze the environmental factors needed to assess the potential to install, construct or erect a small wind energy system. 
 
(2). Net metering:  The difference between the electricity supplied over the electric distribution system and the electricity generated by the small wind energy system that is fed back into the electric distribution system over a billing period. 
 
(3). Power grid:  The transmission system, managed by ISO New England, created to balance the supply and demand of electricity for consumers in New England. 
 
(4). Shadow flicker:  The visible flicker effect when rotating turbine blades cast shadows on the ground and nearby structures causing the repeating pattern of light and shadow. 
 
(5). Small wind energy system:  A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of 100 kilowatts or less and will be used primarily for onsite consumption. 
 
(6). System height:  The vertical distance from ground level to the tip of the wind turbine blade when it is at its highest point. 
 
(7). Tower:  The monopole, guyed monopole or lattice structure that supports a wind turbine. 
 
(8). Tower height:  The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower, excluding the wind turbine. 
 
(9). Wind turbine:  The blades and associated mechanical and electrical conversion components mounted on top of the tower whose purpose is to convert kinetic energy of the wind into rotational energy used to generate electricity. 
 
11.03. Review Procedure: 
 
(1). Building Permit:  Small wind energy systems and met towers are an accessory use permitted in all zoning districts.  No small wind energy system shall be erected, constructed, or installed without first receiving a building permit from the Building Inspector.  A building permit shall be required for any physical modification to an existing small wind energy system that materially alters the size and/or type of the small wind energy system or its location.  Like-kind replacements shall not require a building permit to be modified.  Met towers that receive a building permit shall be permitted on a temporary basis not to exceed three (3) years from the date the building permit was issued. 
 
(2). Application:  Applications submitted to the Building Inspector shall contain a site plan with the following information: 
 
(a).  Property lines and physical dimensions of the applicant’s property; 
 
(b).  Location, dimensions, and types of existing major structures on the property; 
 
(c). Location of the proposed small wind energy system, foundations, guy anchors and associated equipment; 
 
(d).   Tower foundation blueprints or drawings; 
 
(e).   Tower blueprint or drawings; 
 
(f).   Setback requirements as outlined in this ordinance; 
 
(g).   The right-of-way of any public road that is contiguous with the property; 
 
(h).   Any overhead utility lines; 
 
(i).   Small wind energy system specifications, including manufacturer, model, rotor diameter, tower height, tower type, nameplate generation capacity; 
 
(j).   Small wind energy systems that will be connected to the power grid shall include a copy of the application for interconnection with their electric utility provider; 
 
(k).   Sound level analysis prepared by the wind turbine manufacturer or a qualified engineer; 
 
(l).   Electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to State, Federal and International building or electrical codes or laws as required by this Ordinance; 
 
(m).  Evidence of compliance or non-applicability with Federal Aviation Administration requirements; and 
 
(n).   List of abutters to the applicant’s property. 
 
(3). Abutter and Regional Notification:  In accordance with N.H. R.S.A. 674:66, the Building Inspector shall notify all abutters by certified mail upon application for a building permit to construct a small wind energy system.  The public will be afforded thirty (30) days to submit comments to the Building Inspector prior to the issuance of the building permit.  The Building Inspector shall review the application for regional impacts per N.H. R.S.A. 36:55.  If the proposal is determined to have potential regional impacts, the Building Inspector shall follow the procedures set forth in N.H. R.S.A. 36:57, IV. 
 
11.04 Standards: 
 
(1). The Building Inspector shall evaluate the application for compliance with the following standards: 
 
(a).  Setbacks:  The setback shall be calculated by multiplying the minimum setback requirement number by the system height and measured from the center of the wind turbine base to the property line, public roads, or nearest point on the foundation of an occupied building. 
 
Minimum Set Back Requirements 
 

Occupied Buildings on Participating Landowner Property 
 Occupied Buildings on Abutting Property 
 Property Lines of Abutting Property and Utility Lines 
  
Public Records 
 
0 
 1.5 
 1.1 
 1.5 
 


 
(i)   Small wind energy systems must meet all setbacks for principal structures for the zoning district in which the system is located. 
 
(ii)   Guy wires used to support the tower are exempt from the small wind energy system setback requirements. 
 
(b).   Tower:  The maximum tower height shall be restricted to thirty-five (35) feet above the tree canopy within three hundred (300) feet of the small wind energy system.  In no situation shall the tower height exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
 
(c). Sound Level:  The small wind energy system shall not exceed  
sixty (60) decibels using the A scale (dBA), as measured at the site  
property line, except during short-term events such as severe wind  
storms and utility outages. 
 
(d).   Shadow Flicker:  Small wind energy systems shall be sited in a manner that does not result in significant shadow flicker impacts.  Significant shadow flicker is defined as more than thirty (30) hours per year on abutting occupied buildings.  The applicant has the burden of proving that the shadow flicker will not have significant adverse impact on neighboring or adjacent uses.  Potential shadow flicker will be addressed either through siting or mitigation measures. 
 
(e). Signs:  All signs including flags, streamers and decorative items, both temporary and permanent, are prohibited on the small wind energy system, except for manufacturer identification or appropriate warning signs. 
 
(f). Code Compliance:  The small wind energy system shall comply with all applicable sections of the New Hampshire State Building Code. 
 
(g). Aviation:  The small wind energy system shall be built to comply with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration, (FAA), Regulations, including but not limited to, 14 C.F.R. part 77, subpart B, regarding installations close to airports, and the New Hampshire Aviation statutes and regulations, including but not limited to N.H. R.S.A. 422-b and R.S.A. 424. 
 
(h). Visual Impacts:  It is inherent that small wind energy systems may pose some visual impacts due to the tower height needed to access the wind resources.  The purpose of this section is to reduce the visual impacts, without restricting the owner’s access to the optimal wind resources on the property. 
 
(i) The applicant shall demonstrate through project site planning and proposed mitigation that the small wind energy system’s visual impacts will be minimized for surrounding neighbors and the community.  This may include, but is not limited to, information regarding site selection, turbine design or appearance, buffering, and screening of ground-mounted electrical and control equipment.  All electrical conduits shall be underground. 
 
(ii) The color of the small wind energy system shall either be the stock color from the manufacturer or painted with a non-reflective, unobtrusive color that blends in with the surrounding environment.  Approved colors include, but are not limited to, white, off-white or gray. 
 
(iii) A small wind energy system shall not be artificially lit unless such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).  If lighting is required, the applicant shall provide a copy of the FAA determination to establish the required markings and/or lights for the small wind energy system. 
 
(i). Approved Wind Turbines:  The manufacturer and model of the wind turbine to be used in the proposed small wind energy system must have been approved by the California Energy Commission or the New York State Energy Research and Development Authority, or a similar entity on a list approved by the State of New Hampshire, if available. 
 
(j). Utility Connection:  If the proposed small wind energy system is to be connected to the power grid through net metering, it shall adhere to N.H. R.S.A. 362-A:9. 
 
(k). Access:  The tower shall be designed and installed so as not to provide step bolts or a ladder readily accessible to the public for a minimum height of eight (8) feet above the ground.  All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall be labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access. 
 
(l). Clearing:  Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the small wind energy system, and as otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances. 
 
11.05. Abandonment: 
 
(1). At such time that a small wind energy system is scheduled to be abandoned or discontinued, the applicant will notify the Building Inspector by certified U.S. mail of the proposed date of abandonment or discontinuation of operations. 
 
(2). Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the owner shall physically remove the small wind energy system within ninety (90) days from the date of abandonment or discontinuation of use.  This period may be extended at the request of the owner and at the discretion of the Building Inspector.  “Physically remove” shall include, but not be limited to: 
 
(a). Removal of the wind turbine and tower and related above-grade structures; and 
 
(b). Restoration of the location of the small wind energy system to its natural condition, except that any landscaping, grading or below-grade foundation may remain in the after-conditions. 
 
(3). In the event that an owner fails to give such notice, the system shall be considered abandoned or discontinued if the system is out-of-service for a continuous twelve (12) month period.  After the twelve (12) months of inoperability, the Building Inspector may issue a Notice of Abandonment to the owner of the small wind energy system.  The owner shall have the right to respond to the Notice of Abandonment within thirty (30) days from the Notice receipt date.  After review of the information provided by the owner, if the Building Inspector shall determine that the small wind energy system has not been abandoned, the Building Inspection shall withdraw the Notice of Abandonment and notify the owner of the withdrawal. 
 
(4). If the owner fails to respond to the Notice of Abandonment, or if, after review by the Building Inspector, it is determined that the small wind energy system has been abandoned or discontinued, the owner of the small wind energy system shall remove the wind turbine and tower at the owner’s sole expense within three (3) months of receipt of the Notice of Abandonment.  If the owner fails to physically remove the small wind energy system after the Notice of Abandonment procedure, the Building Inspector may pursue legal action to have the small wind energy system removed at the owner’s expense. 
 
11.06. Violation 
 
It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate a small wind energy system that is not in compliance with this Article.  Small wind energy systems installed prior to the adoption of this Article are exempt from this Ordinance except when modifications are proposed to the small wind energy system. 
 
11.07. Penalties 
 
Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this Article or a building permit issued pursuant to this Article shall be subject to enforcement and penalties as allowed by N.H. R.S.A. Chapter 676 and this Ordinance. 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 12 – GROWTH MANAGEMENT 
 
 
12.01 Basis, Purpose and Authority 
 
(1). Findings: 
 
Auburn has recently updated (2007) and reaffirms its Master Plan.  The Town has also prepared and adopted (2008) a Capital Improvements Plan, (CIP).  These documents constitute careful study and assessment of community development needs. 
 
These documents describe regional and local growth trends and project future growth trends.  Presented therein are the findings relative to the significant development pressure that the Town is projected to experience and the steps the Town should pursue to manage future growth.  In accordance with those plans, facility expansion (school enlargement) and facility upgrade (road improvements) are planned and/or underway in Town. 
 
(2). Purpose: 
 
The purpose of this Article is to meet the goals of the Master Plan and to meet the proposed schedule for capital improvements contained in the CIP.  This Article is intended to balance local service expansion needs with consequent fiscal demands, protect public health and general welfare and foster environmental protection.  It is intended to promote planned, orderly growth.  The proposed growth limitation will permit a reasonable rate of growth to occur, in line with the ability of the Town to accommodate its fair share of such growth, without imposing unacceptable burdens on current or future taxpayers. The growth limit represents Auburn's share of the projected regional growth. 
 
(3). Authority: 
 
This Ordinance is established pursuant to N.H. R.S.A. 674:22. 
 
12.02 Eligibility 
 
Eligibility for building permits, but not a right to the issuance of a building permit shall require, in addition to other provisions of this Ordinance and Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Auburn, either: 
 
(1). The recording of a plan in the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds; or 
 
(2). The existence of a lot of record recorded in the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds. 
 
12.03 Issuance 
 
Building permits shall be issued only upon proper completion of the building permit application, payment of the application fee, acceptance of application by the office of the Building Inspector, payment of the permit fee, and in accordance with the following: 
 
(1). The number of building permits to be issued in any building year for the construction of new dwelling units shall be limited to three (3%) percent 
(rounded to the nearest whole number) of the number of dwelling units known to exist in Auburn in the previous year. 
 
(2). The Planning Board, with the advice of the Selectmen, shall establish, prior to March Town Meeting of each year, the number of dwelling units known to exist, using the best available information.  The permit year or building year will run from March Town Meeting to March Town Meeting. 
 
(3). One building permit shall be required for the construction of each dwelling unit, with a duplex requiring two permits, etc.  Conversion of a single-family dwelling to a two-family dwelling shall require one permit for the additional dwelling unit.  The only exception to this one unit-one permit rule shall apply to units containing only two or fewer bedrooms built in clustered or multi-unit developments.  Said units shall be non-expandable.  Two or fewer bedroom units shall be treated as two-thirds (2/3) of a unit for the purposes of the permit limit system.  Permit amounts resulting in 1/3 remainders shall be rounded down and 2/3 remainders rounded up.  For the purpose of determining the number of bedrooms in a unit, any room that could reasonably be used as a bedroom shall be counted as such whether or not it is so designated under current plans.  This two-thirds treatment shall not apply to density determination or any other elements of the Town's regulations. 
 
(4). No more than seven (7) of the annual permits shall be issued to any one individual, business entity or group of related individuals and/or business entities in any one year. 
 
(5). Not more than seven (7) of the annual permits shall be issued in any one subdivision or re-subdivision of the land. 
 
(6). One fifth (1/5) of the annual permit quota shall be reserved for owners of single lots, that are not part of a subdivision of three lots or more or not created within one (1) year from the date of building permit application, for development of single family homes. 
 
(7). Permits issued shall lapse and be returned to the pool if construction on the building has not begun within three (3) months.  Site preparation work shall not be considered building construction.  If building construction has not been completed within twelve (12) months of issuance, a renewal of the permit shall be necessary, including all fees.  This renewal shall not be subtracted from the available building permits for the year. 
 
(8). Unused total annual allocations shall lapse at the close of the year and may not be carried over to a subsequent year. 
 
(9). In the event more permits are requested than are available, the earlier application shall prevail based on the date and time of receipt of the application in the Building Inspector's office.  The Building Inspector may maintain a waiting list in the event that another permit comes available during that building year or to apply to the next building year.  The waiting list shall not extend beyond the next building year. 
 
12.04 Exceptions 
 
(1). Permits for non-dwelling construction or permits for alteration or replacement of existing buildings will not be affected by this Ordinance. 
 
(2). Proposals for housing for the elderly, handicapped, or economically disadvantaged may be excluded from the limitations of this Article upon a finding by the Zoning Board of Adjustment that the proposed project does provide such housing, and provided said proposed housing complies in all other regards to the Town Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Regulations and with the intent of the Master Plan. 
 
(3). Every September and every December, the Planning Board shall review the number of permits issued to date, determine the outstanding number of permits that remains to be issued within the quota, and consider issuance of additional permits (within the annual quota) to developers or developments which had previously received their annual quota of permits.  
 
12.05 Administration 
 
(1). All applications shall first be reviewed for compliance with other regulations.  Each application shall then be assigned a date and time of receipt by the Building Inspector. 
 
(2). This Article of the Zoning Ordinance shall be reviewed by the Planning Board at least once every year, or sooner, if necessary, to determine whether the building permit limitation should be revised or ended and whether the limit represents a fair and equitable method of growth management.  Regional and local growth trends, the Auburn Capital Improvements Plan, land use and housing need shall all be factors considered during this review. 
 
(3). If the Town does not accept the recommended limits, then the growth limitations will be abolished. 
ARTICLE 13 BUILDING CODE AND BUILDING PERMITS 
13.01 Building Permits Required 
 
No building shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired without a building permit issued by the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector is authorized to charge and collect for the Town the fees for building permits, inspections, and certificates for occupancy.  The Auburn Board of Selectmen shall be authorized to establish a fee schedule and amend as necessary following the required statutory public hearing process. The Building Inspector shall receive applications and issue Building Permits under the fee schedule set forth in Appendix E.  
 
13.02 General Building Requirements 
No building or structure shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired in any zoning district, unless in compliance with Article 6, Flood Plain Development Regulations, and each of the following: 
(1). All construction shall be in compliance with the most current versions of the State Building Codes and Standards referenced in N.H. R.S.A. 155-A.  All modular housing shall comply with modular building standards, N.H. R.S.A. 205-C.  Where two or more codes are in conflict with one another, the Building Inspector shall apply the strictest of the code provisions.  The Building Inspector shall post a list of the applicable codes in the Town of Auburn and shall update that list with the most current versions of each of the above-referenced codes. 
(2). Renovations and remodeling of existing structures made necessary by ordinary maintenance and updating of obsolete finish materials will be permitted without making application for a building permit, so long as it does not involve alteration of interior partitions, or modification to structural, electrical, or mechanical systems.  Work on existing structures in excess of this shall be classified as rehabilitation construction and shall require a building permit and shall be subject to all other provisions of this Ordinance. 
(3). On all new buildings or structures, construction must be at least ninety (90%) percent complete before occupied as a dwelling, as determined by the Building Inspector for the Town of Auburn, with reference to the building plan or sketch approved under the provisions of this Article. 
(4). No building permit for a new dwelling shall be issued unless it contains at least eight hundred (800) square feet of first floor living area. 
(5). All buildings or structures used for residential purposes shall be set on continuous solid foundations of concrete, brick, stone or other acceptable masonry material or pressure treated lumber. 
(6). Buildings must be framed according to good building practices and outside walls shall be covered with permanent materials customarily used, such as:  wood or fire-resistant shingles, siding clapboard, brick, stucco, concrete or cinder block or other acceptable materials. 
(7). All electrical wiring shall conform to the latest National Electrical Code (NEC) approved methods and practices for safety to life and property.  Compliance with the safety code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters shall be prima facie evidence of such approved methods and practices. 
(8). In all garages attached to a residence, the wall adjacent to the residence shall have a surface of fire resistant material approved by the Fire Underwriters.  Basement garages must also conform to the above specifications for all ceiling areas exposed in the garage, plus any partitioning walls surrounding it.  Stair entrances from the garage to the residence shall also be sheathed, including walls, ceilings and door. 
(9). No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until site and driveway requirements for storm water drainage have been met as prescribed by the Building Inspector and Road Agent.  The Building Inspector and/or Road Agent shall require, where necessary, the installation of a culvert of a size sufficient to properly control the flow of water.  Additionally, all new driveways (including a driveway on a single lot) shall meet all the requirements of Section 9.15, "Driveways," of the Town of Auburn Subdivision Regulations. 
(10). Any structure damaged by fire, or other casualty, or act of God, to the extent of more than fifty (50%) percent of its total floor area or volume, shall be repaired or rebuilt in conformity with the regulations of this Ordinance, or it shall be razed and the remains removed at the Owner's expense within one year of the date of the damage. 
(11). All residential and non-residential structures, whether single or multi-unit dwellings, which utilize storage tanks for liquid petroleum or propane gas shall have the storage tanks piped to within eight (8) feet of any combustion unit with an acceptable rigid pipe, as defined by NFPA 58 Chapter 2-4.2 Pipe, and further requiring that the rigid piping be protected in accordance with NFPA 58 Chapter 3-2.7.6 and 3-2.7.7, Installation of Pipe. The owner or user of the storage tank must ensure that the tank and piping is both properly installed and maintained in a safe operating condition.  All non-single family detached dwelling installations shall be performed by a fuel gas fitter licensed in accord with N.H. R.S.A. 153:27, et seq. 
(12).   All buildings with cellars, regardless of their use, must have three or more exits. Buildings with cellars must have at least one of the three exits from the cellar.  With any construction begun after the effective date of this amendment, casement windows will not be an acceptable exit. 
 
13.03  Application 
 
(1). All applications for Building Permits shall be accompanied by a plan showing basic construction plans and details and a plot plan indicating the location of lot lines, structures, wells, septic tanks, driveways, the nearest accepted right-of-way, and the intended use of the lot. 
 
(2). The Building Inspector may conduct a minimum of three site and structure inspections for each new structure or dwelling permit issued and a lesser number for remodeling permits. 
 
(3). No permit shall be issued, or be considered valid, if it is in violation of any portion of this Ordinance, or any other Town Ordinance. 
 
(4). The fees for Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy shall be paid when an application is submitted and shall be returned if an application is denied. 
 
(5). Applications for Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy shall be made in duplicate on forms provided by the Building Inspector, each to be accompanied by a plot plan drawn to scale including information outlined in Section 13.03(1) above, and all other information as may be required by the Building Inspector to process said application.  The proposed handling of water supply and sewerage disposal shall be described on all applications and shown on the plot plan. 
 
(6). Except upon written order of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, no Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any construction or use which would be in violation of this Ordinance. 
 
(7). Where applications are denied by the Building Inspector, the specific reasons for so doing shall be stated fully on the application, with one copy of the application to be filed in the Town and one copy returned to the applicant. 
 
(8). All valid building permits must be exercised within twelve (12) months after date of issue.  If a valid building permit is not exercised, a renewal permit must be applied for. 
 
(9). Whenever, in the judgment of the Building Inspector, expert professional assistance is required to analyze plans and specifications, or to inspect work pursuant thereto, the Building Inspector may, after notification to applicant, obtain such assistance.  Such expert assistance is to be paid for by the applicant. 
 
(10). The Building Inspector shall grant or deny the application within a twenty (20) day period.  If granted, the Building Inspector shall give the applicant a Preliminary Certificate of Occupancy, which the applicant shall post in a conspicuous place on the work site.  Such certificate will become null and void if the proposed undertaking is not commenced within ninety (90) days of its issuance. 
 
(11). If the application is denied because licenses, permits or approvals are required under this Ordinance by some authority other than the Building Inspector, or for any other reason, the Building Inspector shall state the reasons for the denial on the application.  An application denied on the basis of the Town’s Growth Management Ordinance shall state such and shall indicate the date of denial. 
 
(12). Upon satisfactory completion of the undertaking in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, the application, and any conditions imposed by other authorities having jurisdiction under this Ordinance, the Building Inspector shall issue the applicant a Final Certificate of Occupancy. 
 
13.04 Certificates of Occupancy 
 
(1).   No land or building shall be occupied, used, or changed in use until a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued by the Building Inspector stating that the proposed use of such land or building complies with all the provisions of this Ordinance.  In the case of construction on a new foundation, a certified foundation plan shall be submitted to the Building Inspector at the time of the foundation inspection, showing the location of the new foundation on the lot, and delineating the edge of any wetland within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the construction.  No construction beyond an existing foundation shall be performed until a certified foundation plan and a to-scale plan of the proposed further construction, delineating the edge of any wetland within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the construction, is submitted to, and approved by, the Building Inspector.  
 
(2). A Certificate of Occupancy shall be applied for at the same time application is made for a Building Permit, and shall be issued following an inspection of the premises by the Building Inspector, and his/her finding that all provisions of this Ordinance, the Town of Auburn Subdivision Regulations and the Town of Auburn Site Plan Regulations have been met 
 
13.05 Other Approvals 
 
In instances where licenses, permits or approvals are required under this Ordinance by some authority other than the Building Inspector, the Preliminary Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued by the Building Inspector only after the applicant has secured the necessary other license, permit or approval. 
13.06  Swimming Pool Barrier Requirements 
 
All swimming pools installed within the Town of Auburn shall comply with applicable state building codes and amendments under NH RSA 155-A.  All pools shall have barrier requirements in place prior to final inspection and issuance of certificate of completion.  
 
13.07 Power Burner, Chimney, Fireplace, Furnace and Oil Tank Permits  
 
(1). It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation to construct or reconstruct any chimney, fireplace or furnace equipment of any kind, nor install fuel oil tanks or power burner equipment, without first obtaining a permit for such installation from the Building Inspector. 
 
(2). Upon the receipt of an application for a permit for the installation of power burner equipment, oil tank, fireplace or chimney, the Building Inspector shall issue a temporary approval for such installation. 
 
(3). Installation under the temporary approval required above shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Town of Auburn Building Code and regulations of the New Hampshire Board of Fire Control, promulgated under N.H. R.S.A. 153. 
 
(4). Upon completion of the installation, the temporary approval shall become void.  The Chief of the Fire Department, or one of his subordinates, after having inspected the installation or otherwise satisfying himself that it is in accordance with this Ordinance, shall advise the Building Inspector to issue a permanent permit covering the storage of oil and/or operation of the equipment installed as provided herein. 
 
(5). A fee of $25.00 is required with each power burner, fireplace, furnace or oil tank installation application. 
 
13.08 Smoke, Fire and Carbon Monoxide Detection and Portable Fire Extinguishers 
 
(1). All new construction shall be equipped with smoke detectors, fire detectors, carbon monoxide detectors and fire suppression equipment in accord with the then current State of New Hampshire Building Codes and State Fire Codes, as well as N.H. R.S.A. 153:10-a relative to fire warning and carbon monoxide detection.   
 
(2). All Commercial and Industrial occupancies shall have all Portable Fire Extinguishers installed, inspected, maintained and recharged in accordance with NFPA 1 Uniform Fire Code 2009 edition, NFPA 101 Life Safety Code 2015 edition, NFPA 10 Standard for Portable Fire Extinguishers 2013 edition and the NH State Fire Code.  Any person performing an annual external visual examination of a portable fire extinguisher shall obtain a: 
 
(a) Certification as a Portable Fire Extinguisher Technician by the National Association of Fire Equipment Distributers.  (NAFED) or; 


 
(b) Certification or testing by another recognized organization as deemed appropriate and acceptable by the Authority Having Jurisdiction.  (AHJ) or; 


 
(c) Current certification from the manufacturer of the portable fire extinguisher denoting the portable fire extinguisher and areas in which the applicant has successfully trained and been certified.  


 
(3). All new construction and all new uses shall conform with the Town of Auburn Fire Department Rules and Regulation Requirements for fire alarms and fire suppression, as provided by the Planning Board. 
 
 
13.09 Enforcement 
 
(1). It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to keep a record of all applications for building permits issued with a notation of special conditions involved. 
 
(2). It shall be the further duty of the Building Inspector to maintain consistent surveillance of the Town to ensure that the provisions of this Ordinance, the Subdivision Regulations and the Site Plan Regulations are not being violated.  The Building Inspector is also authorized to join the Town Health Officer in enforcing health code violations when, in his/her opinion, the violation rises to the level of a nuisance. 
 
 
 
13.10 Violations and Penalties 
 
(1). If at any time the Building Inspector finds that any construction or use has been commenced in violation of this Ordinance, he or she shall immediately notify the Owner or agent of the nature of the violation, in writing, and order the abatement of such violation. 
 
(2). Failure to comply with any provisions of this Ordinance, any specific conditions and safeguards established by the Zoning Board of Adjustment in granting a variance or special exception, or any condition or requirement of Site Plan or Subdivision approval of the Planning Board, or an Excavation Permit shall cause the violator to be liable for a fine not to exceed Two Hundred Seventy-Five Dollars ($275.00) for each day such violation continues unabated after the remedy of the same is ordered by the Building Inspector, and/or such other penalty as may be authorized by N.H. R.S.A. 676:17.  For subsequent offenses involving the same violation, an owner shall be subject to a fine of not more than Five Hundred Fifty ($550.00) per day of a continuing violation.  The Building Inspector may undertake any enforcement action or combination of enforcement actions allowed by law, including: 
 
(a). Self-help; 
(b). A civil action for fines; 
(c). A civil action for attorney’s fees; 
 
(d). An action for injunctive relief; 
(e). An action for money damages; and 
(f). Any other action allowed by law. 
 
 
(3). Wherever any violation of this Ordinance occurs, any person may file a complaint in regard thereto in writing to the Building Inspector.  The Building Inspector shall immediately investigate said complaint, and finding a violation to exist, shall act according to paragraph 14.02 of this Ordinance. 
 
13.11 Appeals 
 
(1). The owner, applicant or any other person aggrieved by a decision of the Building Inspector hereunder, may appeal therefrom to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
 
(2). The procedure for said appeals shall be the same in all respects as appeals from the refusal to grant a building permit as provided in N.H. R.S.A. 673:3, 674:34, and the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the same duties and powers as provided therein. 
 
(3). Whenever, in the judgment of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, expert professional assistance is required to determine any appeal, the Zoning Board may, after notification to the appellant, obtain the same at the expense of the appellant, who shall pay the cost of such expert.              
 
 
ARTICLE 14 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
 
14.01 Zoning Officer-Building Inspector 
 
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint and replace, as is appropriate, a Zoning Officer-Building Inspector (herein referred to as "Building Inspector") whose duty it shall be to administer the provisions of this Ordinance in accordance with New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, Chapters 673, 674, 676 and 677, and, where applicable, all other State laws and Town of Auburn ordinances and regulations.  The procedures for obtaining building permits and certificates of occupancy from the Building Inspector are set forth in Article 13.01, et seq. of this Ordinance. 
 
14.02 Enforcement 
 
In any case in which the Building Inspector finds that an undertaking subject to the provisions of this Ordinance has been commenced or is proceeding in violation of this Ordinance, he/she shall issue a cease and desist order to the owner.  If compliance with this Ordinance is not gained within thirty (30) days, or such shorter period of time deemed appropriate by the Building Inspector, the Building Inspector shall notify the Selectmen, and they shall take immediate steps to enforce compliance by seeking an injunction in the Superior Court, civil fines, and attorney’s fees, or by any other appropriate legal action set forth in Section 13.10. 
 
14.03 Penalty 
 
Any owner violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance may be fined not more than Two Hundred Seventy-Five Dollars ($275.00) for a first offense.  Each day such violation continues from the time a cease and desist order is issued, until the time that work is undertaken to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance, (excluding any time during which the individual is actively seeking relief through administrative appeal or court action), the owner shall be subject to an additional fine of not more than Two Hundred Seventy-Five ($275.00) per day.  For subsequent offenses involving the same violation, an owner shall be subject to a fine of not more than Five Hundred Fifty Dollars ($550.00) per day of continuing violation. 
 
14.04 Fees Established by Selectmen 
 
The Board of Selectmen may adopt, and, from time to time, amend, a schedule of fees adequate to cover the cost of required notices and its other necessary administrative expenses.  The cost of notice, whether mailed, posted, or published, shall be paid in advance by the applicant.  Failure to pay such costs shall constitute valid grounds for the Board to terminate further consideration, and to deny an application or appeal without public hearing. 
 
14.05 Zoning Board of Adjustment 
 
(1). Appointment:  The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall consist of five (5) members who shall be residents of the Town and appointed by the Board of Selectmen.  Members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment in office at the effective date of this Ordinance shall continue in office.  Thereafter, as terms expire or vacancies occur, the Selectmen shall make appointments pursuant to N.H. R.S.A. 673:5.  At no time shall more than one member of the same occupation or profession be permitted on the Board.  No more than five (5) alternate members shall be appointed by the Selectmen, pursuant to N.H. R.S.A. 673:6. 
 
(2). Removal of Members 
 
(a). After public hearing, appointed members and alternate members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be removed by the Board of Selectmen upon written findings of inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office.  See NH RSA 673:13. 
 
(b). The Board of Selectmen shall file with the Town Clerk a written statement of reasons for removal under this section. 
 
(3). Adoption of Rules:  The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules to govern its proceedings pursuant to N.H. R.S.A. 676:1.  Rules of procedure shall be adopted at a regular meeting of the Board and shall be placed on file with the Town Clerk for public inspection. 
 
(4). Powers:  Pursuant to N.H. R.S.A. 674:33 and 674:33-a, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers: 
 
(a). To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Building Inspector or other administrative official in the enforcement of this Ordinance or of any ordinance adopted pursuant to N.H. R.S.A. 674:16. 
 
(b). To hear and decide requests for special exceptions to the terms of this Ordinance, which the Zoning Board is authorized by this Ordinance to pass upon. 
 
(c). To hear appeals under N.H. R.S.A. 676:5(III) when the Planning Board has interpreted the Zoning Ordinance in the context of Site Plan review or a Subdivision Application.  See 14.06(2). 
 
(d). To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, if, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of the Ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done. 
 
(e). To grant a permit to locate a building or structure or part thereof in a street shown on the official town map when the Zoning Board finds that the property of the applicant of which the mapped-street location forms a part will not yield a reasonable return to the owner of the property, or the Zoning Board finds, after balancing the interest of the municipality in preserving the integrity of the official map and in not increasing too greatly the cost of later opening such street, and the interest of the owner in the use and benefits of his property, that considerations of justice and equity require the grant of such permit; provided, however, that the Zoning Board shall deny such a permit if the applicant will not be substantially damaged by placing his building outside the mapped-street location.  Before taking any action under the section, the Zoning Board shall hold a hearing at which parties in interest and others shall have an opportunity to be heard.  Notice for a public hearing under this section shall be as provided in N.H. R.S.A. 675:7. 
 
(f). To grant equitable waivers from the physical layout or dimensional requirements of this Ordinance in accord with N.H. R.S.A. 674:33-a. Under no circumstances shall this authority be used to grant a waiver from a use restriction in this Ordinance.  An equitable waiver granted under this authority shall not be construed as a non-conforming use, and shall not exempt future use, construction, reconstruction, or additions on the property from full compliance with this Ordinance.  This authority shall not be construed to alter the principle that owners of land are bound by constructive knowledge of all applicable zoning requirements.  This authority shall not be construed to impose upon town officials or boards any duty to guarantee the correctness of plans reviewed by them or property inspected by them.   
 
(g).   To hear appeals from the decision of the Building Inspector denying a building permit on a lot accessed by a Class VI road, whenever the enforcement of N.H. R.S.A. 674:41 would entail practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and when the circumstances of the case do not require the building, structure or part thereof to be related to existing or proposed streets.  In passing on such an appeal the Zoning Board may impose such terms and conditions as it deems appropriate under RSA 674:41. 
 
(h).   In exercising its appellate powers, the Zoning Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and may make such order, or decision, as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
 
(i).   The concurring vote of three (3) members of the Zoning Board shall be necessary to reverse any action of such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this Ordinance, or to affect any variation in this Ordinance. 
(5). Issuance of Decision 
(a). The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall issue a final written decision which either approves or disapproves an application for a local permit.  If the application is not approved, the Zoning Board shall provide the applicant with written reasons for the disapproval. 
(b). Whenever the Zoning Board issues a decision, the decision shall be placed on file in the Town Clerk's office and shall be made available for public inspection after the decision is made, within the time period required by N.H. R.S.A. 91-A. 
14.06 Appeals to Zoning Board of Adjustment 
(1).   Administrative Officer’s Decision:  Appeals to the Zoning Board may be taken by any person aggrieved by, or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the Town affected by, any decision of an administrative officer of the Town.  Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the Zoning Board, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Zoning Board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof.  The 
officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Zoning Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.  Applicants are warned that an appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may not toll or stay the time period in which to appeal a Planning Board decision to the Superior Court. 
(2).   Planning Board Decision:  If, in the exercise of subdivision or site plan review, the Planning Board makes any decision or determination which is based upon the terms of this Ordinance, or upon any construction, interpretation or application of this Ordinance, which would be appealable to the Zoning Board of Adjustment if it had been made by the administrative officer, then such decision may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment; provided, however, that if the Planning Board decision is based on any section of this Ordinance involving innovative land use controls adopted pursuant to N.H. R.S.A. 674:21, which delegate administration to the Planning Board, then the Planning Board’s decision made pursuant to that delegation shall not be appealed to the Board of Adjustment, but may be appealed to the Superior Court as provided by N.H. R.S.A. 677:15. Any such appeal of the Planning Board’s decision or determination shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, by filing with the Planning Board and with the Zoning Board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof.  The Planning Board shall forthwith transmit to the Zoning Board of Adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken. 
 
(3).   Status Quo Maintained:  The effect of an appeal to the Zoning Board shall be to maintain the status quo.  An appeal of the issuance of any permit or certificate shall be deemed to suspend such permit or certificate, and no construction, alteration, or change of use which is contingent upon it shall be commenced.  An appeal of any order or other enforcement action shall stay all proceedings under the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, after notice of the appeal has been filed with such officer, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the officer’s opinion, cause imminent peril to life, health, safety, property, or the environment.  When such a certification has been made by the enforcing officer, the officer’s enforcement proceedings shall not be stayed, other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Zoning Board or by the Superior Court, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and cause shown.   
14.07 Referral to Planning Board 
The Zoning Board may, before acting on any appeal, special exception or variance, refer it to the Planning Board for review and recommendation. 
14.08 Motion for Rehearing 
Within thirty (30) days after any order or decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, the Selectmen, any party to the action or proceedings, or any person directly affected thereby, may apply for a rehearing in respect to any matter determined in the action or proceeding, or covered or included in the order, specifying in the Motion for Rehearing the ground therefore; and the Board of Adjustment, may grant such rehearing if in its opinion good reason therefore is stated in said motion.  The thirty-day time period shall be counted in calendar days beginning 
with the date, as required by N.H. R.S.A. 677:2, following the date upon which the Board voted to approve or disapprove the application; provided however, that if the moving party shows that the minutes of the meeting at which such vote was taken, including the written decision, were not filed within five (5) business days after the vote pursuant to N.H. R.S.A. 676:3-II, the person applying for the Motion for Rehearing shall have the right to amend the Motion for Rehearing, including the grounds therefore, within thirty (30) days after the date on which the written decision was actually filed. 
Upon the filing of a Motion for Rehearing, the Zoning Board shall within thirty (30) days either grant or deny the application, or suspend the order or decision complained of pending further consideration.  Any order of suspension may be upon such terms and conditions as the Zoning Board may prescribe. 
14.09 Variances 
(1).   General:  Any variance shall be only for the minimum relief required to alleviate the hardship justifying the variance and shall expire if construction or the use (as appropriate) is not commenced within two (2) years of the authorization.  In authorizing a variance, the Zoning Board may attach such conditions and safeguards as it deems necessary or appropriate to protect the abutters, the neighborhood and/or the Town as a whole.  Additional provisions relative to the granting of a variance within a special flood hazard area are contained in Article 6.10. 
(2).   Requirements:  The Zoning Board of Adjustment may authorize a variance from the Zoning Ordinance only where the applicant proves all of the following: 
(a).    Literal enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance would result in an unnecessary hardship: 
(i). For purposes of this sub-paragraph, “unnecessary hardship” means that owing to special conditions of the property that distinguish it from other properties in the area;   
(A)  No fair and substantial relationship exists between the general public purposes of the ordinance provision and the specific application of the provision to the property; and  
(B)  The proposed use is a reasonable one. 
(ii). If the criteria in sub-paragraph (i) are not established, an unnecessary hardship will be deemed to exist if, and only if, owing to special conditions of the property that distinguish it from other properties in the area, the property cannot be reasonably used in strict conformance with the ordinance, and a variance is therefore necessary to enable a reasonable use of it.  
 (b).    Granting of a variance will not be contrary to the public interest; 
 (c).    The granting of a variance will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of the Ordinance; 
 (d).     The granting of a variance will result in substantial justice being done; and 
 (e).    There will be no diminution in the value of surrounding properties as a result of granting the variance. 
14.10  Disability Variance 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 14.09, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may grant a variance without finding a hardship arising from the condition of the premises when reasonable accommodations are necessary to allow a person with a recognized physical disability to reside in or regularly use the premises, provided that: 
(a). Any variance granted under this Section shall be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Zoning Ordinance; and 
(b). The Zoning Board of Adjustment may provide that the variance shall survive only so long as the particular person has a continuing need to use the premises. 
When such a limitation has been imposed on the variance, any improvements made as a result of the variance shall, at the sole discretion of the Zoning Board, be removed upon cessation of use by the particular person(s) who is the subject of the variance.   
14.11 Abandonment or Discontinuance of a Variance 
If, after commencement, a variance is abandoned for a period of one (1) year, or otherwise replaced by a conforming use, then the variance shall be deemed to have expired and cannot be reestablished without a new application process and affirmative decision by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
14.12 Appeals under N.H. R.S.A. 674:41 
If an appeal has been granted under N.H. R.S.A. 674:41, the applicant shall have one (1) year within which to obtain a building permit.  Failure to secure a building permit within one (1) year of the Zoning Board decision shall result in an expiration of the relief granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
14.13 Temporary Uses 
In the case of natural disaster such as dwelling destruction by fire, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may authorize a permit, after due notice and hearing, for the temporary occupancy and use of a structure or land in any zone for a purpose that does not conform with the zone requirements.  Such occupancy and use shall be subject to any reasonable conditions and safeguards which the Zoning Board may impose to minimize any injurious effect upon the neighborhood or to protect contiguous property.  The approval by the Zoning Board and any permit based thereon, for such temporary occupancy and use, shall not be granted for a period of more than twenty-four (24) months, and may be renewed upon reapplication to the Zoning Board. 
 
14.14 Special Exceptions 
  
(1). General:  Special exceptions shall be subject to the satisfaction of the requirements and standards set forth herein, in addition to all other requirements and standards of this Ordinance.  Special exceptions shall be made in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance.  All such uses are hereby  
declared to possess characteristics of such unique and special form that each 
specific use shall be considered as an individual case. 
 
(2). Standards Applicable to All Special Exceptions: The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall grant an application for a special exception provided the applicant proves by a preponderance of the evidence that the following criteria are met: 
 
(a).   The requested use is specifically authorized in this Ordinance for the zone; 
 
(b).  The requested use will not create undue traffic congestion or unduly impair pedestrian safety; 
 
(c).  The requested use will not overload any public or private water, drainage or sewage system, or any other municipal system, nor will there be any significant increase in storm water runoff onto adjacent property or streets; 
 
(d).   The requested use will not create excessive demand for municipal services, including, but not limited to, police, fire protection, or schools; 
 
(e).   The requested use will not create hazards to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public, nor be detrimental to the use of, or out of character with, the adjacent neighborhood in that location, and the nature and height of the buildings and structures will neither discourage the permitted use of the adjacent land and buildings nor impair the value thereof; 
 
(f).  The proposed location, with due consideration to the size of the use, the nature and intensity of operations involved and the size of the site, is appropriate for the requested use; 
 
(g).   The intensity of the use will be of no greater intensity than the operation of any permitted use; and 
 
(h).   The requested use is consistent with the spirit and intent of this Ordinance and the Town of Auburn Master Plan. 
 
(3). Permits for Special Exceptions 
 
Special exceptions may be allowed only by approval of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.  A permit for a special exception use shall not be issued by the Zoning Board until it shall first be satisfied that all of the standards and conditions of this section and this Ordinance have been met. 
 
 
(4). Review Procedure 
 
(a). In determining whether to grant or deny a special exception, the Zoning Board shall apply the standards applicable to variances, as prescribed by N.H. R.S.A. 674:33, I(b), except that no showing or finding of unnecessary hardship shall be required. 
 
(b). The burden of proof in establishing the propriety of a special exception and compliance with the standards set forth in Section 14.14(2) shall be upon the applicant. 
 
(c). The Zoning Board shall utilize the procedures established by N.H. R.S.A. 674:33 in hearing and determining applications for a special exception. 
 
(5).  Application Process: 
 
(a).   When submitting an application for a special exception to the Zoning Board, the owner or his agent shall also submit the following: 
 
 A preliminary plan prepared in accordance with the standards and requirements set forth in the Town of Auburn Subdivision Regulations, unless otherwise noted in the following subsections. 
 
The applicant shall also submit to the Zoning Board and/or the Building Inspector any information specifically required by this Ordinance or any applicable Town regulation, depending upon the proposed use.    
 
 The applicant shall also submit any additional information so indicated in the following subsections, and any other information requested by the Zoning Board in order to permit the Zoning Board to reach a decision on the application. 
 
(b). If requested, a special exception applicant shall present the Zoning Board with a written environmental impact statement concerning the actual or potential effect of the proposed use upon the following factors: 
 
(i) The regenerative capacity of water aquifers or other ground or service water supplies; 
 
(ii) The natural functioning of plant, animal, fish and human life processes; 
 
(iii) Unique or irreplaceable land types, historic sites or archaeological areas, or of existing scenic and aesthetic features of the surrounding area; 
 
(iv) Conformity with existing geologic and topographic features; and 
 
(v) The traffic volume or traffic patterns in the surrounding area. 
 
(c). Within five (5) days of receipt of the plan(s), the Zoning Board shall transmit a copy thereof to the Planning Board, Health Officer, and/or Police Chief, where appropriate. These entities or officers shall submit written recommendations and reports to the Zoning Board within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the applicant’s plan(s). 
 
(d). The Zoning Board shall not take final action on an application for a special exception until it has received reports thereon from the Planning Board and department heads, as indicated above, or until each recipient has allowed fifteen (15) days to elapse.  The Zoning Board shall give due consideration to the reports, and where its’ decision differs from the recommendations, shall state the reasons therefore in writing. 
 
(e). Failure of the Zoning Board to approve or disapprove an application for special exception upon a use permit or a new or renewal license application within one hundred and twenty (120) days from the date of filing of the application shall constitute approval, and the permit or license shall be automatically issued. 
 
(f). If the Zoning Board denies a special exception, it shall do so in writing issued to the owner.  Within ten (10) days of its written denial, the Zoning Board shall also issue to the owner a written statement of its reasons for the denial. 
 
(6). Conditions 
 
If deemed necessary to protect the best interest of the abutting property, the neighborhood, or the Town as a whole, the Zoning Board may impose conditions in granting a special exception.  These conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
 
(a). Increasing the required lot size or yard requirements; 
 
(b). Limiting the height of buildings because of obstruction to view and reduction of light and air to adjacent properties; 
 
(c). Controlling the number and location of vehicle access points to the property; 
 
(d). Increasing the street width adjacent to the property; 
 
(e). Increasing the number of parking spaces required; 
 
(f). Limiting the number, location and size of signs; 
 
(g). Requiring suitable on-site landscaping and screening; 
 
(h). Specifying a time limit for initiation and/or completion of construction or alteration of a structure; and 
 
(i). Providing for specific layout of facilities on the property, such as location of the building, parking areas, access to the building and the like. 
 
(7). Limits of Special Exception 
 
Special exceptions shall be deemed to authorize only one particular use.  If there is an alteration in use, a request for a new special exception is required.  If the use or construction authorized by the granting of a special exception has not commenced within a one (1) year period from the date of the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, or in the event of an appeal to the courts of the special exception or the project to which it relates, within a one (1) year period from the final judgment of the court, then the special exception shall be deemed to have expired and the Zoning Board’s decision rendered null and void.  Upon a request, submitted prior to the date of expiration, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may extend the period of validity of a special exception for one (1) additional year, provided that the applicant presents evidence of: 
 
(a).   A good faith effort to commence the use or construction so authorized by special exception; 
 
(b).   That the delay in commencement of the use or construction was beyond the applicant’s control; and 
 
(c).   That the circumstances relating to the property and surrounding neighborhood have not changed substantially since the date of the original decision. 
 
(8). Abandonment or Discontinuance of a Special Exception 
 
If, after commencement, a special exception is abandoned or discontinued for a period of one (1) year, or it is supplanted by another use, then the special exception shall be deemed to have expired and shall not be re-established without a new application to the Zoning Board of Adjustment and an affirmative decision thereon. 
14.15  Costs 
Any person appearing before the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be represented by counsel, but the costs of retaining such counsel shall be borne by the party retaining the counsel, and not by the Town of Auburn. 
 
14.16  Appeals to the Superior Court 
 
The filing of an appeal with the Superior Court shall not stay any enforcement proceedings upon the decision appealed from and shall not have the effect of suspending the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment unless the appealing party has been granted a restraining order by the Superior Court.   
 
ARTICLE 15-AMENDMENT, VALIDITY AND EFFECTIVE DATE 
 
 
15.01 Amendment 
 
Any amendment to this Ordinance, as proposed by the Planning Board or otherwise, shall be adopted in accordance with the procedures required by New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, Chapter 675, et seq. 
 
15.02 Validity 
 
The invalidity of any provision of this Ordinance or district boundary shown on the official zoning maps shall not affect the validity of any other provision of this Ordinance or boundary. 
 
15.03 Existing Ordinances 
 
All existing Ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are repealed upon passage of this Ordinance. 
 
15.04 Effective Date 
 
The effective date of this Ordinance or any amendment thereto shall be upon its approval by the Town of Auburn pursuant to New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, Chapter 675, et seq. 
 
The effective date of this amended Ordinance is March Town Election, 2018.  
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
 
APPENDIX A 
 ……. 
 Zoning Matrix of Uses and Districts 
 
APPENDIX B 
 ……. 
 Zoning Table of Dimensions 
 
APPENDIX C 
 ……. 
 Flood Insurance Rate Map 
 
APPENDIX D 
 ……. 
 Zoning Map 
 
APPENDIX E 
 ……. 
 Fee Schedule for Building Permits and Inspections 
 
APPENDIX F 
 ……. 
 Fire Department Regulations 
 


 
APPENDIX A 
ZONING MATRIX OF USES AND DISTRICTS 
 
P= Permitted Use S= Special Exception  X= Not Allowed 
 
 
TYPE OF LAND USE     ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL 
  
 R 
 R1 
 R2 
 C1 
 C2 
 I 
 V 
 
 
1 
 Public Educational Facility 
  
 P 
 P 
 P 
 X 
 P 
 X 
 P 
 
2. 
 Church 
  
 P 
 P 
 P 
 X 
 P 
 X 
 P 
 
3. 
 Public Recreational Facility 
  
 P 
 P 
 P 
 X 
 P 
 X 
 P 
 
4. 
 Day Care Center, 1 to 6 Persons 
  
 P 
 P 
 P 
 S 
 S 
 X 
 S 
 
5. 
 Day Care Center, over 6 Persons* 
  
 P 
 S 
 P 
 S 
 P 
 X 
 P 
 
6. 
 Private Education Facility* 
  
 S 
 S 
 S 
 P 
 P 
 X 
 P 
 
7. 
 Nursery School* 
  
 P 
 S 
 P 
 S 
 P 
 X 
 P 
 
8. 
 Outdoor Commercial Recreational Facility 
  
 S 
 S 
 X 
 P 
 P 
 S 
 S 
 
9 
 Indoor Commercial Recreational Facility 
  
 S 
 X 
 X 
 P 
 P 
 S 
 P 
 
10 
 Social Facility 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 S 
 S 
 X 
 S 
 
11. 
 Hospitals 
  
 S 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 P 
 X 
 P 
 
12. 
 Municipal Buildings 
  
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 
13. 
 Cultural Facilities 
  
 S 
 S 
 S 
 P 
 P 
 X 
 P 
 


 
* In a Clustered Residential Development, the following uses are allowed by Special Exception:  home shop; home business; daycare center (over 6 persons); nursery school and produce stand. 
 
AGRICULTURE AND FORESTRY 
  
 R 
 R1 
 R2 
 C1 
 C2 
 I 
 V 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
 Agriculture 
Agritourism  
Farm Roadside Stand                                                                    
  
 P 
S 
P             
 P 
S 
S 
 
 P 
S 
P 
 P 
S 
P 
 S 
P 
P 
 X 
X 
X 
 
  S 
P 
P 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 


 
RESIDENTIAL 
  
 R 
 R1 
 R2 
 C1 
 C2 
 I 
 V 
 
 
1 
 Single Family Detached Dwelling 
  
 P 
 P 
 P 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 
2. 
 Manufactured Housing/Mobile Home** 
  
 P 
 P 
 P 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 
3. 
 Dwelling Unit, Duplex 
  
 X 
 S 
 S 
 X 
 S 
 X 
 S 
 
4. 
 Dwelling Unit, Multi-Family 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 S 
 X 
 S 
 
5. 
 Boarding House 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 S 
 X 
 S 
 
6. 
 Clustered Residential Development 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 
7. 
 Conversion Apartment 
  
 S 
 S 
 S 
 X 
 S 
 X 
 S 
 
8. 
 Accessory Dwelling Unit 
  
 S 
 S 
 S 
 X 
 S 
 X 
 X 
 
9. 
 Accessory Dwelling Unit to Commercial Establishment 
  
  
X 
  
X 
  
X 
  
X 
  
X 
  
X 
  
X 
 
10. 
 Elderly Housing 
  
 P 
 S 
 P 
 X 
 P 
 X 
 P 
 
11. 
 Workforce Housing 
  
 X 
 P 
 S 
 X 
 S 
 X 
 S 
 
12. 
 Mixed Residential/Commercial Use 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 S 
 X 
 S 
 


 
**    Manufactured Housing Parks and Mobile Home Parks are not permitted. 
APPENDIX A CONTINUED 
 
 
COMMERCIAL 
  
 R 
 R1 
 R2 
 C1 
 C2 
 I 
 V 
 
 
1 
 Home Shop 
  
 P 
 S 
 P 
 X 
 P 
 X 
 P 
 
2. 
 Home Office 
  
 P 
 P 
 P 
 X 
 P 
 X 
 P 
 
3. 
 Home Business 
  
 P 
 S 
 P 
 X 
 P 
 X 
 P 
 
4. 
 Motels/Hotels 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 P 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 
5. 
 Sales Establishment 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 P 
 P 
 S 
 P 
 
6. 
 Restaurant 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 
7. 
 Fast Food Restaurant 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 P 
 S 
 P 
 S 
 
8. 
 Commercial Service Establishment 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 P 
 P 
 S 
 P 
 
9. 
 Office Establishment under 3,000 sq. ft. 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 P 
 P 
 S 
 P 
 
10. 
 Office Establishment over 3,000 sq. ft. 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 P 
 X 
 P 
 X 
 
11. 
 Multi-Unit Commercial Establishment 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 P 
 S 
 X 
 P 
 
12. 
 Automobile Service Station 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 P 
 S 
 X 
 S 
 
13. 
 Automobile Repair Garage 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 P 
 S 
 X 
 S 
 
14. 
 Automobile or Similar Vehicle Sales Facility 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 P 
 S 
 P 
 S 
 
15. 
 Warehouse Establishment 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 P 
 X 
 P 
 X 
 
16. 
 Light Industrial Establishment 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 S 
 X 
 P 
 X 
 
17. 
 Travel Trailer Park/Campground 
  
 S 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 
18. 
 Clustered Commercial Development 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 
19. 
 Veterinary Clinic 
  
 X 
 S 
 S 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 
20. 
 Sexually Oriented Business*** 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 S 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 


 
***    Subject to additional requirements of Section 4.07(7) 
 
 
INDUSTRIAL 
  
 R 
 R1 
 R2 
 C1 
 C2 
 I 
 V 
 
 
1 
 Industrial Establishment 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 P 
 X 
 
2. 
 Lumber Treatment Establishment 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
   P 
  X 
 
3. 
 Junk Yards 
  
 X 
 X 
   X 
 X 
 X 
   S 
  X 
 
4. 
 Industrial Repair Garage 
  
 X 
 X 
   X 
 X 
 X 
   P 
  X 
 
5. 
 Clustered Industrial Development 
  
 X 
 X 
   X 
 X 
 X 
   X 
  X 
 


 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
  
 R 
 R1 
 R2 
 C1 
 C2 
 I 
 V 
 
 
1 
 Utility Substation 
  
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 
2. 
 Water Supply Works 
  
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 
3. 
 Excavation and Soil Removal 
  
 X 
 X 
 S 
 X 
 X 
 S 
 X 
 
4. 
 Heliport 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 S 
 X 
 
5. 
 Private Airstrip 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 S 
 X 
 
6. 
 Antennas and Communication Towers 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 S 
 X 
 
7. 
 Permanent Storage Facility 
  
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 
8 
 Temporary Storage Facility 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 P 
 X 
 
9. 
 Employee Amenities, including but not limited to: fitness center, dry cleaner, personal services or bank machine, when established as part of a permitted use in the Industrial District. 
  
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 X 
 


APPENDIX B 
ZONING TABLE OF DIMENSIONS 
 
 
 
  
MINIMUM  
  
MINIMUM  
  
MINIMUM DIMENSIONS 
 MAXIMUM HEIGHT 
 
DISTRICT 
 LOT SIZE 
 FRONTAGE 
 Front Yard 
 Side Yard 
 Rear Yard 
 Feet 
 Stories 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
R 
 3 acres 
 300 feet 
 50 feet 
 50 feet 
 50 feet 
 35 
 3 
 
R1, R2 
 2 acres 
 200 feet 
 50 feet 
 30 feet 
 50 feet 
 35 
 3 
 
C1, C2 
 2 acres 
 200 feet 
 50 feet 
 30 feet 
 50 feet 
 35 
 3 
 
I 
 3 acres 
 300 feet 
 50 feet 
 (* see note) 
 42 
 3 
 


 
 
*   To be determined at Site Plan Review 
 
Note: See specific sections of this Ordinance for additional requirements. 
 
APPENDIX C 
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP 
 
 
Please see Article 6 – Flood Plain  
Development Regulations 
 
msc.fema.gov 
to create a FIRMette map 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX D 
ZONING MAP 
 
APPENDIX E   
(ability to amend by Auburn Board of Selectmen per RSA 674:51 adopted March 2017) 
FEE SCHEDULE FOR  
BUILDING PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 
 
New Construction & Additions 
Use Group and Type of Construction  
 ICC Building Valuation Data (reviewed annually at discretion of Auburn Planning Board) 
    
Group (International Building Code) 
  
  
                   Type   of   Construction 
  
  
  
 
 
 1A 
 1B 
 2A 
 2B 
      3A 
      3B 
      4 
      5A 
      5B 
 
A-2 Assembly, nightclubs 
 137.74 
 133.48 
 130.10 
 125.03 
 116.08 
 115.77 
 120.68 
 106.71 
 103.11 
 
A-2 Assembly, restaurants, bars, banquet halls 
 136.74 
 132.48 
 128.10 
 124.03 
 114.08 
 114.77 
 119.68 
 104.71 
 102.11 
 
A-3 Assembly, churches 
 163.64 
 157.92 
 153.66 
 146.75 
 135.13 
 134.40 
 141.56 
 123.97 
 118.86 
 
A-3 Assembly, general, community halls, libraries, museums 
 139.33 
 133.62 
 128.35 
 122.44 
 109.81 
 110.09 
 117.26 
 98.65 
 94.55 
 
B Business 
 140.02 
 134.95 
 130.65 
 124.54 
 111.53 
 110.82 
 119.78 
 99.60 
 95.75 
 
E Educational 
 149.11 
 144.06 
 139.93 
 133.69 
 123.37 
 120.45 
 129.32 
 110.19 
 106.00 
 
M Mercantile 
 102.58 
 98.32 
 93.94 
 89.87 
 80.45 
 81.15 
 85.52 
 71.08 
 68.48 
 
R-2 Residential, multiple family 
 116.34 
 111.63 
 108.08 
 102.84 
 92.80 
 92.76 
 102.18 
 83.63 
 79.45 
 
R-3 Residential, one- and two-family 
 111.51 
 108.46 
 105.79 
 102.87 
 98.15 
 97.91 
 101.12 
 93.50 
 88.03 
 
R-4 Residential, care/assisted living facilities 
 138.30 
 133.59 
 130.04 
 124.80 
 114.56 
 114.52 
 123.94 
 105.39 
 101.21 
 
S-1 Storage, moderate hazard 
 78.75 
 74.84 
 70.09 
 67.68 
 57.88 
 58.88 
 64.66 
 48.46 
 45.63 
 
S-2 Storage, low hazard 
 77.75 
 73.84 
 70.09 
 66.68 
 57.88 
 57.88 
 63.66 
 48.46 
 44.63 
 
U Utility, miscellaneous 
 59.54 
 56.30 
 52.95 
 50.29 
 43.72 
 43.72 
 46.94 
 35.89 
 34.18 
 
Private garages use Utility, miscellaneous 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 


Unfinished basements (all use groups) = $15.00 per square foot 
N.P. = not permitted 
 
Construction of New Homes, Additions, Detached Accessory Structures, New Commercial Buildings   
 Calculate square footage  x  square foot construction costs per Building Valuation Data  
 
Multiply by: Town of Auburn Permit Fee Multiplier = 0.0034   
 
Minimum Permit fee shall be $25.00 
 
Renovations/Remodel 
Renovation and remodel fees shall be calculated at one third (1/3rd) the cost of new construction.  Minimum permit fee shall be $25.00. 
 
Individual Permit Fees (if not part of new construction) 
 
Electrical Permit  $25.00    (installation, replacement, alteration) 
Plumbing Permit  $25.00    (installation, replacement, alteration) 
Mechanical Permit  $25.00   (propane piping, heating equipment,) 
Oil Burning Equipment  $25.00    (inspection through Auburn Fire Department) 
Chimney    $25.00 
Above ground pool  $25.00     (includes electrical fee) 
In-ground Pool   $50.00     (includes electrical fee) 
Shed    $25.00 
Septic Design Review  $30.00 
Septic Installation  $30.00 
Sprinkler   $50.00 
Sign  (non-illuminated)  $25.00 
Sign  (illuminated)  $50.00    (includes electrical fee) 
Driveway New   $50.00     per curb cut 
Driveway improvement  $25.00     per curb cut 
 
Renewals   
Permit renewal fees shall be based on a determination by the building inspector as to the percentage of completion of construction. 
Fees shall be calculated as follows: 
 25% complete  $100.00   
 50% complete  $  75.00 
  75% complete  $  50.00 
 
Reinspection fees.  There shall be no fee for the first inspection.  However, the fee for any second or subsequent reinspections shall be charged 50% of the fee for initial inspection. 
 
Relocated Structures:  The fees for relocated structures shall be the same as new structures whether residential, commercial, or industrial. 
APPENDIX F 
FIRE DEPARTMENT REGULATIONS 
 
 
Section A System Design and Layout 
Section B System Guide Lines 
Section C Radio Boxes 
Section D Knox Box 
Section E Plan Review and Technical Assistance 
 
Plan Review and Technical Assistance. 
 
(1) The Town of Auburn shall require for new commercial construction, modification, or rehabilitation, construction documents and shop drawings shall be submitted, reviewed, and approved by the AHJ (Authority Having Jurisdiction) prior to the start of such work. 


 
(2) The applicant shall be responsible to ensure that the following conditions are met: 

(a) The construction documents include all of the fire protection requirements. 

(b) The shop drawings are correct and in compliance with all applicable codes and standards. 

(c) The contractor maintains an approved set of construction documents on site. 


 
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the AHJ (Authority Having Jurisdiction) to promulgate rules that cover the criteria to meet the New Hampshire State Fire Code and the review of documents and construction documents within established time frames for the purpose of acceptance or providing reasons for non-acceptance. 

(4) Review and approval by the AHJ shall not relieve the applicant of the responsibility of compliance with the New Hampshire State Fire Code. 


 
Technical Assistance 
 
(1) Construction documents or shop drawings shall be prepared and or reviewed by an approved independent third party with expertise in the matter to be reviewed at the submitter’s expense. 

(2) The independent reviewer shall provide an evaluation and recommend necessary changes of the proposed design, operation, process, or new technology to the ADH. 

(3) The AHJ shall be authorized to require the design submittals to bear the stamp of a registered design professional. 

(4) The AHJ shall make the final determination as to whether the provisions of The New Hampshire State Fire Code have been met. 


 
 
 
These requirements are not to be construed to be complete, but only as a guide. For all questions regarding fire, the enclosed shall be directed to the Auburn Fire Department and resolved before proceeding with construction. 
SECTION A 
System Design and Layout 
 
 
1. All fire alarm systems installed in the Town of Auburn shall have an application for Fire Alarm from The Auburn Fire Department. A floor plan showing all fire alarm devises, location of radio box, panel and annunciators, a one-line wiring diagram, and battery calculations and annunciator detail showing zone labeling will be required to be submitted before The Auburn Fire Department or Town of Auburn Building Inspector issues an application. 
 
2. The installer shall complete a certificate certifying that the system has been 100% tested and functions in complete compliance with the system specifications and manufacturers recommendations.  The certificate shall be signed by the installer, general contractor and the owner.  After receipt of the certification, the Fire Chief will conduct an inspection, the installer shall perform the test and shall provide the necessary tools and personnel to perform the test with a representative of the owner. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to inspect 25% of all alarm devices quarterly. The intent is a 100% inspection of the system annually. 
 
3. Additions and modifications to existing systems will require a new application and submittal. 
 
4. All equipment used shall be of a type approved by the Fire Chief. All systems shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 1221, 13A, 70, 72A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, 90A, 101, IBC 2000, and IRC 2000. 
 
5. All Fire Alarm Panels, Annunciators, Firefighter Telephone and Fire Alarm Pull Stations shall have CAT-30 key locks. 
 
6. All Fire Alarm Panels (FIRE ALARM CONTROL PANEL) shall be stand-alone units.  No other functions shall be allowed in the panel (e.g. security systems). 
 
7. All systems shall be DC, supervised, battery stand-by Fire Alarm systems. Multiplex and addressable systems shall not be allowed without special exception after review by the Fire chief. 
 
8. A separate AC circuit disconnect will be provided for the Fire Alarm system with breaker lock and painted RED. 
 
9. The batteries used with the Fire Alarm control panel shall be capable of operating the panel for sixty (60) hours with a five (5) minute ring-down at the end of the sixty (60) hour period.  The calculation used to determine battery capacity shall be presented to the Fire Department with the application for Fire Alarm. Stand-by batteries and the charging system shall be supervised. 
 
10. Fire Alarm control panels shall have a sign "Fire Alarm System" of 1" white lettering on a red background. 
 
11. If the Fire Alarm control panel is located in a separate or concealed space, a sign shall be provided on the entrance door or near the concealed space. The sign shall be red with white lettering at least one (1) inch in height and shall read: "Fire Alarm System". 
 
 
12. Upon activation of any alarm device, the control panel shall sound the evacuation signals, flash the evacuation lights, indicate the zone of activation, and send a signal to a UL approved central station.  Elevator recall shall be wired to the State of New Hampshire Elevator Code. 
 
13. All elevators which travel 25 feet or more above the ground level shall be connected to the fire alarm system. Each elevator lobby, at each level and the elevator equipment room shall have a smoke detector with connections to the elevator control system. Smoke detectors activation in an elevator lobby shall prevent the elevator from stopping and/or opening at the lobby. The system shall be wired so that in the event of activation of all lobby smoke detectors, the elevators shall open at a designated level. Elevator recall systems shall reset-set automatically with the resetting-setting of the Fire Alarm Control Panel. All smoke detectors shall be connected to the appropriated zone of the building fire alarm system. 
 
14. All control panels shall have a drill switch to permit fire drills without summoning the Fire department in educational, daycare, nursing homes, group homes, and other occupancies as determined by the Fire Department. 
 
15. City disconnect switches are not allowed on the Fire Alarm control panels. This shall not apply to Radio Box trip units. 
 
16. All zones of the control panel shall have red alarm indicating lamps and yellow trouble lamps. Power lamps shall be green. 
 
17. A trouble signal switch shall silence the trouble audible signal while the trouble visual signal remains illuminated.  The trouble silence and drill switches shall have a ring back feature to supervise correct switch position. Alarm signals shall have a resound provision. When a system is "silenced" and subsequent alarms from any other zone shall resound-round the evacuation signals. All control panels shall have a signal silence switch and a system reset switch. 
 
18. Control panels having zone labeling on the outside of the door with zone lamps mounted on an inside panel shall have zone labeling inside the panel also, to indicate zones when door is opened. 
 
19. ALL SYSTEMS shall allow the visual indicators of the evacuation signal to stay illuminated after the alarm silence switch is operated and remain illuminated until the system is reset. 
 
20. All places of assembly and all structures housing 24 or more living units shall require a Voice Fire Alarm system with slow whoop evacuation signal and must have a supervised microphone public address system. 
 
21. All dwelling units shall have a UL listed device (mini-horn) or speaker connected to the buildings fire alarm system. All evacuation and audible devices shall have the same sound. 
 
22. End of the line devices must be installed electrically last beyond any detection device in an alarm circuit. The location of the end of the line device shall be permanently labeled. 
 
23. Detection devices located in concealed areas shall have remote indicators or their location shall be permanently marked in a manner acceptable to the Fire Chief. 
 
 
 
24. A system smoke detector and 212-degree sprinkler head  (if sprinkled) shall be installed in all main electrical rooms. Installation of equipment shall be in accordance with modern standards of practice. All wiring shall be in accordance with the National Electrical Code, NFPA 72 series pamphlets, and all State and Local codes, and the rules and regulations of The Auburn Volunteer Fire Department. 
 
25. Fire Alarm zones shall protect a maximum of 10,000 square feet. 
 
26. Structures having multiple- tenant outside access shall be zoned by tenant space.  (E.g.  strip malls shall be zoned by address of each store.) 
 
27. All wiring shall be run in EMT or metallic conduit.  All pull boxes shall be red. No wiring shall be exposed.  105-degree centigrade wire may be run without conduit provided it is not exposed, is above seven (7) feet from the floor level and is stapled or supported every twenty-four (24) inches. 105 c wire must be labeled 'FPL', 'FPLR' if the cable runs in a plenum. All initiating and audio/visual devices shall be mounted on back of boxes. All wire must be solid. 
 
28. All Alarm initiating devices other than smoke devices shall be wired electrically first before smoke detectors in a class "B" system. All smoke detectors shall be wired electrically grouped together in a class "A" system. 
 
29. If a local alarm system is present, a RED label with White lettering shall be present over the pull stations and is to read: "LOCAL ALARM ONLY. DIAL "911" 
 
30. A remote annunciator shall be located at the main entrance of the building and strategically mounted to allow unimpaired access and view at all times. The color shall be predominantly red. All zone labeling shall be in plain English indicating the location of the alarm. Zone indicators WILL NOT be allowed on the annunciator. Units located on the outside of the building shall be back-lit type with sufficient brilliance to be seen in normal direct sunlight. No LED lamps are allowed. Acceptable annunciator labeling will include: Back lit painted window letters or engraved plastic white on red. NOTE: "Dymo" labels will not be allowed. 
 
31. Graphic annunciators shall be required on all buildings of unusual design or with a floor space in excess of 20,000 square feet and all multi-building systems. 
 
32. The building graphic shall show the building in phase with the viewer and shall indicate in red to the viewer "You Are Here". 
 
33. Building outlines shall be "triple thick" black.  Within the buildings rooms, corridor, etc. shall be shown "double thick". Other lines of lesser significance such as door swings and windows shall be shown "single thickness". Extraneous building details shall be eliminated to provide a clear and concise plan of the layout depicting only relevant details. 
 
34. Graphics having significant detail should have stairways highlighted or shaded in blue and elevators in yellow to bring attention to these areas. All main corridors and point of egress shall also be clearly indicated. 
 
35. All Fire Alarm and Fire Department control devices and locations shall be shown with red symbols and identification. 
 
36. Zone boundaries shall be shown using a red dashed line when applicable. 
 
37. Permanent "HAZARDOUS MATERIALS" storage locations should be so noted in red. 
 
38. Annunciator panel detail plan and drawing shall be submitted to the Fire Chief for approval before installation. 
 
39. All exterior exit ways and each exit from each floor shall have a pull station within four (4) feet of exit way. 
 
40. All pull stations and horn/light units shall be predominantly red and be labeled "Fire". Any alarm or signal devices located in the building which are not part of the fire alarm system shall be painted a color other than red. If key pull stations are used, a CAT-30 key shall be used. 
 
41. Signal levels shall not be less than 84 dB or exceed 100 dB as measured four (4) feet above the floor throughout each coverage area. Levels shall be measured using an ANSI Type 1 sound level meter set for "A" weighting and "slow" meter response. For signals with varying levels, the signal shall be deemed to be the maximum level indicated. The signal level requirement shall be met for all required signals. Tests shall be conducted with doors closed between rooms. 
 
42. The Town of Auburn assumes no responsibility for the correct operation of the fire alarm systems. 
 
43. The Auburn Fire Department maintains a "Knox Box" key depository system. All commercial, industrial, non-residential and multi-family buildings are required to install "Knox Box" systems. See section D of these regulations for additional information and requirements. 
 
 
 
SECTION B 
Fire Alarm System Guidelines 
 
 
 
1. All single family and two (2) family homes shall be equipped with 110-volt hard wire smoke detectors, with a minimum of one per floor and is to include the attic. All smoke detector circuits will be tied into a common light circuit. 
 
2. All multi-family dwellings from 3 to 6 units shall contain 110-volt smoke detectors in all common hallways, attic area and basement area. These shall all be connected together and connected to a common light circuit.  Each unit shall be equipped with not less than one (1) smoke detector per floor and shall be connected to a common light circuit with-in the unit. 
 
3. All multi-family dwellings from 7 to 9 units shall meet all specifications as listed above in section 2.  However, pull stations shall be installed within four (4) feet of all common exits and shall be labeled local alarm as specified in the System Design and Layout section 29. 
 
4. All multi-family dwellings from 10 units on up shall meet all requirements as listed above in section 3. However, said alarm system shall be equipped with a Radio Box Fire Alarm System and shall meet all requirements as listed for Equipment Design and layout and the section on Radio Boxes which can be found in Section C. 
 
5. All commercial and industrial buildings shall contain a complete fire alarm system as specified in the System Design and Layout. 
 
6. All commercial and industrial buildings, up to 8,000 square feet shall be monitored by a Digital Dialer and shall be monitored by a UL approved monitoring company. 
 
7. All commercial and industrial buildings greater than 8,000 square feet shall be monitored by a radio Box transmitter which will be monitored by the Town of Derry. 
 
8. All places of assembly will be monitored by a Radio Box Transmitter that will be monitored by the Town of Derry. 
 
9. Buildings undergoing renovations must be brought up to compliance as defined in this document. 
 
10. All smoke detectors shall be UL approved and not less than three (3) percent activation. 
 
 
 
SECTION C 
Radio Boxes 
 
 
1. All Radio Boxes installed in The Town of Auburn shall be of a type approved by the Fire Chief. 
 
2. Radio Boxes shall be pedestal or wall mounted at the main entrance of the building, or internally mounted next to the Fire Alarm Panel. Internally mounted Radio Boxes shall require a Knox Box at the main entrance of the building. 
 
3. Radio Box batteries shall be float charged from an AC source in the Fire Alarm Control Panel, fused at both ends of the charged circuit. 
 
4. Radio Master Box Interface will be mounted adjacent to the Fire Alarm control Panel and have its trouble signal wired to the common system trouble. Fire Alarm panels with UL listed Radio Box trip modules do not require interface panels. 
 
5. All Radio Box Locks shall be a CAT-30 lock and key.   
 
6. All Radio Box locations must be approved prior to installation. 
 
7. All Radio Boxes shall remain completely covered during construction to prevent accidental use. 
 
8. All keys to the Radio Box shall be turned over to the Fire Chief after system acceptance. 
 
9. All equipment shall be made available for test and inspection when required by the Fire Department. 
 
10. The Auburn Fire Department reserves the right to disconnect service to the Radio Box at any time for non-compliance with the Fire Department regulations or in case of system trouble which might endanger the proper operation of the Town alarm system. The owner will be notified of any disconnections. 
 
 
 
 
SECTION D 
Knox Box 
 
 
Any building having an alarm system must have a "Knox Box" mounted within 10 feet of main entrance. 
 
Applications can be obtained from the Building Inspector or Fire Chief.  
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TOWN OF AUBURN 
 
SUBDIVISION REVIEW REGULATIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Original:  Adopted March 1967 
Revised in the following years:  December 1983, April 1984, July 1985, October 1986, August 1999, June 2011 
     
 
 
 
 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
ARTICLE 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS.................................................................................................................1 
1.01 Title..........................................................................................................................................................1 
1.02 Authority..................................................................................................................................................1 
1.03 Policy and Purposes.................................................................................................................................1 
1.04  Applicability.............................................................................................................................................2 
1.05 Waivers....................................................................................................................................................2 
1.06 Expenses and Fees...................................................................................................................................3 
1.07 Compliance with Regulations..................................................................................................................4 

 
ARTICLE 2 - DEFINITIONS....................................................................................................................................5 
2.01  Usage........................................................................................................................................................5 
2.02 Words and Terms.....................................................................................................................................5 
2.03 Other Definitions......................................................................................................................................9 

 
ARTICLE 3 - SUBDIVISION APPLICATION AND SUBMITTAL PROCESS...............................................10 
3.01 Subdivision Classifications....................................................................................................................10 
3.02 Procedures for Lot Line Adjustments....................................................................................................10 
3.03 Procedures for Minor Subdivisions........................................................................................................11 
3.04 Procedures for Major Subdivisions........................................................................................................14 
3.05 Submission Requirements for Design Review Phase.............................................................................16 
3.06  Final Review Phase................................................................................................................................19 
3.07           Submission Requirements for Final Review Phase...............................................................................20 
3.08 Time Table for Final Review Phase.......................................................................................................23 
3.09 (Reserved)..............................................................................................................................................24 
3.10  Notification of Application Submission and Public Hearings...............................................................24 
3.11 Developments of Regional Impact.........................................................................................................24 

 
ARTICLE 4– SUBDIVISION APPROVAL PROCESS........................................................................................27 
4.01  Standards for Final Review and Approval or Disapproval....................................................................27 
4.02 Written Decisions and Filing Requirement............................................................................................28 
4.03  Approval with Conditions......................................................................................................................28 
4.04. Conditional Approval: (Conditions precedent)......................................................................................30 
4.05 Recording of Final Plan and Time Period for Submitting Final Mylar..................................................30 

 
ARTICLE 5 - GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.......................................................................................32 
5.01  Character of Land for Subdivision.........................................................................................................32 
5.02  Conformity to Zoning Ordinance and Master Plan................................................................................32 
5.03  Scattered or Premature Development.....................................................................................................32 
5.04  Required Certification............................................................................................................................33 
5.05   Erosion Control......................................................................................................................................34 
5.06  Reserved Strips......................................................................................................................................34 
5.07  Preservation of Existing Features...........................................................................................................34 
5.08  Cluster Development Project Review....................................................................................................34 

 
ARTICLE 6 – GENERAL SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS............................................................................36 
6.01 Regulatory Approvals and Additional Reviews.....................................................................................36 
6.02   Acceptance of Dedication Offers...........................................................................................................36 
6.03   Soil Tests................................................................................................................................................36 
6.04   Access Driveway....................................................................................................................................36 
6.05   Assurances from Applicant....................................................................................................................36 
6.06   Availability of Other Utilities................................................................................................................37 
6.07  Other Requirements:  Easements, Rights-of-way; Covenants and Conveyances..................................37 

 
ARTICLE 7- CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS....................................................................................38 
7.01 Pre-Construction Conference.................................................................................................................38 
7.02 Improvements.........................................................................................................................................38 
7.03 Off-site and On-site Improvements........................................................................................................39 
7.04 Performance Guarantee Prior to Acceptance of Streets, Utilities, Other Improvements and  
                  Public Land............................................................................................................................................40 
7.05   Change of Design and Improvements....................................................................................................40 
7.06 Soil Test Pits, Boring and Percolation Test Pits.....................................................................................40 

 
ARTICLE 8 – PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES..........................41 
8.01 Performance Guarantee Required..........................................................................................................41 
8.02 Form.......................................................................................................................................................41 
8.03 Renewal..................................................................................................................................................41 
8.04 Failure to Complete Improvements........................................................................................................41 

8.05           Release or Reduction of Performance Guarantee..................................................................................42 
 
ARTICLE 9 - DESIGN STANDARDS....................................................................................................................43 
9.01  Minimum Standards...............................................................................................................................43 
9.02  Specifications for Required Improvements............................................................................................43 
9.03 Requirements Prior to Certificate of Occupancy...................................................................................43 
9.04  Street Layout and Design.......................................................................................................................43 
9.05   Block Layout..........................................................................................................................................48 
9.06   Lot Detail...............................................................................................................................................48 
9.07   Open Space Requirements.....................................................................................................................49 
9.08   Landscaping and Planting......................................................................................................................49 
9.09  Street Construction.................................................................................................................................50 
9.10   Drainage Requirements..........................................................................................................................52 
9.11   Under Drains..........................................................................................................................................53 
9.12 Box Culverts, Bridges and Retaining Walls...........................................................................................54 
9.13  Fire Protection........................................................................................................................................55 
9.14   Driveways..............................................................................................................................................64 
9.15  Utilities...................................................................................................................................................65 
9.16  Monuments.............................................................................................................................................66 
9.17   Cluster Development Specific Design Requirements............................................................................66 
9.18  Preservation of Natural Features and Amenities....................................................................................68 
9.19  Other Improvements...............................................................................................................................68 
9.20 Temporary Signs....................................................................................................................................68 
9.21  Conditions During Construction............................................................................................................68 

 
ARTICLE 10 – STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL REGULATIONS.............................................................................................................................70 
10.01 General...................................................................................................................................................70 
10.02 Definitions..............................................................................................................................................70 
10.03 Applicability...........................................................................................................................................71 
10.04 Waiver....................................................................................................................................................71 
10.05 Minimum Requirements.........................................................................................................................71 
10.06 Design Standards....................................................................................................................................72 
10.07        Technical Requirements.........................................................................................................................73 
10.08 Completed Application Requirements...................................................................................................79 
10.09 Responsibility for Construction/Installation..........................................................................................81 
10.10 Plan Review and Approval....................................................................................................................81 
10.11 Maintenance and Inspection...................................................................................................................82 

 
ARTICLE 11 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT............................................................................83 
11.01   Acceptance of Streets.............................................................................................................................83 
11.02   Other Regulations and Ordinances.........................................................................................................83 
11.03   Enforcement...........................................................................................................................................83 
11.04   Fees........................................................................................................................................................84 
11.05   Concurrent and Joint Hearings...............................................................................................................84 
11.06   Penalty....................................................................................................................................................84 
11.07   Court Review.........................................................................................................................................85 
11.08   Amendments..........................................................................................................................................85 
11.09   Severability............................................................................................................................................85 
11.10   Validity...................................................................................................................................................85 
11.11   Effective Date........................................................................................................................................85 
11.12   Repeal....................................................................................................................................................85 


 
APPENDICES 
Appendix A – Typical Construction Details 
Appendix B – Typical Escrow Agreement 
Appendix C – Application for Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase 
Appendix D – Application for Design Review Phase 
Appendix E – Application for Lot Line Adjustment 
Appendix F – Application for Final Review Phase 
Appendix G – Fee Schedule 
Appendix H – Subdivision Plan Improvements Guarantee Worksheet 
Appendix I – Suggested Road Names 
 
CONTENTS OF APPENDIX A – TYPICAL CONSTRUCTION DETAILS 
1.
 Typical Cul-De-Sac 


2.
 Roadway cross section – open drainage 


3.
 Roadway cross section – open drainage 


4.
 Roadway cross section – closed drainage 


5.
 Typical sidewalk detail – open drainage 


6.
 Typical sidewalk detail – closed drainage 


7.
 Roadway cross section – utility locations 


8.
 Precast catch basin  


9.
 Precast drain manhole 


10.
 Type A catch basin frame and grate  


11.
 Torrent catch basin frame and grate 


12.
 Type C catch basin frame and grate 


13.
 Precast and mortar rubble drainage culvert headwall 


14.
 30,000 gallon fibreglass cistern  



 

ARTICLE 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
1.01 Title 
 
These Regulations shall hereafter be known, cited and referred to as the “Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Auburn, New Hampshire.” 
 
1.02 Authority 
 
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Planning Board by the voters of the Town of Auburn and in accordance with the provisions of New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, Chapter 674: Sections 35-42, inclusive, the Auburn Planning Board hereby adopts the following Regulations governing the approval and disapproval of plans for the subdivision of land in the Town of Auburn, New Hampshire, on June 15, 2011. 
 
These Regulations replace and supersede the former Subdivision Regulations for the Town  adopted on August 18, 1999.  Adoption of these Regulations is not intended to invalidate any approval or alter any requirement of an approval under the former Regulations.  The provisions of the former Subdivision Regulations shall be deemed to apply to all completed applications currently pending before the Planning Board, and all applications which are the subject of a first legal notice before the Board, unless determined otherwise by agreement of the Applicant and the Board. 
 
1.03 Policy and Purposes 
 
1.   Policy:  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Town of Auburn Planning Board to consider the subdivision of land and development of residential and non-residential projects as subject to regulation and control by the Planning Board.  The goal of such regulation is to enhance the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens through orderly, efficient and safe development that encourages the appropriate and wise use of land in accord with the rural character of Auburn, and in accord with the Auburn Master Plan. 
 
2.   Purposes: In accordance with the above-stated policy and with R.S.A. 674:36, these Regulations are adopted for the following purposes: 
 
 (A). To provide against such scattered or premature subdivision of land as would involve danger or injury to health, safety or prosperity by reason of the lack of water supply, drainage, transportation, schools, fire protection, or other public services, or necessitate an excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of such services; 
 
  (B). To provide for the harmonious development of the Town and its environs;  
 
 (C). To require the proper arrangement and coordination of streets within subdivisions in relation to other existing or planned streets or with features of the official map of the Town; 
 
  (D). To provide for open spaces of adequate proportions; 
 
 (E). To require suitably located streets of sufficient width to accommodate existing and prospective traffic and to afford adequate light, air, and access for rescue vehicles, fire fighting apparatus and equipment to buildings, and to be coordinated so as to compose a convenient system;  
 
 (F). To require, in proper cases, that plats showing new streets or narrowing or widening of such streets submitted to the Planning Board for approval shall show a park or parks suitably located for playground or other recreational purposes, and to require that proposed parks shall be of reasonable size for neighborhood playgrounds or other recreational uses; 
 
 (G). To require that the land indicated on plats submitted to the Planning Board shall be of such character that it can be used for building purposes without danger to health; 
 
 (H). To include provisions which will tend to create conditions favorable to the general health, safety, convenience and prosperity; 
 
 (I). To minimize the pollution of air, streams, ponds, and ground water by ensuring that all utilities are properly designed and installed to encourage the wise use of natural resources; 
 
 (J). To ensure that an equitable share of the costs of public facilities that are of primary benefit to new developments are provided for as part of those developments and are not imposed as a cost on the community at large; and 
  
 (K). To promote the proper legal description and monumentation of subdivided land and provide land records adequate for future use. 
 
1.04  Applicability 
 
1.   These Regulations shall apply to all subdivisions or lot-line adjustments of land, as defined herein, located within the corporate limits of the Town of Auburn. 
  
2.   No land shall be subdivided, merged, annexed or lots transferred within the corporate limits of the Town of Auburn until: 
 
(A). The applicant or his agent has obtained approval in writing from the Planning Board of the Final Plat, and 
 
(B). The approved Final Plat is recorded with the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds. 
 
 
1.05 Waivers 
 
1. In accordance with N.H. R.S.A. 674:36, II,(n), the Planning Board may, upon written request of an applicant, and after a majority vote taken at a duly noticed public meeting, grant a waiver of any provision(s) or requirement(s) of these Regulations, if the Board finds that: 
 
(A). Strict conformity with the Regulation(s) would pose an unnecessary hardship to the applicant and waiver would not be contrary to the spirit and intent of these Regulations; or  
 
(B). Specific circumstances relative to the subdivision, or conditions of the land in such subdivision, indicate that the waiver will properly carry out the spirit and intent of these Regulations. 
 
 2.   All waivers granted by the Planning Board shall be clearly noted upon the approved plat or plan, or in a separate document appended to the approved plat or plan. 
 
1.06 Expenses and Fees  
 
 1. General:  The applicant shall pay for all expenses incurred by the Town for review and hearings associated with the application.  The cost of any required publication or posting of notice, and the cost of mailing notices of the hearing via certified mail, shall be paid by the applicant prior to said hearing.  In accordance with N.H. R.S.A. 676:4-b, all expenses incurred by the Town in having the Town's engineers, consultants, and the Planning Board attorney review proposed plats shall be borne by the applicant, and paid prior to final plat approval. 
 
 2. Fee Schedule:  The Planning Board shall establish a fee schedule for the processing and review of subdivision applications.  This fee schedule may be revised and updated after review by the Planning Board at a duly noticed public meeting.  The fee schedule is attached as Appendix G to these Regulations. 
 
 3. Escrow Account:  The Planning Board, at its discretion, may require that a separate escrow account be established with the Town to cover certain expenses, costs and/or fees.  In such cases, the applicant shall complete an escrow agreement with the Town in a form acceptable to the Planning Board, Board of Selectmen and Town Counsel.  A sample escrow agreement is attached as Appendix B to these Regulations.  All such agreements are subject to revision and final approval by the Town and its Legal Counsel. 
 
 4. Application Fees:  An application fee in the amount set forth in the fee schedule shall be paid for each lot or parcel of land shown on a Design Phase Plat or Final Plat submitted to the Planning Board.  An additional fee as set forth in the schedule shall be paid for each abutter entitled to receive written notice of the proposed subdivision.  All application fees shall be payable to the Town of Auburn for deposit in the general fund of said Town.  An adjustment of an increase or decrease in the application fee will be made at the time of Final Plat approval, if the number of lots approved differs from the number proposed. 
 
 5. Professional Inspection/Review Fees:  Whenever a proposed subdivision will involve street construction, the installation of drainage structures or other required improvements, the costs incurred by the Town in having the Town Engineer or Consultant inspect the required improvements shall be borne by the applicant.  Prior to receiving final approval of a subdivision involving required improvements, the applicant shall deposit with the Clerk of the Town of Auburn a sum in accord with the fee schedule.  The amount deposited under this Section shall be held in a special escrow account by the Clerk for the purpose of paying the Town Engineer, Attorney or Consultant to make the necessary inspections and reports.   
 
 6. Return of Unused Fees:  Any amount deposited under this Section and not used for the purposes stated herein shall be returned to the applicant upon final acceptance of the required improvements, and prior to the release of any performance guarantee money deposited under Article 8 of these Regulations. 
 
1.07 Compliance with Regulations 
 
 1. Pre-Approval Required:  No subdivision of land shall be made, and no land in any subdivision shall be sold or offered for sale or lease, and no street or utility constructions shall be started until a plat, prepared in accordance with the requirements of these Regulations, has been approved by the Planning Board, and any required permits have been issued. 
 
 2. Knowledge of Law Required:  An applicant shall become familiar with all State and Town Regulations relative to health, buildings, roads and other pertinent data, so that the applicant is aware of the obligations and standards expected. An applicant may avail himself of the assistance of the Planning Board before preparation of any application or plan. 
 
 
ARTICLE 2 - DEFINITIONS 
 
2.01  Usage 
 
Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the plural include the singular; and the word “herein” means these Regulations.  Reference to a building or structure includes any part thereof, and the terms “used” or “occupied” shall be construed to include planned, designed, or intended uses. The word “shall” is mandatory; the word “may” is permissive. 
 
2.02 Words and Terms  
 
For the purpose of these Regulations certain words and terms used herein are defined as follows: 
 
1.
 Abutter:  Shall be as defined in New Hampshire R.S.A. 672:3 and as may be amended from time to time, which is currently as follows:  “any person whose property is located in New Hampshire and adjoins or is directly across the street or stream from the land under consideration by the [Planning Board].   

 
For purposes of receiving testimony only, and not for purposes of notification, the term “abutter” shall include any person who is able to demonstrate that his land will be directly affected by the proposal under consideration. 
 
For purposes of receipt of notification by the [Planning Board of a] hearing, in the case of an abutting property being under a condominium or other collective form of ownership, the term abutter means the officers of the collective or association, as defined in N.H. R.S.A. 356-B:3, XXIII.  


 
 For the purposes of receipt of notification by [the Planning Board of a hearing] in the case of an abutting property being under a manufactured housing park form of ownership as defined in R.S.A. 205-A:1, II, the term “abutter” includes the manufactured housing park owner and the tenants who own manufactured housing which adjoins or is directly across the street or stream from the land under consideration by [the Planning Board.]  
 
2. Acceptance:  An affirmative vote by a majority of the Planning Board at a public meeting that an application contains the items required to constitute a complete application sufficient for the Planning Board to invoke jurisdiction in accordance with R.S.A. 676:4(I)(b). 
 
 3. Active and Substantial Development and Building:  May be defined by the Planning Board with respect to each application.  In accordance with N.H. R.S.A. 674:39, the Board, at its discretion, may require all plans to include a note that shall specify the threshold level of work which shall constitute “active and substantial development or building” for the purposes of fulfilling the requirements of RSA 674:39, I.  This threshold for “active and substantial development or building” must be reached within twelve (12) months of final approval before the plan will be eligible for the four (4) year exemption, as provided under R.S.A. 674:39, from subsequent changes in the Town of Auburn Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Regulations, or Non-residential Site Plan Review Regulations.  Upon receipt of a written application demonstrating good cause to do so, the Board may extend this period for up to an additional twelve (12) months. 
 
4. Applicant/Developer:  The owner of land to be subdivided or developed, or his or her agent or representative, as he or she may authorize, by signed and notarized statement on a form sufficient and acceptable to the Planning Board.   
 
5. Approval:  A final vote by the Planning Board, certified by written endorsement on the plat, that the plat submission meets the requirements of these Regulations, and satisfies, in the judgment of the Planning Board, all criteria of good planning and design. 
 
6. Approval, Conditional:  Also known as approval with conditions precedent.  A vote by the Planning Board that the subdivision plat is approved, contingent upon the completion of specific tasks or items required for final approval.  Until all the requirements for an approval have been met, a conditional approval does not constitute, nor shall it be construed as, approval, either implied or granted, of the subdivision plat.  A conditional approval does not bind the Planning Board to approval of the final subdivision plat.  A conditional approval requires that the applicant return to appear before the Planning Board in a public hearing for final approval. 
 
7. Approval, with Conditions:  A vote by the Planning Board that the subdivision plat is approved, with conditions subsequent that, once resolved, will constitute final approval without returning to the Planning Board.  The Board Chairperson will have authority to sign the final mylar in such cases, upon completion of the conditions subsequent. 
 
8. Board: The Planning Board of the Town of Auburn, New Hampshire. 
 
 
9. Bond:  Any form of security, including a cash deposit escrow account, surety bond or other instrument of credit, in an amount and form satisfactory to the Board of Selectmen and the Planning Board. The term “performance guarantee” is used generally to cover all forms of security which may be posted to guarantee the applicant’s compliance with the terms of subdivision approval. See Section 2.02(20) below. 
 
10. Buffer or Buffer Strip: A strip of land along a property line or zoned district boundary line which shall be free of any building or use other than natural woody growth, landscaping or screening. 
 
11. Buildable Area:  The required area of contiguous non-wetland acreage within each buildable lot, including each clustered building lot.  The buildable area should not contain protected wetlands, front, side or rear yard setbacks, wetland buffers, cluster perimeter buffers, or slope, drainage or utility easements. 
 
12. Cul-de-sac:  A local street, closed at one end by building lots, which comports with the typical cul-de-sac detail set forth herein in the Appendix - Typical Design Details.  
 
13. Dedication:  A gift, by the owner, of his or her property to another party without any consideration being given for the transfer.  Since a transfer of real property is involved, the dedication shall be made by written instrument suitable for recording and completed with an acceptance. 
 
14. Design Review Phase: An optional stage of subdivision approval for major subdivision applicants, which involves non-binding discussions with the Planning Board beyond conceptual and general discussion, which address more specific design and engineering details. This phase is intended for the submission of information, which is beyond that of the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase, and includes more specific design and engineering details of the proposal.   
 
15. Easement:  A restriction by a property owner for the use, access or maintenance by another and for a specific purpose, including an acquired privilege or right of use which one party may have on the land of another, such as a strip of land used or intended to be used for a sanitary sewer or storm, water drainage line, or other utility when such utilities are not included in the street.   
 
16. Engineer: The duly designated registered and licensed professional engineer of the applicant. 
 
17. Final Review Phase:  The last stage of the subdivision application process.  The first part of this phase commences upon the Planning Board’s acceptance, at a duly noticed public meeting, of a formal application for final review.  The second part of the Final Review Phase commences after the Planning Board has voted , at a duly noticed public meeting, to accept the application for subdivision approval. This second part of the Final Review Phase involves the Planning Board’s consideration of the merits of the subdivision application at a duly noticed public hearing and a vote by the Planning Board to approve or deny the subdivision application.  
 
18. Improvements:  All work required to construct the proposed development, including but not limited to: site grading; landscaping; utility installation (water, sewer, electric, drainage, telephone, etc. and their appurtenances); roadways; parking lots; drives; buildings; fencing; signs; etc., meaning and intending to include all work necessary to construct the development as agreed and shown on the approved plat or plan, including all on-site and off-site improvements. 
 
19. Lot Line Adjustment: Any subdivision involving a minor relocation of a lot line between two properties or the annexation of land where the lot areas do not change by more than twenty-five (25%) percent and no new lots are being created. 
 
 20.  Performance Guarantee:  Any form of security, including a cash deposit escrow account, surety bond or other instrument of credit, in an amount and form satisfactory to the Board of Selectmen and the Planning Board. The term “performance guarantee” is used generally to cover all forms of security which may be posted to guarantee the applicant’s compliance with the terms of subdivision approval. 
 
21. Person: Includes an individual, corporation, partnership, trust, incorporated association, limited liability company or any other legally recognized entity. 
 
22. Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase:  An optional stage of subdivision approval which involves review of the basic concept of the proposal.  The purpose is for the Planning Board to make suggestions which might be of assistance in meeting requirements for final review and approval.  Such consultation does not bind either the Applicant or the Planning Board, and statements made by Planning Board members shall not be the basis for disqualifying said members or invalidating any action taken.  The Planning Board and the Applicant may discuss proposals in conceptual form only and in general terms, such as desirability of types of development and proposals under the Town’s Master Plan. 
 
23. Special Flood Hazard Area: The land in the flood plain within the Town of Auburn subject to a one-percent or greater possibility of flooding in any given year.  In particular, that area designated as Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) and Flood-Boundary and Floodway Maps (FHBM).   
 
24. Street:  Any road or other way which is an existing and/or improved Town street or which is shown on a subdivision plat approved by the Board and recorded at the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds.  A street includes the land between the right-of-way lines whether improved or unimproved.  The Planning Board may exercise its discretion in determining the classification of a street. 
 
25. Street, Local or Service: A street used primarily to give access to abutting properties. 
 
26. Street, Collector: A street which, in addition to giving access to abutting properties, serves primarily to carry traffic from local streets to arterial streets and to public and other centers of traffic concentration. 
 
27. Street, Arterial: A street or highway used primarily for heavy and/or through traffic.   
 
28. Subdivider: The owner of record of the land to be subdivided, including any subsequent owner of record making any subdivision of such land, or any part thereof, or the agent of any such owner, including any person, firm or corporation who, having an interest in land, causes it, directly or indirectly, to be divided. 
 
29. Subdivision Plat: A map of a land subdivision prepared in a form suitable for filing under these Regulations and acceptable for recording in the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds.   
 
30. Subdivision:  As defined in N.H. R.S.A. 672:14, as may be amended from time to time, which is currently as follows: “the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, plats, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, rent, lease, condominium conveyance or building development.  It includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or territory subdivided.  The division of a parcel of land held in common and subsequently divided in parts among the several owners shall be deemed a subdivision under this title.” 
 
       The records of the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds as June 15, 2011, the effective date of these Regulations shall determine the status of a tract or parcel for the purpose of determining the applicability of these Subdivision Regulations.  A survey or resurvey and revised description of an existing lot will not be a subdivision for the purpose of these Regulations, provided that the Town Selectmen have reviewed such survey and/or new description and have notified the Chairman and/or Secretary of the Planning Board that such lot is an existing lot of record.  The Chairman and/or Secretary, when so notified, shall certify this fact to the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds, so that the corrected information on such existing lot may be recorded.   
 
31. Subdivision, Major: Any subdivision that is not a minor subdivision or a lot line adjustment. 
 
32. Subdivision, Minor:  In a three year period, a subdivision of land into three (3) or fewer lots having frontage on and primary access to an existing approved public street, which requires no new roads, utilities or other Town improvements, providing it is so classified by the Planning Board. 
 
33. Substantial Completion:  Unless otherwise defined by the Planning Board with respect to a particular subdivision application, means the completion of all on-site and off-site improvements specified on the approved subdivision application, except for those improvements which are specifically deferred by recorded vote of the Planning Board, prior to the expiration of the four-year period specified in R.S.A. 674:39. 
 
34. Town: The Town of Auburn, New Hampshire. 
 
35.  Town Engineer:  The duly designated engineer of the Town of Auburn, or if there is no such office, the planning consultant or official assigned by the Selectmen.  The Planning Board is authorized to enter into a contract(s) with a private engineering firm to serve as the Town Engineer for the Town of Auburn.   
 
36.  Way:  Any public highway, street, avenue, road, alley, park, or parkway, or any private way laid out under authority of statute, and ways provided and maintained by public institutions to which state funds are appropriated for public use. 
 
37. Zoning Ordinance: The duly enacted and current Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Auburn. 
 
 
2.03 Other Definitions 
 
Any word or term used in these Regulations which is not defined in this Article, nor a defined word or term in the Auburn Zoning Ordinance or Site Plan Review Regulations, nor defined in its context, shall carry its customary meaning, unless otherwise stipulated by the Planning Board. 
 
 
ARTICLE 3 - SUBDIVISION APPLICATION AND SUBMITTAL PROCESS  
 
3.01 Subdivision Classifications 
 
There are three subdivision classifications in the Town of Auburn.  They are as follows: 
 
1. Lot Line Adjustments:  This classification includes any subdivision involving a minor relocation of a lot line between two properties where the lot areas do not change more than twenty-five (25%) percent and no new lots are being created. 
 
2. Minor Subdivisions:  This classification includes subdivisions where, in a three (3) year period, a subdivision is proposed of land into three (3) or fewer lots, all of which will have frontage on and primary access to an existing improved public street, requiring no new roads, utilities or other Town improvements, provided the subdivision is so classified by the Planning Board.  A subdivision application will only be treated as a minor subdivision if there are no unusual or special conditions which require supplemental information, and no major change in site characteristics will occur as a result of the subdivision.  If a portion of the subdivision is being reserved for future use, the application will only be treated as a minor subdivision if the future use would not be hampered or restricted by approving the minor subdivision.  The Board may elect to treat an application as a minor subdivision where it creates no new buildable lots. 
 
3. Major Subdivisions.  This classification of subdivision includes all subdivisions other than those subdivisions defined in the preceding sub-sections (1) and (2). 
 
3.02 Procedures for Lot Line Adjustments 
 
Pursuant to N.H. R.S.A. 676:4, I(e)(1), lot line adjustments shall be administered according to the following expedited process:   
 
1. Informal Consultation:  Applicants are encouraged to informally consult with the Board prior to filing an application and prior to investing in any planning or engineering, in order to determine that the application will qualify as a lot-line adjustment.   
 
2.   Application Required: A completed application for lot line adjustment shall be submitted to the Board for consideration at a single public hearing.  The application form may be found in Appendix E to these Regulations.  The application form is also available at the Town offices, and may, at the Planning Board’s discretion, be available on the Town website.   
 
3.   Filing Deadline:  The applicant shall file the completed application with the Board at least twenty-one (21) days prior to the public hearing at which the application will be submitted, and if accepted, reviewed for approval.   
 
4.   Notice:  The Planning Board shall notify the abutters, holders of conservation, preservation, or agricultural preservation restrictions, the applicant and every engineer, architect, land surveyor or soil scientist whose professional seal appears on any plat submitted to the Board, by certified mail, of the date upon which the application will be formally submitted to the Board and reviewed by the Board for purposes of acceptance and final approval.   Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing date.  Notice shall also be given to the general public in the manner required by Section 3.10 of these Regulations for notice of a public hearing for acceptance and/or approval of a minor or major subdivision application. 
 
5.  Costs:  The applicant shall bear all costs of providing all necessary notices, design review, engineering review, and legal review on behalf of the Planning Board, and will be required, at the discretion of the Board, to establish a separate escrow account to pay for such costs in accordance with Section 1.06 of these Regulations. 
 
3.03 Procedures for Minor Subdivisions 
 
All minor subdivision applicants are required to complete the Final Review Phase, which is described in Section 3.06 of these Regulations.  All minor subdivision applicants are encouraged to first engage in the optional Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase of the subdivision approval process which is set forth below. 
 
1.   Optional Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase:  Applicants for minor subdivisions are encouraged to participate in the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase as the first phase of the subdivision approval process. 
 
(A). Description:  This phase provides the applicant with the opportunity to meet with the Planning Board to review the concept of any anticipated subdivision or development. The applicant is encouraged to participate in these meetings prior to any substantial investment in planning or engineering of a proposal, and prior to entering the Final Review Phase described in Section 3.06.  Discussions with the Planning Board during the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase may occur without the necessity of giving formal public notice, but such discussions may occur only at formal meetings of the Board.  
 
(B).   Costs:  The applicant for Minor Subdivision approval shall bear all costs of providing all necessary notices, design reviews, studies, reports, engineering review, traffic studies, environmental impact studies, and legal review required by the Planning Board as part of the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase. The applicant will be required, at the discretion of the Board, to establish a separate escrow account to pay for such costs in accordance with Section 1.06 of these Regulations. 
 
(C).  Application Required:  Before participating in the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase, the applicant shall submit a completed Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase Application Form, in duplicate, and any required information delineated below in Section 3.03(2). The application form is contained in Appendix C to these Regulations and is available at the Town Offices. The application must be completely filled out prior to submission to the Planning Board. A completed Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase Application shall not be deemed a complete Application for purpose of the Formal Review Application Phase.  
 
(D). Acceptance of Application:  The Planning Board shall place on its agenda for consideration the information submitted to it within thirty (30) days, indicating on the agenda the nature of the application, and the fact that the applicant will be appearing before the Planning Board for the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase.  Acceptance of a Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase Application may occur at any formal meeting of the Planning Board. 
 
(E).   Optional Preliminary Plan: Applicants are also encouraged to submit a Preliminary Plan for review and comment.  The intent of a Preliminary Plan is to enable the applicant and the Planning Board to review, discuss and evaluate a proposed subdivision at a time when modifications will not result in a substantial engineering or surveying costs to the subdivider.  Specifications for a Preliminary Plan are set forth in the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase Application form. 
 
2. Submission Requirements for Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase: 
 
 (A).   In addition to fully completing the Preliminary Consultation Phase Application Form,  the applicant shall submit sketch plans of proposed subdivision tracts, prepared in ink or pencil, which shall be drawn to a convenient scale of not more than fifty (50) feet to the inch, and which shall show or be accompanied by the following information: 
 

 (i). Name of subdivision if property is within an existing subdivision; 
 
 (ii). Proposed name of the subdivision if not within a previously platted subdivision.  The proposed name shall not duplicate phonetically the name of any plat previously recorded in the Town; 
 
  (iii). Name of property if no subdivision name has been chosen; 
 
 (iv). Proposed names of any streets.  The proposed names shall not duplicate phonetically the name of any existing or platted streets in the Town and shall be chosen from the list in Appendix I to these Regulations. 
 
  (v). Name, address, and telephone number of applicant; 
 
 (vi). Name, address, and telephone number of legal owner(s) owning ten (10%) percent or more of the property, and citation of last instrument conveying title to each parcel of property involved in the proposed subdivision, giving grantor, grantee, date, and land records reference; 
 
 (vii). Citation of any existing legal rights-of-way or easements affecting the property; 
 
  (viii).  Existing covenants on the property, if any; 
 
 (ix). Name, address, and telephone number of the professional person(s) responsible for subdivision design, for the design of public improvements, for surveys, and any legal descriptions; 
 
  (x). Names and addresses of all abutters to the proposed subdivision; 
 
 (xi). Names and addresses of all property owners within two (200) feet of any perimeter boundary of the subdivision; 
 
 (xii).   Location of property lines, existing easements, burial grounds, historic sites and buildings, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses, water bodies, wetlands, one hundred (100) year flood plains, ledges and boulders, areas with slopes over twenty-five (25%) percent and existing wooded areas; location width, and names of all existing or platted streets or other public ways within or immediately adjacent to the tract; 
 
 (xiii). Location, sizes, elevations, and slopes of existing sewers, water mains, culverts, and other underground structures within the tract and immediately adjacent to the site and utility rights-of-way; 
 
 (xiv).  Approximate topography of the entire parcel of land, at the same scale as the sketch plan, with a maximum ten (10) foot contour interval; 
 
 (xv).  Soil types and approximate soils boundaries, at the same scale as the sketch plan, based upon Soil Conservation Service data for minor subdivisions and field determined for major subdivisions.  For all subdivisions, soil types must be accurately determined at the location of improvements; 
 
 (xvi).   Approximate location and widths of proposed streets; 
 
 (xvii).  Preliminary proposals for connection with existing water supply and sanitary sewerage systems, or alternative means and locations for providing water supply and sanitary waste treatment and disposal. Preliminary provisions for collecting and discharging surface water drainage and for controlling erosion and sedimentation shall be addressed in accordance with the provisions of Article 10; 
 
 (xviii). The approximate dimensions, areas, and numbers of all proposed or existing lots; and 
 
 (xix). The approximate location, dimensions and areas of all parcels of land proposed to be set aside for park or playground use, or other public use, or for the use of property owners in the proposed subdivision. 
 
(B). Other Items for Submittal in Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase. 
 
(i). Whenever the sketch plan covers only part of any applicant's contiguous holdings, the applicant shall submit, at the scale of not more than two hundred (200) feet to the inch, a sketch in pen or pencil of the proposed subdivision area, and the perimeter boundaries of the entire contiguous holdings of the applicant. 
 
 (ii). If the applicant intends to submit a final plat on only a portion of the total land to be subdivided, the preliminary plat shall cover the entire area of the tract and shall indicate the approximate outline and sequence of those portions of the tract for which subsequent final plats will be submitted. 
 
 (iii). A vicinity map showing streets and other general development of the surrounding area, all zoning district lines on and adjacent to the  property, with zones properly designated. 
 
 3. Required Final Review Phase:  All Minor Subdivision Applicants must undergo the Final Review Phase, as set forth below in Section 3.06. 
  
3.04 Procedures for Major Subdivisions 
 
Applicants for major subdivision approval may elect to undergo either or both of the optional Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase and/or the Design Review Phase, as the first and/or second phases of subdivision review.  All major subdivision applicants must undergo the formal Final Review Phase.   
 
 1. Optional Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase:  Major Subdivision applicants may elect to participate in the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase, which is described above in Section 3.03(1), as the first phase of the subdivision approval process.  
 
  (A). Description:  This phase provides the applicant with the opportunity to meet with the Planning Board to review the concept of any anticipated subdivision or development. The applicant is encouraged to participate in these meetings prior to any substantial investment in planning or engineering of a proposal, and prior to entering the Final Review Phase described below in Section 3.06.  Discussions with the Planning Board during the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase may occur without the necessity of giving formal public notice, but such discussions may occur only at formal meetings of the Board.  
 
 (B).   Costs:  The applicant for Major Subdivision approval shall bear all costs of providing all necessary notices, design reviews, studies, reports, engineering review, traffic studies, environmental impact studies, and legal review required by the Planning Board as part of the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase.  The applicant will be required, at the discretion of the Board, to establish a separate escrow account to pay for such costs in accordance with Section 1.06 of these Regulations. 
 
 (C). Application Required:  Before participating in the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase, the applicant shall submit a completed Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase Application Form, in duplicate, and any required information delineated above in Section 3.03(2) for the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase.  The application form is contained in Appendix C to these Regulations and is available at the Town Offices. The application form must be completely filled out prior to submission to the Planning Board. A completed Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase Application shall not be deemed a complete Application for purposes of the Design Review or Formal Application Submission Phases. 
 
 (D). Acceptance of Application:  The Planning Board shall place on its agenda for consideration the information submitted to it within thirty (30) days, indicating on the agenda the nature of the application, and the fact that the applicant will be appearing before the Planning Board for the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase.  [A duly noticed public hearing is not required for acceptance of the completed Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase Application, rather, acceptance may occur at any noticed formal meeting of the Planning Board.]   
 
 (E). Optional Preliminary Plan: Applicants are also encouraged to submit a Preliminary Plan for review and comment.  The intent of a Preliminary Plan is to enable the Applicant and the Planning Board to review, discuss and evaluate a proposed subdivision at a time when modifications will not result in a substantial engineering or surveying costs to the subdivider.  Specifications for a Preliminary Plan are set forth in the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase application form. 
 
 2. Optional Design Review Phase: Major Subdivision applicants may elect to participate in the Design Review Phase, as either the first or second phase of the subdivision approval process, prior to entering the Final Review Phase.   
 
  (A). Description:  The applicant may engage in non-binding discussions with the Planning Board, beyond conceptual and general discussions, which involve more specific design and engineering details, by participating in the Design Review Phase. Statements made by Planning Board members during the Design Review Phase shall not be the basis for disqualifying said members or invalidating any action taken by the Board.  An applicant may elect to forego the Design Review Phase, but all applicants must comply with all requirements of the Final Review Phase, set forth below in Section 3.06. 
 
 (B).   Costs:  The applicant for Major Subdivision approval shall bear all costs of providing all necessary notices, design reviews, studies, reports, engineering review, traffic studies, environmental impact studies, and legal review required by the Planning Board for the Design Review Phase, and will be required, at the discretion of the Board, to establish a separate escrow account to pay for such costs in accordance with Section 1.06 of these Regulations. 
 
  (C).   Application Required:  The applicant shall submit a completed Design Review Application Form, in duplicate, plus three (3) copies of the specific plats and any required information delineated in Section 3.03(2) for the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase and in Section 3.05 for the Design Review Phase. The application form is contained in Appendix D to these Regulations and is available at the Town Offices. The Design Review Phase Application Form must be completely filled out prior to submission to the Planning Board. A duly notified public hearing is required for acceptance of the completed Design Review Phase application.  A completed Design Review Phase Application shall not be deemed a complete application for purposes of the Final Review Phase. 
 
  (D). Notice:  The Design Review Phase may proceed only after identification of, and notice to, abutters, holders of conservation, preservation, or agricultural preservation restrictions, the applicant and every engineer, architect, land surveyor or soil scientist whose professional seal appears on any plat submitted to the Board, by certified mail, of the date upon which the Planning Board will engage in the Design Review process.  For those proposals near rivers and streams and downstream of a dam, the Planning Board shall also notify the owners of the upstream dam and the N.H. Department of Environmental Services Dam Bureau by certified mail.  Notice of the Design Review Phase shall also be given to the general public as required by Section 3.10 of these Regulations. The Planning Board shall place on its agenda for consideration the information submitted to it within thirty (30) days, indicating on the agenda the nature of the application, and the fact that the applicant will be appearing before the Planning Board for the Design Review Phase. 
 
  (E). Completion of Design Review Phase:  The Design Review Phase ends upon submission by the applicant of a Final Review application.  In addition, the Planning Board may, in its discretion, determine that the Design Review phase of an application has ended, and shall inform the applicant in writing of such decision within ten (10) days of such determination. 
 
 3. Required Final Review Phase:  All Major Subdivision Applicants must undergo the Final Review Phase.  The process for the Final Review Phase is set forth below in Section 3.06. 
 
3.05 Submission Requirements for Design Review Phase   
 
In addition to completing, in duplicate, the sections on the Design Review Phase Application Form, the Applicant shall submit the following information for consideration by the Planning Board. 
 
 (1). Plat: A design review plat shall be prepared by a licensed land surveyor, engineer or landscape architect at a convenient scale of not more than one (1) inch equal to fifty (50) feet, may be prepared in ink or pencil and the sheets shall be numbered in sequence if more than one (1) sheet is used and shall be of such size as is acceptable for filing in office of the County Registrar of Deeds, but shall be no larger than twenty-two by thirty-four (22 x 34) inches.  It should be noted that the map prepared for the design review plat may also be used for the final subdivision plat, and therefore, should be drawn on reproducible Mylar in ink. Three (3) copies of the specific plats shall be submitted to the Board. The following drafting requirements apply to the plat: 
 
 (A). Location of property with respect to surrounding property and streets, the names of all abutters and the names of adjoining streets. 
 
 (B). Location, bearings to the nearest minute, and dimensions of all boundary lines of the property to be expressed in feet and hundredths of a foot. 
 
 (C). Location of existing streets, easements, water bodies, streams, and other pertinent features such as wetlands, railroads, buildings, parks, cemeteries, drainage ditches and bridges. 
 
 (D). Location and width of all existing and proposed streets and other public ways, and easements and proposed driveways, street rights-of-way and building set-back lines. 
 
  (E). Locations, dimensions, and areas of all proposed lots. 
 
 (F). Location, dimensions and area of all property proposed to be set aside for park or playground use, open space, or other public or private reservation, with designation of the purpose thereof, and conditions, if any, of the dedication or reservation. 
 
 (G). Name, address and signature of the owner of land to be subdivided, and the name, address and seal of the land surveyor, engineer or landscape architect. 
 
 (H). Date of the map, true north point, scale and title of the subdivision. 
 
 (I). Location and type of all proposed and existing monuments. 
 
 (J). Names of the subdivision and all new streets as approved by the Planning Board. 
 
 (K). Indication of the use of any lot and all uses other than residential proposed by the applicant, where permitted by the Zoning Ordinance. 
 
 (L). Blocks shall be consecutively numbered or lettered in alphabetical order.  The blocks in numbered additions to subdivisions bearing the same name shall be numbered or lettered consecutively throughout the several additions. 
 
 (M). All lots in each block shall be consecutively numbered.  Large remaining parcels, to be subdivided in the future, shall be lettered in alphabetical order within each block. 
 
 (N).  Proposed location of all soil test pits, test borings, and percolation test pits. 
 
 (O). All information required for the Survey Phase shall also be shown on the preliminary plat and shall be accurately represented. 
 
 (P).  Existing topography of the land to be subdivided at the following intervals: 
 
              Grade                    Contour Intervals 
           0-2              2 foot plus spot elevations 
          2+%-5%                    2 foot 
             5+%                      10 foot 
 
  All low points, high points and other areas needing spot elevations should be shown.  Contours shall be shown in dashed lines.  All topography is to be obtained by field survey. 
 
 (Q). Soils types and boundaries based upon an on site survey or Soil Conservation Service data. Soil boundaries shall be shown by dotted lines. 
 
 (R).  Full legal descriptions of the drainage easements, site easements, rights-of-way, covenants, reservations, or other restrictions shall accompany the preliminary plat with notations of each on the preliminary plat. 
 
  (S).  A title block to be located in the lower right-hand corner. 
 
 (T).  Lot numbering shall be such that new lots are numbered sequentially as extensions from the parent lot.  Letters shall not be used.  The lot from which the subdivision evolved shall maintain the original lot number. 
 
 (U).  Location, dimension, and areas of all proposed or existing stump burial sites. 
   
The lack of information under any item specified herein, or improper information supplied by the applicant, shall be the cause of disapproval of a preliminary plat. 
 
(2).  Other Items for Submittal in Design Review Phase: 
 
   (A). A vicinity map at the town map scale showing the location of the subdivision in relation to surrounding streets and development. 
 
  (B). Whenever the design review plat covers only a part of an applicant's contiguous holdings, the applicant shall submit, at the scale of no more than two hundred (200) feet to the inch, a survey of the proposed subdivision area, together with its proposed street system, and lot layout, and an indication of the probable future street system, drainage system, and lot layout of the remaining portion of the tract.  This requirement may be waived at the sole discretion of the Board. 
 
 (C). A statement signed and sealed by a New Hampshire licensed land surveyor attesting to the accuracy of the plan and a survey closure of better than 1 in 10,000. 
 
 (D). Photographs, if required by the Planning Board.  Camera locations and direction of view shall be submitted. 
 
 (E). When submitted to the Planning Board, the Design Review Plan shall be accompanied by any other studies the Board may deem necessary or desirable to protect and assure the health and safety of the citizens of Auburn, including the future occupants of such subdivision, whether residential, commercial or industrial. 
 
3.06  Final Review Phase 
 
The Final Review Phase is required for all Minor and Major Subdivision Applicants.  The process for completion of the Final Review Phase is set forth below: 
 
1. Formal Application Required:  To commence the Final Review Phase, all applicants are required to complete the Final Review Phase Application Form, as applicable to the Subdivision, in accord with the Checklist for such applications.  The application forms and checklists for same are set forth in the Appendix to these Regulations, are available at the Town Offices, and may, at the Planning Board’s discretion, be available on the Town website. The submission of a formal application shall include a final subdivision plan, the recordable Mylar, four (4) copies of all specific plats, and any required information delineated in Section 3.03(2) for the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase, Section 3.05 for the Design Review Phase, Section 3.07 for the Final Review Phase, as well as any submission requirements set forth in Articles 5 or 6 of these Regulations.  The Planning Board may require that the application and supporting documents be submitted in electronic format in addition to the hard copy versions. The application shall include the names and addresses of the applicant and all abutters as such are indicated in the Town of Auburn records not more than five (5) days before the day of filing.  Abutters shall also be identified on any plat submitted to the Board.  Formal acceptance of a completed Final Review Application shall occur at a duly noticed public meeting of the Planning Board, as set forth below.  
 
2. Costs:  The subdivision applicant shall bear all costs of providing all necessary notices, design reviews, studies, reports, engineering review, traffic studies, environmental impact studies, and legal review required by the Planning Board throughout the Final Review Phase.  The applicant may be required, at the discretion of the Board, to establish a separate escrow account to pay for such costs in accordance with Section 1.06 of these Regulations. 
 
3.  Filing Deadlines:  The completed application, all application fees, notice fees and other fees required under these Regulations shall be filed with the Planning Board Secretary not less than twenty-one (21) days prior to the public meeting at which the application will be submitted to the Planning Board.   
 
4.   Notice:  Notice shall be given in accordance with the requirements of Section 3.10 of these Regulations.  
 
5. Acceptance at Public Meeting:  The completed Final Review application must be submitted to the Planning Board at a duly noticed public meeting. The Board will determine whether to accept the Final Review application as complete, or, alternatively, to deny the application as incomplete.  The Planning Board shall be the sole authority to determine whether an applicant has met all the necessary requirements as set forth in these Regulations and has submitted a complete application.  The Board shall look to these Regulations, the application form, and the Checklist to determine whether or not an application is deemed to be sufficient for the Board to accept the application and proceed to the Final Review Phase.  The Board may elect not to accept an application for commencement of the Final Review Phase for any of the following reasons: 
 
       (A). The application is incomplete; 
 

  (B). The applicant has not paid all necessary fees; 
 
  (C). Notice of the hearing has not been properly given; 
 
      (D). The property(s) which is the subject of the application is involved in litigation and the outcome of such litigation may materially affect the decision of the Planning Board; 
 
    (E). The proposed subdivision does not meet the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for the Town of Auburn.  The Board may accept the application if a variance or special exception request is pending before the Zoning Board of Adjustment and the Board has requested that the Planning Board act first on an application.  Any Planning Board action in such an instance shall be conditioned upon any necessary Board of Adjustment action; 
 
 (F). The applicant is in default on a plat approved previously by the Planning Board. 
 
 6. Rejection of Application:  In the event that the Board declines to accept an application, it shall provide the applicant with a written statement of reasons for the rejection.  The basis for the Board’s decision shall be reflected in the minutes of the meeting at which the decision was made. 
 
7. Receipt:  The Planning Board shall furnish the applicant with a printed receipt indicating the date on which the application was submitted to, and accepted by, the Planning Board.  The official submission date for all relevant time periods shall be the date recorded upon the receipt acknowledging acceptance of the completed application. 
 
3.07   Submission Requirements for Final Review Phase    
 
In addition to submitting a fully completed Application Form and Checklist, the applicant shall submit a final subdivision plan, a recordable Mylar, four (4) copies of all specific plats, all information required for the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase and the Design Review Phase, and the following information for consideration by the Planning Board. 
 
1. Final Plat: The final plat shall be prepared by a licensed land surveyor, engineer or landscape architect in pen on Mylar and shall show all the information required for the preliminary consultation phase plan and design review plat.  The final plat shall also show the following: 
 
(A). The location, bearings to the nearest minute, and dimensions to the nearest hundredth of a foot of all lot lines and areas of all proposed or existing lots; 
 
(B). Any and all changes requested in the preliminary plat; 
 
 (C). Form for endorsements by the Planning Board as follows: 
 
Under the provisions of R.S.A. 674:37, approval is granted by the AUBURN PLANNING BOARD, in accordance with the vote of the Board dated _______________. Approval of this plat is limited to lots as shown: _____________________________. 
                                                    Chairman 
 
The endorsement shall be located in the lower right hand corner of the final plat above the title block. 
 
2. Other Requirements: 
 
(A). The applicant shall also submit all information and certification of approval required by any state agency. 
 
(B). The applicant shall submit revised construction plans reflecting any changes in accord with Section 7.05. 
 
(C). The applicant shall submit a key map drawn at the same scale as the Town of Auburn's tax map in an electronic format and on hard copy, which covers the impacted parcel(s) and proposed features. 
 
The lack of information under any item specified herein, or improper information supplied by the applicant, shall be the cause of disapproval of a final plat. 
 
 3. Additional Requirements for Major Subdivisions: 
 
In addition to the requirements set forth in section 3.07(1) and (2), the following additional requirements shall apply to major subdivisions. 
 
(A). General:  Construction plans shall be prepared for all required improvements.  Map sheets shall be of the same size as the Design Review plat.   The following shall be shown: 
 
 (i). Plans – Plans shall be drawn at a scale of no more than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet. 
 
  --All areas to be disturbed for construction of streets, drainage ways, and structures, sewer, water and electric lines, erosion and sediment control structures, and other areas to be disturbed for the construction of improvements shall be made showing: existing topography shown in dashed lines and proposed contours shown in solid lines, at a contour interval no greater than two (2) feet plus spot elevations;  
 
  --Soil types and boundaries shown in dotted lines; 
 
  --Existing tree lines and proposed trees and all other plantings; 
 
  --Edge of all paved areas;  
 
  --Location and size of all structures, piping and other materials; 
 
  --Center line stationing of all proposed streets at fifty (50) foot intervals; 
 
  --Location of all adjacent lot lines with the lot numbers of each lot taken from the appropriate preliminary or final plat.   
 
 (ii). Profiles - Profiles of all proposed streets, showing existing and proposed elevations along the center lines of all proposed streets, and all structures, piping, and other materials.  Profiles shall be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet horizontal scale and one (1) inch equals five (5) feet vertical scale. 
 
 (iii).  Cross-Sections - Cross-sections of all proposed streets at one hundred foot stations and at all catch basins or culverts showing the streets and all areas to be disturbed for the construction of all proposed streets, existing grades, proposed sub-grades, proposed final grades, and all utilities and other structures. 
 
 (iv).  Details - Construction details of all streets, driveways, curbing, sidewalks, drainage structures, sediment and erosion control structures and any other required improvements shall be shown at a convenient scale. 
 
 (v). Erosion and Sediment Control - Plans and other information indicating how increased runoff, sedimentation, and erosion shall be controlled during and after construction of required improvements shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with the provisions of Article 10 of these Regulations. 
 
 (vi). Phased Subdivision - When subdivision of any parcel occurs in two or more phases, an applicant shall present a design review level plan showing the proposed development of the entire parcel, including sufficient information to properly engineer all of the phases.  This shall include drainage calculations, road layout, erosion and sedimentation control and proposed utilities. 
 
3.08 Time Table for Final Review Phase 
 
 1. Acceptance of Final Review Application:  The Planning Board shall determine if a submitted Final Review Phase application is complete according to the Board’s Regulations, and shall vote upon acceptance of the completed application within thirty (30) days following the submission of the completed application to the Planning Board Secretary, or at the next regular meeting for which notice can be given in accord with the requirements of these Regulations and N.H. R.S.A. 676:4, I (b).   
 
 2 .  Rejection of Incomplete Applications:  If the Board determines that a submitted application is incomplete, the Board shall notify the applicant of its determination in accord with N.H. R.S.A. 676:3, and said determination shall describe the information, procedure or other requirement necessary for the application to be complete. 
 
 3. Vote to Approve/Deny Application:  After the Board has voted to accept a Final Review Phase application as complete, the Board shall begin formal consideration of the application, and shall act to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the application within sixty-five (65) days after submission and acceptance of the application, subject to extension or waiver as set forth below.  The Board may, in its discretion, vote to approve or deny a Final Review Phase application at the same public meeting during which it voted to accept the application.  
 
 4. Selectmen’s Order: Upon failure of the Board to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the application, the Selectmen shall, upon request of the applicant, immediately issue an order directing the Board to act on the application within thirty (30) days.  If the Planning Board does not act on the application within that thirty (30) day time period, then within forty (40) days of issuance of the order, the Selectmen shall certify on the applicant's application that the plat is approved pursuant to this paragraph, unless within those forty (40) days the Selectmen have identified in writing some specific Subdivision Regulation or Zoning or other Ordinance provision with which the applicant does not comply. Such certification, citing this paragraph, shall constitute final approval for all purposes, including filing, recording and court review. 
 
5.  Court Order: Failure of the Selectmen to issue an order to the Planning Board as described above, or to certify approval of the plat upon the Planning Board's failure to comply with the order, shall constitute grounds for the Rockingham County Superior Court, upon petition of the applicant, to issue an order approving the application if the Court determines that the proposal complies with existing Subdivision Regulations and Zoning or other Ordinances. 
 
 6. Extension of Final Review Phase:  In those circumstances where the Planning Board determines that it requires an extension of time within which to approve or disapprove of an application, it may apply to the Selectmen for an extension of time for the Final Review Phase, not to exceed an additional ninety (90) days.   
 
 7.  Waiver of Final Review Phase Deadline:  An applicant may waive the requirements for Planning Board action within the time table set forth above, and may consent to any such extension as may be mutually agreeable between the Planning Board and the Applicant. 
 
3.09  (Reserved) 
 
3.10  Notification of Application Submission and Public Hearings 
 
 1. Public hearings shall be required when the Board is considering a lot line adjustment, or engaging in the Design Review Phase or Final Review Phase of a minor or major subdivision.  The public hearing may be held at the meeting at which the application is submitted and accepted.    
 
 2. Public hearings shall not be required when the Board is engaged in the Preliminary Conceptual Review Phase or is considering or acting upon disapproval of applications as incomplete for procedural reasons, such as failing to include abutter information, failing to meet reasonable deadlines established by the Board, or failing to pay costs of notice or other fees required by the Board. 
 
 3. The Planning Board shall notify the abutters, holders of conservation, preservation, or agricultural preservation restrictions, the applicant, and every engineer, architect, land surveyor, or soil scientist whose professional seal appears on any plat submitted to the Planning Board, by certified mail, of the date upon which the application will be formally submitted to the Board.  For those proposals near rivers and streams and downstream of a dam, the Planning Board shall also notify the owners of the upstream dam and the N.H. Department of Environmental Services Dam Bureau by certified mail.  Notice shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the submission at a public hearing.   
 
 4. Notice to the general public shall also be given at the same time as the notice described in the proceeding paragraph, by posting the mailed notice in two public places.   
 
 5. For any public hearing on the application, the same notice as required for notice of submission of the application shall be given.  If notice of a public hearing has been included in the notice of submission or in any prior notice, additional notice of that hearing is not required, nor shall additional notice be required of an adjourned session of a hearing with proper notice, if the date, time and place of the adjourned session was made known at the prior hearing.   
 
 6. All costs of notice, whether mailed, posted or published, shall be paid in advance by the applicant.  Failure to pay such costs shall constitute valid grounds for the Planning Board to terminate further consideration and to disapprove the plat without a public hearing. 
 
3.11 Developments of Regional Impact 
 
1. Applicability:  In accordance with N.H. R.S.A. 36:54 – 36:58, the Planning Board shall determine whether a subdivision application may reasonably be construed as having potential  regional impact that would require additional notice under State law.  Applications for lot line adjustments and for minor subdivisions shall not, absent extraordinary circumstances, be considered developments that may have regional impact. Doubt concerning whether a subdivision application, if approved, may have regional impact, shall be resolved in favor of a determination that the proposed subdivision shall have the potential for regional impact. 
 
 2. Determining Factors:  Determination of potential regional impact may result from a number of factors, including, but not limited to, the following: 
 
 (A). Relative size or number of dwelling units as compared with existing stock in the Town of Auburn; 
 
  (B.) Proximity to the borders of a neighboring community; 
 
  (C). Affect upon, or availability of, transportation networks; 
  
  (D). Anticipated emissions such as light, noise, smoke, odors or particles; 
 
 (E). Proximity to aquifers or surface waters which transcend the boundaries of the Town of Auburn; and/or 
  
(F). Shared facilities such as schools and solid waste disposal facilities. 
 
3. Procedure:  Upon a Planning Board determination that a proposed subdivision has a potential regional impact, the following procedures shall apply: 
 
  (A). The Southern New Hampshire Regional Planning Commission and the affected municipalities shall have the status of abutters as defined in N.H. R.S.A. 672:3 for the limited purpose of providing notice and giving testimony at Planning Board hearings. 
 
  (B). No later than five (5) business days after making a determination that a proposed subdivision has potential regional impact, the Planning Board shall provide to the Southern New Hampshire Regional Planning Commission and the affected municipalities, by certified mail, copies of the minutes of the meeting(s) at which the determination was made.  The Planning Board shall simultaneously provide the Southern New Hampshire Regional Planning Commission with an initial set of plans provided by the applicant, the cost of which shall be borne by the applicant. 
 
  (C). At least fourteen (14) days prior to the public hearing on an a subdivision application having potential regional impact, the Planning Board shall notify, by certified mail, all affected municipalities and the Southern New Hampshire Regional Planning Commission of the date, time and place of the hearing, and of their right to testify concerning the development. 
 
4. Building Permits:  Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding Sections 3.11(1) – (3), when the Auburn Building Inspector determines that a use or structure proposed in a building permit application will have the potential for regional impact, and no such determination has previously been made by the Planning Board, he or she shall notify the Planning Board and the Board of Selectmen.  The Building Inspector shall also notify the Southern New Hampshire Regional Planning Commission and the affected municipalities, by certified mail, which shall be provided thirty (30) days to submit comments to the Auburn Planning Board, Board of Selectmen and/or the Building Inspector prior the issuance of the building permit.   
 
 
 
ARTICLE 4 - SUBDIVISION APPROVAL PROCESS 
 
4.01  Standards for Final Review and Approval or Disapproval 
 
 1. General:  The Board may exercise its full statutory, common law, and regulatory discretion in approving or disapproving of a subdivision application.  In reviewing a subdivision application, the Board shall consider the criteria generally outlined in N.H. R.S..A 674:36, any applicable Site Plan Regulations, any applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, as well as the provisions, policies and purposes of these Subdivision Regulations. 
 
 2. Reasons for Denial:  The Board may deny an application based on one or more of the following findings: 
 
 (A). The land is undesirable for platting purposes because of topography, flooding potential or adverse man-made development features. 
 
 (B). The subdivision as proposed would be premature insofar as it would involve danger or injury to health, public safety, or prosperity by reason of the lack of water supply, drainage, transportation, schools, fire and emergency services, or other public services, or would necessitate an expenditure of public funds for the supply of such services. 
 
 (C). The applicant has not secured all applicable approvals and or permits from the Town, the State, or other governmental authorities, or the applicant has been denied a necessary permit from the Town, the State, or other governmental authority. 
 
 (D). The proposed streets within the subdivision are not coordinated with other existing or planned streets or with the Official Road Map of the Town of Auburn. 
 
 (E). The proposed streets are not suitably located and of sufficient design to accommodate access of emergency equipment or to facilitate evacuation of the area. 
 
 (F). The proposed subdivision is not in conformance with the Town of Auburn Zoning Ordinance or any other Town Ordinances that may apply. 
 
 (G). In any Cluster or Planned Unit Development, the method of ownership and maintenance of the proposed open spaces is not adequate to protect the public interests. 
 
 (H). The proposed subdivision would have a significant impact on the environment of the site or surrounding area in terms of water quality, storm drainage, air quality, wetland protection, or other adverse physical impact (such as erosion, sedimentation and similar impacts). 
 
 (I). The application is incomplete, notice has not been properly given, fees have not been paid, escrowed sums or required bonds have not been satisfactorily tendered, requested materials necessary for review have not been submitted, or required reports or studies are incomplete. 
 
 (J). The proposed subdivision is inconsistent with the policies, objectives, or spirit and intent of these Regulations or the criteria outlined in N.H. R.S.A. 674:36. 
 
 (K). The applicant is in default on a plat approved previously by the Planning Board. 
 
4.02 Written Decisions and Filing Requirement 
 
 1. All decisions resulting from the Final Review process shall be in writing.  Whenever the Board issues a written decision, the decision shall be placed on file in the Board’s Office and shall be made available for public inspection within five (5) business days after the decision is made.   
 
 2. The minutes of the Board shall also be posted in the Town Offices within five (5) business days after all meetings of the Board and all minutes shall be available for reasonable review, copying (at a reasonable fee), and inspection by the public. 
 
 3. In the event an application is denied as incomplete according to the Board’s Regulations, the Board shall notify the applicant in accord with N.H. R.S.A. 676:3 in a written decision which sets forth the areas in which the application has been deemed to be incomplete.  The basis of the Board’s decision shall be set forth in both the notice of decision and in the minutes of the Board in accord with N.H. R.S.A. 676:4.   
 
 4. In cases of disapproval, the Board shall issue a written decision to the applicant which shall state the reasons for disapproval.  The basis of the Board’s decision shall be set forth in both the notice of decision and in the minutes of the Board in accord with N.H. R.S.A. 676:4.   
 
4.03  Approval, with Conditions 
 
1. Approval, with Conditions: (conditions subsequent). The Planning Board may grant approval, with conditions, of a subdivision plat or application, which approval shall become final without further public hearing, upon certification to the Board by its designee, or based upon evidence submitted by the applicant, of satisfactory compliance with the conditions imposed. The Board Chairperson will have authority to sign the final mylar in such cases, upon completion of the stated conditions. Final approval of a plat or application may occur in the foregoing manner only when the conditions imposed are the following types: 
 
 (A). Minor plan changes, whether or not imposed by the Board as a result of a public hearing, compliance with which is administrative and which does not involve discretionary judgment; 
 
 (B). Conditions which are in themselves administrative and which involve no discretionary judgment on the part of the Board; 
 
 (C). Conditions with regard to the applicant's possession of permits and approvals granted by other boards or agencies, or approvals granted by other boards or agencies. 
 
 2. Time Limit:  In granting an approval, with conditions, the Board may specify in its action the time period within which such approval shall be considered valid.  If the conditions for approval have not been met by the deadline set by the Board, then the approval shall lapse. 
 
  (A) Extension:  If there have been no amendments to the Auburn Zoning Ordinance or Subdivision Regulations which would make the application non-conforming, the Board may grant a reasonable extension of the time period for completing the conditions of approval, not to exceed an additional ninety (90) days per extension.    
 
 3. Deed Restrictions:   
 
  (A).   Where conditions imposed by the Board will run with the land, the Board may require that deed restrictions be placed on the property in order to carry out the condition(s). 
 
  (B). The Planning Board may require that Town Counsel approve the form of the deed, including any language pertaining to restrictive covenants with regard to the preservation of wetland buffers, vegetative buffers, or other restrictive covenants imposed by the Board as a condition of approval.   
  
  (C).   Conservation Restrictions:  In accordance with N.H. R.S.A. 674:21-a, any open space designation or other development restriction which is part of a cluster development, or which is lawfully imposed by the Planning Board as a condition of subdivision approval, and which has been filed in the records of the Planning Board, shall be deemed to create a conservation restriction as defined in R.S.A. 477:45, I, which shall run with the land, and shall be enforceable by the Town of Auburn, or by the owner of any property which would be specially damaged by the violation of such restriction, regardless of whether any deed or other instrument conveying such restriction has been executed or recorded.  An applicant’s statement of intent to restrict development, submitted with or contained in an approved subdivision application, shall be deemed a condition of the approval. 
 
 
  
4. Compliance Hearing:   
 
   (A). The Board shall specify whether a compliance hearing will be held as part of its action in issuing any approval with conditions.   
 
  (B). The Notice requirements of Section 3.10 shall apply to any such compliance hearing. 
 
  (C). Abutter’s Interests:  If the completed application is approved with one or more conditions which are to be fulfilled prior to final approval, and which may, in the opinion of the Board, pertain to abutting interests, the Board shall hold a compliance hearing to determine whether the Applicant has complied with the conditions before issuing a final approval.   
 
4.04 Conditional Approval   
 
 1.   The Planning Board may, by vote, grant a conditional approval of a subdivision plat or application. A conditional approval is not a final subdivision approval, as it is contingent upon the completion of specific tasks or items required for final approval.  Until all the requirements for an approval have been met, a conditional approval does not constitute, nor shall it be construed as approval, either implied or granted, of the subdivision plat.  A conditional approval does not bind the Planning Board to approval of the final subdivision plat.  A conditional approval requires that the applicant return to appear before the Planning Board in a public hearing for final subdivision approval in order to ensure that the applicant has complied with the conditions precedent to approval. 
 
  (A). Time Limit:  Unless otherwise specified within the approval, the applicant shall have ninety (90) days from the date the Board votes to conditionally approve the application, to comply with the conditions of the approval and have the plan signed by the Board.  If the conditions are not met within ninety (90) days, the conditional approval shall lapse, unless a mutually agreeable extension has been granted by the Board.   
 
  (B).  Extension:  If there have been no amendments to the Auburn Zoning Ordinance or Subdivision Regulations which would make the application non-conforming, and if all other required permits are still valid, the Board may grant a reasonable extension of the time period for completing the conditions of approval, not to exceed an additional ninety (90) days. 
 
4.05 Recording of Final Plan and Time Period for Submitting Final Mylar 
 
 1. An approved subdivision plat shall be recorded with the Registry of Deeds of Rockingham County prior to any sale, lease or transfer of land within the subdivision or prior to the issuance of any building permits for erection of a structure in the proposed subdivision.  The final written decision of the Planning Board approving the subdivision application and plat, including all conditions of approval, shall be recorded with or on the plat. 
 
 2. The applicant shall provide a final Mylar plan for signature by the Chairman of the Planning Board within one hundred eighty (180) days of approval by the Board or, where applicable, within one hundred eighty (180) days of meeting any conditions of approval. 
 
 3. No plat shall be filed or recorded until it has been approved and endorsed by the Planning Board in writing on the plat. All approved and endorsed plats shall be recorded by the Planning Board's designee.  The Planning Board’s designee shall record the approved and endorsed plan in the Office of the Registry of Deeds for Rockingham County and shall notify the Board in writing of the Plan Number and filing date within thirty (30) days of signing. 
  
 4. Approval of a final plan shall lapse if such plan is not recorded in the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds within one hundred eighty five (185) days from the date of the Notice of Decision of Subdivision Approval, unless, upon written request, the Planning Board extends the time limit for recording. 
 
ARTICLE 5 - GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 
 
5.01  Character of Land for Subdivision 
 
All land to be subdivided shall be, in the judgment of the Board, of such a character that it can be used for building purposes without danger to public health or safety, or to the environment.  Land subject to periodic flooding, poor drainage, or other hazardous conditions shall not ordinarily be subdivided.  Land with inadequate capacity for sanitary sewage disposal shall not be subdivided unless connected to public sewers.  Additionally, all lots shall have a minimum of one contiguous acre of dry land. 
 
5.02  Conformity to Zoning Ordinance and Master Plan 
 
All subdivision plans shall conform to the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Auburn and to the Subdivision Regulations herewith prescribed.  Subdivision plans shall be guided in their layout by any comprehensive plans the Planning Board may have adopted covering the area involved, before receiving final approval. 
 
5.03  Scattered or Premature Development 
 
1. Purpose:  The purpose of this section is to provide against such scattered or premature subdivision of land as would involve danger or injury to health, safety, or prosperity by reason of the lack of water supply, drainage, transportation, schools, fire department, or other public services, or necessitate an excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of such services.  Therefore, the Planning Board shall not allow such scattered or premature subdivision of land to take place unless the applicant shows:  
 
(A). Through studies approved by the Planning Board and conducted at the expense of the applicant, that the type and/or scope of the proposed subdivision is neither scattered nor premature; and/or 
 
(B). Through both on and off-site improvements made at the expense of the applicant, that the scattered or premature nature of the subdivision is overcome by remedial action by the applicant. 
 
2. Causes: The following items shall be considered in determining whether the proposed subdivision is scattered or premature, and the applicant may be required to have studies performed under guidelines established by the Planning Board to determine the effect that the proposed subdivision may have on: 
 
(A). Distance from nearest elementary school; 
 
(B). Capacity of school system and effect on school bus transportation; 
 
(C). Adequacy of access street(s) and/or sidewalk(s); 
 
(D). Adequacy of water supply for domestic and fire-fighting purposes; 
 
(E). Potential health problems due to on-site sewage systems and water supply; 
 
(F). Potential fire protection problems due to location and/or special conditions relative to type of use; 
 
(G). Potential special policing problems; 
 
(H). Potential drainage problems both on the site and offsite; 
 
(I). Excessive expenditure of public funds; and 
 
(J). Other potential problems within the meaning or the purpose of this section, as stated in Section 5.03(1), above. 
 
3. Improvements:  If it is determined by the Planning Board that the proposed subdivision is scattered or premature unless special on and off site improvements are made, the Planning Board may require the applicant to make said improvements prior to, or as condition of, approval of the subdivision.  These improvements may consist of, but not be limited to, the following: 
 
(A). Improve any access street to the subdivision to the appropriate street standards if such access would otherwise be inadequate, provided the Town owns or provides the right-of-way; 
 
(B). Extend the public water and/or sewer system(s) if either or both are within 3,000 feet of the subdivision, provided that the subdivision serves or potentially can serve twelve (12) or more lots; 
 
(C). Build or reconstruct sidewalks on any access streets where potential increase in pedestrian traffic will occur, provided the Town owns or provides the right-of-way; 
 
(D). Construct static water supplies, (fire ponds) with dry hydrants, fire cisterns, or other systems for fire protection; and 
 
(E). Provide traffic signals at intersections and/or rebuild intersections in the immediate area of the proposed subdivision, if such intersection would otherwise be inadequate, provided the Town owns or provides the right-of-way. 
 
4. Phasing of Subdivisions:  As an alternative to performing the studies and/or making improvements as required by this section, the applicant may propose to develop the subdivision in stages.  This may be approved by the Planning Board if the Town and/or School District have plans to make public improvements, and a schedule to implement these improvements so that the various phases of the subdivision will not take place until the relative public improvements are scheduled.  However, under no circumstances may phasing be used to avoid the end result of a premature or scattered subdivision. 
 
5.04  Required Certification 
 
The applicant shall certify before any plat is approved by the Board that all arrangements have been made with the appropriate governmental agencies, private utilities and others, including Town departments, to provide and install, in the manner customary in the Town, all usual and necessary utilities and services to each of the lots in the subdivision, unless otherwise exempted by the Planning Board. 
 
5.05   Erosion Control 
 
The applicant shall provide adequate control of stormwater and erosion and sedimentation control of both a temporary and permanent nature, in accordance with the provisions of Article 10, during all phases of clearing, grading and construction. 
 
5.06  Reserved Strips 
 
No privately owned reserved strip, except an open space area, shall be permitted which controls access to any part of the subdivision, or to any other parcel of land from any street, or from any land dedicated to public use, or which may be so dedicated. 
 
5.07  Preservation of Existing Features 
 
1. Existing features, which would add value to the subdivision, such as trees, watercourses, falls, brooks, historic buildings, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the subdivision to the greatest extent possible.  Use of the services of professional land planners and or landscape architects to meet the intent of this section is strongly encouraged. 
 
2. Land shall be subdivided and improved in reasonable conformity to existing topography in order to minimize grading, cutting and filling, and in order to retain the natural contours, limit storm water run off and conserve the natural cover and soil. After a preliminary layout has been submitted to the Auburn Planning Board, no topsoil, sand or gravel shall be removed from the subdivision for any other purpose than to meet construction needs for that particular subdivision, or to meet any requirements of these Regulations. 
 
3. The smallest practical area of land should be disturbed at any one time during development.  When land is disturbed during development, the disturbance should be kept to the shortest practical period of time.  Land should not be left disturbed during the winter months.  Where necessary, temporary vegetation or mulching and structural measures may be required by the Town to protect areas disturbed during the development.  Sediment basins shall be installed and maintained during development to remove sediment from run off water from land undergoing development.  Where possible, natural drainage ways should be utilized and left open to remove excess surface water.  Permanent final vegetation and structures should be installed as soon as practical. 
 
(4). Stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be addressed in accordance with the provisions of Article 10 of these Subdivision Regulations. 
 
5.08  Cluster Development Project Review 
 
The Planning Board shall ascertain that the plan minimizes the encroachment of the cluster development upon neighboring land uses.  In addition to the cluster development regulations set forth in the Zoning Ordinance and the subdivision review criteria set forth in these Regulations, the review of any cluster development conducted by the Planning Board under these Regulations shall ascertain that adequate provisions have been made by the owner or his or her authorized agent for the following: 
 
1. Traffic circulation and access, including adequacy of adjacent streets, entrances and exits, traffic flow, sight distances, curb cuts, turning lanes, and existing or recommended traffic signals; 
 
2.  Pedestrian safety and access; 
 
3. Off-street parking and loading; 
 
4. Emergency vehicle and school bus access; 
 
5. Storm water drainage based upon a minimum of fifty (50) year storm frequency, utilizing on-site absorption and or positive out-fall; 
 
6. Recreation facilities; 
 
7. Water supply and wastewater disposal; 
 
8. Environmental factors such as protection against pollution, noise, odor, and the protection of natural features; 
 
9. Landscaping in keeping with the general character of the surrounding areas; 
 
10. Signing and exterior lighting; and 
 
11. Submission of proposal along with abutting property owners' names and addresses shall be in accordance with the Town of Auburn Subdivision Regulations in order to provide for timely notification to abutters of public hearing to review said proposal. 
 
 
ARTICLE 6 - GENERAL SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS 
 
6.01 Regulatory Approvals and Additional Reviews  
 
 1. The Auburn Planning Board may require written copies of decisions relative to the proposed subdivision made by, but not limited to: 
 
 (A). The New Hampshire D.E.S., Water Division; 
 
 (B). The New Hampshire D.E.S., Dredge and Fill Commission; 
 
 (C). The New Hampshire D.E.S., Water Resources Board; 
 

 (D). The Rockingham County Soil Conservation District; 
 
 (E). The Auburn Zoning Board of Adjustment; and  
 
 (F). Any other state, federal, municipal, or county agency. 
 
 2. The Auburn Planning Board, in its sole discretion, may refer any subdivision plan or component of a subdivision plan for additional review and comment by the School District and/or any other department or commission of the Town prior to approval. 
 
6.02   Acceptance of Dedication Offers 
 
Acceptance of formal offers of dedication of streets shall occur in accordance with N.H. R.S.A. 674:40-a.  Acceptance of public areas and parks shall comply with New Hampshire statutes governing municipal acceptance of land.  The approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision plat shall not be deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance by the Board of Selectmen or the town of any street, right-of-way, easement or park shown on said plat.  The Planning Board may require said plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. 
 
6.03   Soil Tests 
 
Where private individual sewage systems are proposed, the subdivider shall perform soil tests and design all proposed on-site sewage systems meeting the minimum specifications and having the written approval of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services, and the Town of Auburn, if a local sanitary code exists, regulating on-site sewage systems.  At the Planning Board’s discretion, additional tests, including a hydro-geologic study, may be required to assure that an on-site septic system is adequate to protect groundwater and the public health. 
 
6.04   Access Driveway 
 
Any access driveway and street shall be approved by the State Department of Public Works and Highways, or the Town of Auburn, as may be applicable, and such written approval shall be provided to the Planning Board. 
 
6.05   Assurances from Applicant 
 
A written acknowledgment of the applicant's responsibility for maintenance, and the assumption by the applicant of liability for injuries and damages that may occur on any land to be dedicated for public use until such land has been legally accepted by the Town, shall be submitted. 
 
6.06   Availability of Other Utilities 
 
The applicant shall submit a statement from telephone and electric utilities stating that service will be furnished and that arrangements have been made for installation of these utilities according to the submitted plat.  If the applicant has any financial liability for the installation of these utilities, it shall be included as part of the performance guarantee. 
 
6.07  Other Requirements:  Easements, Rights-of-way; Covenants and Conveyances 
 
Where applicable to a specific subdivision, the following are required, in form as approved by the Town Attorney, prior to final approval of a subdivision plat: 
 
1. Agreement to convey to the Town land to be used for streets and other public purposes, with transfer of title to such interests to be effective on such date as the Town accepts such land; 
 
2. Easements and rights-of-way over property to remain in private ownership; 
 
3. A copy of proposed covenants or deed restrictions as may be intended to apply to the property in whole or in part; 
 
4. Rights to drain onto or across other property, whether public or private, including a street; and/or 
 
5.  Conservation easements for the benefit of the Town. 
 
 
ARTICLE 7 - CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS 
 
7.01 Pre-Construction Conference 
 
   1. Required:  Prior to performing any site activity, the applicant shall participate in a pre-construction conference with designated representatives of the Town. An authorized representative(s) of the owner or developer shall attend the conference.  The Town of Auburn Building Inspector, Town Engineer and any other representative of the Town, or professional retained by the Town, whose input the Planning Board may desire, shall attend the conference. 
 
 2. Start and Completion Dates:  During the pre-construction conference, the owner or developer shall inform the Town’s representatives of the date on which the work shall commence and the date upon which the work shall be completed. 
 
 3. Engineer’s Approval:  Prior to performing any site activity, the Planning Board must receive the approval or the Town engineer, or other Board designee, that the results of the pre-construction conference are satisfactory given the terms of the Board’s subdivision approval, and the requirements of these Regulations, as well as any applicable State, Federal or Town statutes, ordinances or regulations.  
 
7.02 Improvements 
 
 1. All costs of required improvements shall be borne by the applicant unless specifically required to be borne by others.   
 
 2. The applicant is responsible for the satisfactory installation of all required improvements and maintenance of these improvements in a condition satisfactory to the Town without any cost to the Town, unless and until the improvements are accepted by the Town. 
 
 3. The Board may require that the Applicant enter into a Subdivision Improvement Agreement related to the timing of public improvements to private development, to minimize hardships and other adverse effects which might arise from unanticipated delays in completion of all required improvements.  Failure to comply with the terms of such an agreement may be considered as failure on the part of the applicant to provide the required improvements, and may be considered adequate grounds for action against the applicant’s performance guarantee in order to guarantee the proper completion of the required improvements. 
 
 4. All applicants shall be required to complete, in accordance with the Planning Board's decision and to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer and Board of Selectmen, all the street, sanitary, and other improvements of the subdivision as required in these Regulations, specified in the final plat and the construction plans set forth in these Regulations, and as approved by the Planning Board, and to dedicate the same to the Town of Auburn, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the property and public improvements thus dedicated. 
 
5. Temporary Improvements: The applicant shall build and pay for all costs of temporary improvements required by the Planning Board and shall maintain same for a time period specified by the Planning Board.  Prior to construction of any temporary facility or improvement, the developer shall file with the local Board of Selectmen a separate suitable performance guarantee, in accordance with the requirements of Article 8, for temporary facilities, which performance guarantee shall insure that the temporary facilities will be properly constructed, maintained, and removed. 
 
 6. Inspection of Improvements: The Planning Board shall provide for the inspection of required improvements during their construction.  The Planning Board may delegate the responsibility for such inspections to the Town Engineer, Building Inspector or Town Road Agent, as the Planning Board sees fit. If, upon inspection, it is determined that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the Planning Board's construction standards and specifications, the applicant shall be responsible for completing or correcting the improvements.  Wherever the cost of improvements is covered by a performance guarantee, the applicant and the bonding or surety company shall be jointly and severally liable for completing the improvements according to the specifications.  In such cases, the Board of Selectmen shall notify the applicant and, if necessary, the bonding company or escrow agent, and take all necessary steps to preserve the Town's rights under the performance guarantee.  This action shall be without prejudice to any other enforcement action available to the Town. 
 
7. Maintenance of Improvements: The applicant shall be required to maintain all improvements to and on the individual subdivided lots and to provide for snow removal on streets, until acceptance of said improvements by the Town.  The local government may give twelve (12) hours notice of its intent to plow a street or effect emergency repairs and charge same to said applicant, and if such work is not completed by the applicant, may plow the street or effectuate emergency repairs, charging the same to the applicant or to the bond, as the Town sees fits. 
 
7.03 Off-site and On-site Improvements 
 
 1. Approval of any Plat, either Design Phase or Final, shall, in all cases, be conditioned upon the applicant bearing the entire cost of designing and installing all on-site improvements, and such off-site improvements as bear a rational relationship to the needs created by the subdivision and the benefits which will be conferred upon the subdivision by the improvements.   
 
 2. Where off-site improvements will be required solely because of the existence of the subdivision, yet will benefit other land or extend beyond the subdivision, apportionment of the expenses between the Town, the applicant, and where appropriate, other applicants, shall be made by the Board.  Such apportionment shall be based, in part, upon a consideration of: 
 
 (A). The standard which the Town presently applies to the construction and maintenance of other off-site improvements; 
 
 (B). The use which it can be expected will be made of the off-site improvements by the subdivision, its residents or other applicants; 
 
 (C). The use which it can be expected that other residents of the Town will make of the off-site improvements; and 
 
 (D). The Town budget and Capital Improvements Plan for such improvements. 
 
 3. Should the Board decide that the Town's proportionate share of the cost of any off-site improvements could be met only by an excessive expenditure of Town funds, it may either refuse to approve the application, or approve the application on the condition that the subdivider volunteer to pay the Town's share as outlined in Section 7.03(2).  In such cases, the Board shall issue a written decision to the applicant, stating the reasons for such action, and such decision shall be reflected in the minutes of the Planning Board meeting at which such decision was made. 
 
7.04 Performance Guarantee Prior to Acceptance of Streets, Utilities, Other Improvements and Public Land 
 
Before acceptance by the Town of any street, utility system or other improvement, the applicant shall provide a surety bond or escrow agreement, approved as to form by the Town Attorney, which shall be in the amount of at least ten (10%) percent of the cost of such improvement, and for a period of two (2) years to be payable to the Town, if the applicant does not correct any deficiency found or damage to any such improvement during this period. 
 
7.05   Change of Design and Improvements 
 
If at any time before or during the construction of the required improvements, it is demonstrated that unforeseen conditions make it necessary or preferable to modify the location or design of such required improvements, the Board may authorize changes, provided these changes are within the spirit and intent of the Board’s approval, and do not extend to the modification or substantial alteration of the function of any improvements required by the Board.  After a duly noticed public hearing, the Board shall issue a written authorization under this Section.  Any authorized change shall be included on the official subdivision plat, and notice of the authorized change shall be transmitted to the Rockingham County Register of Deeds.  No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made in any subdivision plat after approval has been given by the Board and endorsed in writing on the plat, except as herein provided.  In the event that any such plat is recorded without complying with this requirement, the same shall be considered null and void, and the Board shall institute proceedings to have the plat stricken from the records of the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds, and may also revoke the subdivision approval. 
 
7.06 Soil Test Pits, Boring and Percolation Test Pits  
 
No soil test pits or borings, or percolation test pits shall be conducted without at least ten (10) days prior notice to the Planning Board and Building Inspector, as to their date and location within the proposed subdivision.  The soil test pits, borings or percolation test pits shall be observed by the Building Inspector at a time convenient to his or her schedule. 
 
ARTICLE 8 - PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES 
 
8.01 Performance Guarantee Required 
 
The Planning Board shall require that the applicant post a performance bond, escrow account, direct cash bond, cash security or other satisfactory security at the time of application for final plat approval.  The amount of the performance guarantee shall be calculated by using the Table set forth in the Appendix, after consultation with the Town Engineer and approval by the Planning Board of an amount sufficient to secure to the Town of Auburn the satisfactory construction, installation, and dedication of the required improvements delineated in the construction plans or required by these Regulations, without cost to the Town. With respect to fire cisterns required by Section 9.14 of these Regulations, the required performance guarantee prior to the start of tank installation is $80,000, increasing by 5% annually.  The Planning Board may require that prior to construction of any temporary facility or improvement, the developer shall post a separate suitable performance guarantee pertaining to the completion of temporary facilities or improvements.  Final approval of a plat will not be recorded at the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds until the applicant has either completed all of the improvements specified in the plan or filed a performance guarantee in compliance with the requirements of these Regulations. 
 
8.02 Form   
 
The performance guarantee shall comply with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to the Planning Board and its Attorney as to form, sufficiency, and manner of execution. Direct cash bonds will be deposited by the Board of Selectmen in an interest-bearing savings account. The period within which required improvements must be completed shall be specified by the Planning Board in the resolution approving the final subdivision plat, shall be incorporated in the performance guarantee, and shall not in any event exceed two (2) years from the date of final plat approval.  Such performance guarantee shall also be approved by the Board of Selectmen as to the amount, surety and conditions satisfactory to the Board of Selectmen. All performance guarantees shall include a self-calling provision, so that the security is automatically called in the event of non-performance by the applicant.  The Planning Board may, upon proof of difficulty, and not neglect, recommend to the Board of Selectmen extension of the completion date set forth in such performance guarantee for a maximum period of one (1) additional year.   
 
8.03 Renewal  
 
All performance guarantees shall contain an automatic renewal clause. Renewal shall be the responsibility of the applicant.  The performance guarantee must remain effective until the applicant has dedicated to the Town of Auburn all improvements specified in the final plat, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances. 
 
8.04 Failure to Complete Improvements  
 
When a performance guarantee has been posted and required improvements have not been installed within the terms and conditions of subdivision approval, the Board of Selectmen may thereupon declare the performance guarantee to be in default, and require that all improvements be installed regardless of the extent of the building development at the time the performance guarantee is declared to be in default. 
 
8.05    Release or Reduction of Performance Guarantee   
 
1.
 Certificate of Satisfactory Completion:  The Board of Selectmen and Planning Board will not accept dedication of required improvements, or release nor reduce a performance bond, until the Town Engineer has submitted a certificate stating that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed, and until the applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the Town Engineer, through submission of a detailed "as built" survey plan of the subdivision, indicating locations, dimensions, materials, and other information required by the Planning Board or Town Engineer, that the layout of the line and grade of all public improvements and lot monuments is in accordance with the final plat and construction plans for the subdivision, that a title insurance policy has been furnished to and approved by the Planning Board, that all improvements are completed and ready for dedication to the Town of Auburn, and are free and clear of any and all liens and encumbrances. Upon such approval and recommendation, the Town may thereafter accept the improvements for dedication in accordance with the established procedure. 

 

2.
 Roadway As-Built Plan Requirements: The applicant shall cause to have prepared, by a competent engineer and surveyor, as-built plans showing the location, invert, and top grade of all drainage structures and other underground public utilities, the centerline street grades on 50-foot stations, to the nearest 0.01 foot.  These plans shall show all street centerline and ditch grades to the nearest 0.1 foot on 50-foot stations.  The plans shall include the approved and the “as-built” elevations, locations, and inverts of all the roadway and utility infrastructure.  This data for the as-built plan must be collected from a field survey and the date of the survey noted on the plan. The plan must be stamped by the Professional Engineer and licensed land surveyor, and must include a certification that all right of way bounds (monuments) are in place and the date they were set. Paper copies and pdf copies saved on a CD or DVD must be provided to the Planning Board.  



 
3.   Reduction of  Performance Guarantee:  A  performance guarantee may be reduced upon actual dedication of public improvements, and then only to the ratio that the public improvement dedicated bears to the total public improvements for the subdivision.  In no event shall a performance guarantee be reduced below twenty-five percent (25%) of the principal amount, prior to issuance of the Certificate of Satisfactory Completion. 
 
4.   Town’s Use of the Performance Guarantee: If the Board finds that the developer has not installed improvements satisfactorily, has not completed those improvements within the approved time for completion, or has not maintained those improvements in a satisfactory condition, the Board may provide notice to the developer and may take such further action or make such use of the performance guarantee as may be appropriate in the judgment of the Board, to complete the improvements. 
ARTICLE 9 - DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
9.01  Minimum Standards 
 
In considering applications for the subdivision of land, and clustered development plans, the Planning Board shall adhere to and be guided by the applicable design standards set forth herein.  Such standards shall be considered to be minimum standards and shall be modified by the Board only when in its opinion specific circumstances surrounding a subdivision, or condition of the land in such subdivision, indicate that such modification will properly carry out the purpose and intent of the Town Master Plan, Zoning Ordinance and these Regulations. 
 
9.02  Specifications for Required Improvements 
 
1. All required improvements shall be constructed or installed in accordance with good engineering design practice, in accordance with Town standards, which may be obtained from the Town Engineer, and in accordance with these Regulations. 
 
2. The applicant shall prepare a cost opinion for the proposed subdivision improvements using the Improvement Bond Estimate form and its unit costs.  The cost opinion shall be subject to review and approval by the Town Engineer.  This information shall be used by the Planning Board to determine the amount of surety sufficient to secure to the Town of Auburn the satisfactory construction, installation, and dedication of the required improvements delineated in the construction plans or required by these Regulations, without cost to the Town.  Upon approval of the application and plat, the applicant shall submit suitable performance guarantee to the Town in accordance with the requirements of Section 8 of these Regulations. 
 
9.03 Requirements Prior to Certificate of Occupancy 
 
No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any lot in a subdivision until the following requirements have been completed: 
 
 1. The road(s) in the subdivision have been constructed to road standards minus final pavement.  All required guardrails, signage and drainage shall be in place; 
 
 2. Any required fire protection system or device shall be operational;  
 
 3. All utilities, including sewer, water and drainage structures are completed for the entire length of the lot frontage upon which the structure is located; and 
 
 4. All instruments of conveyance required under Section 6.07 of these Regulations are recorded at the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds. 
 
9.04
 Street Layout and Design 



 
1.
 All streets shall have a minimum right-of-way of fifty (50) feet.   



 
2.
 All streets to be constructed in areas zoned as Commercial or Industrial shall have a minimum paved width of twenty-four (24) feet centered on the right-of-way.  A street may be deemed by the Auburn Planning Board as a through street if  the  average daily traffic count is not greater than four hundred (400) vehicle trips per day 

 

3.
 All streets to be constructed in areas zoned as Residential-Rural shall have a minimum paved width of twenty-two (22) feet centered on the right-of-way, as long as the Auburn Planning Board has not classified said street as a through street and the  average daily traffic count  is greater than 400 vehicle trips per day. 



 
4.
 Dead end streets shall not be allowed.  Cul-de-sacs will be permitted but not of greater length than 1,200 feet, and they must have a turn around consisting of a twenty (20) foot wide black top road, with a minimum turning radius of forty (40) feet around a central island of loam and grass or undisturbed land.  (See Appendix A – cul-de-sac detail.) 



 
5.
 Streets shall be arranged to provide for extension or connection of eventual street systems necessary to develop abutting land in future subdivisions.  In no case should future right-of-ways be more than one thousand (1,000) feet apart. 



 
6.
 The grades of all streets shall be at least one (1%) percent, but less than or equal to eight (8%) percent. 



 
7.
 The maximum grade within one hundred (100) feet, measured from the center of the intersection, shall be three (3%) percent. 



 
8.
 Intersections shall be as nearly as possible at right angles, ninety (90) degrees, with a minimum allowable intersection angle of sixty (60) degrees. 



 
9.
 All rights-of-way shall be conveyed to the Town of Auburn by warranty deed. 



 
10.
 Streets shall also be constructed in accordance with the "Typical Cross Section” set forth in Appendix A. 



 
11.
 Side slopes shall not be steeper than four (4) feet horizontal and one (1) foot vertical, graded, loamed and seeded as shown in the typical section view drawings in Appendix A.  Where guardrails are provided or required, side slopes may be a maximum of two (2) feet horizontal and one (1) foot vertical. 



 
12.
 The street and lot layout shall be adapted to the topography.  Extensive grading and filling shall be avoided. 



 
13.
 The centerlines of no more than two accepted rights-of-way shall intersect at any one point. 



 
14.
 The name of the subdivision shall not duplicate or approximate the name of any other subdivision within the Town. 



 
15.
 All new street names shall be chosen from the list in Appendix I.  Applicants not wishing to use the proposed road name list shall submit their proposed road name in writing to the Planning Board.  In all cases, no first names will be allowed for submission or acceptance, (i.e. James, Margaret, etc.).  In no case will a proposed road name be acceptable unless the applicant receives approval for its use from the Planning Board.  The continuation of an existing street shall have the same name.   



 
 16. Minimum width of shoulders shall be four (4) feet. 
 
17. No more than two (2) proposed streets shall intersect at any one (1) point. 
 
18.
 All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient length to provide a smooth transition and proper sight distance.  All horizontal curves shall be designed according to AASHTO standards for the existing or proposed speed limit. 



 
19.
 Street layout shall include access into abutting properties unless such action is not deemed necessary by the Planning Board due to the location or nature of the abutting land. 



 
20.
 Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall not be permitted. 



 
21.
 Horizontal and vertical curves shall meet the design standards as recommended by AASHTO for the proposed speed limit. 



 
22.
 A minimum 100’ tangent must be designed between reverse vertical and horizontal curves. 



 
23.
 Sight distances at intersections shall be in accordance with the most recent edition of AASHTO standards for Intersection Sight Distance using the posted/design speed limit plus 5 mph.  Sight distance calculations shall be required and shown on the project roadway and/or driveway plans.   



 
24.
 All utility locations must be shown on the proposed plans.  



 
9.05
 Construction Requirements 

 
1.   All site plans, road and drainage construction shall be performed in accordance with the agreements, plans, profiles, and typical details approved by the Board. 
 
2.   Changes or revisions to the approved plans and profiles or development plans caused by unanticipated conditions encountered during construction shall be designed by the developer’s engineer and shall be subject to the approval of the Town’s Consulting Engineer and subject to the requirements of Section 7.05 of these Regulations. 
 

3.
 All site plan, roadway, drainage and utility construction shall be performed in accordance with the latest edition of the Auburn Subdivision and Site Plan Review Regulations. 

 


4.    All work within the Town right-of-way shall be subject to approval by the Town.  Patching will be paved flush with binder then milled and paved (overlay) with the appropriate thickness of wearing course pavement.  The limits of the overlay will be determined by the Town’s Consulting Engineer and Road Agent.  
5.   Any item of work for which there are no specifications contained herein, shall conform to the most current “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction of the State of New Hampshire Department of Transportation.” 
 
6.   The Applicant or his or her representative must contact the Planning Department before any construction activities to schedule a pre-construction meeting as set forth in Section 7.01 of these Regulations.  The purpose of the meeting is to discuss inspection procedures, construction specifications, material testing program and any other details relating to the construction and inspection of the development roads and related infrastructure. Before the preconstruction meeting can be scheduled the applicant must provide signed, approved plans, the estimated monitoring escrow and surety, and all necessary retaining wall and structure shop drawings. 
 
7.   Detail of Required Inspections:   
 
(a). Visual Inspections:  Inspections shall be made by the Town’s Consulting Engineer as determined and as required in the most recent edition of the Town’s Subdivision and Site Plan Regulations.  
 
(b).  Materials Testing:  Materials testing shall be conducted to verify that the specified roadway materials have been furnished and constructed according to the Subdivision and Site Plan Regulations, as determined by the Town’s Consulting Engineer.  On private sites, the applicant shall coordinate with an independent testing agency, at the applicant’s cost, to provide the required testing.  All reports shall be forwarded to the Planning Department and the Town’s Consulting Engineer.  For all road projects, the Town’s Consulting Engineer will coordinate the testing, at the applicant’s cost.   
 
8.   Cleanup: Before acceptance, a street shall be cleaned, by hand if necessary, so that it is left in a neat and presentable condition.  Inspections shall be made by the Town’s Consulting Engineer as required by the most recent edition of the Subdivision and Site Plan Regulations. 
 
9.  Maintenance: Before acceptance, a street system, sidewalks, and all drainage infrastructure shall be maintained by the developer.  The sidewalks and streets shall be swept as required, and at a minimum, shall be swept annually.  The drainage system, including, but not limited to, catch basins, drain manholes, culverts, detention basins, roadside swales, treatment swales, level spreaders and underground detention systems, shall be maintained as required, and at a minimum, shall be maintained annually.  
 
10.  Acceptance:  Prior to the Board of Selectmen accepting a street, the performance guarantee will be released only after the completion of all required improvements, final inspection, final approval, the submission by the applicant of all required as-built drawings and the delivery to the Town of a fully executed warranty deed for all rights-of-way, all improvements within the rights-of-way in fee simple, free of all encumbrances and applicable easements as set forth in Article 8 of  these Regulations.  Reviews shall be made by the Town’s Consulting Engineer as required in the latest edition of the Subdivision and Site Plan Regulations. 
 
11. Residential Subdivision Improvements Prior to Building Permit: Prior to the issuance of a residential building permit the following must be completed: 
 
 (A).  Roadway:  The roadway must be complete to base gravel. 
   
(B). Underground Utilities: All underground utility systems, designed and approved within the roadway, must be installed and backfilled.  No trenching across the roadway will be permitted after building permits have been issued. 
 
(C).  Erosion Control:  Temporary and permanent erosion control measures for the affected area of the site must be constructed as specified on the approved construction plans or as recommended by the Town’s Consulting Engineer.   
 
12. Residential Subdivision Improvements Prior to Certificate of Occupancy: 
  
 In addition to the Building Code Requirements, the project improvements, conditions, and commitments from the developer shall be in effect prior to the issuance of Certificates of Occupancy. 
 
(A). Pavement:  The base course of pavement, shall be constructed in accordance with the Town’s Subdivision and Site Plan Regulations. 
 
(B). Drainage:  The site drainage systems shall be constructed and functioning as designed.    
 
(C). Underground Utilities:  All applicable underground utilities, to include water, sewer, and gas, must be installed and approved, in writing, by the utility provider.  Additionally, all required electric, phone, and/or cable utilities must be installed and functional.  
 
(D). Erosion Control:  Temporary and permanent erosion control measures for the affected area of the site must be constructed as specified on the approved construction plans or as recommended by the Town’s Consulting Engineer.  
 
(E). Curbing:  It is the intent of the Town to have development roadways constructed with permanent curbing (where required) and base course prior to the winter maintenance system.  The required length of curbing to be constructed shall be the distance of the affected development road requiring curbing (including both sides of the road) to the furthest lot for which a Certificate of Occupancy is requested.  Prior to the issuance of any Certificates of Occupancy, the developer shall construct the permanent curbing (where required) and full width of base course hot bituminous pavement. 
   
NOTE:  No gaps in curbing, except for drives shall be permitted. 
 
(F). Turn-Arounds:  The developer must provide a paved temporary turn-around for snowplow trucks.  The turn-around design and location must be approved by the Planning Board and the Town’s Consulting Engineer. 
 
(G). Right-of-Way:  The right-of-way of the affected development roadway shall be clear of construction materials, debris, contractor’s equipment, and storage trailers. Catch basin grates and public or private utility frames/grates shall be constructed so as not to extend above the base course pavement.  The required regulatory and warning signs shall be constructed by the developer. 
 
(H). Safety Measures:  All approved guardrails, pedestrian barriers, pavement markings, (i.e. cross walks, stop bars, etc.), signage, and lighting must be installed, and approved. 
 
(I).  Sidewalks:  The sidewalks (if applicable) must be completed, including the necessary curbing, gravels, binder pavement, and wearing course pavement (or concrete) to finish grade. 
 
(J). Surety:  An acceptable form of performance guarantee must be provided, reviewed and approved for the value of all remaining work for the project or affected phase.  The value of the performance guarantee will be determined by the Town’s Consulting Engineer.  
 
(K). Fire Protection:  The approved fire protection (municipal hydrants or underground cisterns) must be operational and approved by the Fire Department and water utility, as applicable.  
 


9.06   Block Layout 
 
1.   A block created within a subdivision shall not have a length greater than 1,000 feet. 
 
2.   A block created within a subdivision shall not have a width greater than 1,000 feet.  
 
9.07   Lot Detail 
 
 1. The area and frontage of proposed lots shall conform to the Zoning Ordinance and shall be of such shape, size, location, topography and character that buildings can be reasonably constructed. 
 
2. All lots shall have their required contiguous frontage on one existing or proposed Class V or better paved road. 
 
3. Whenever possible, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines and radial to the center of all exterior curves. 
 
4. Lots other than corner lots with frontage on two streets shall not be allowed. 
 
5. All lots shall meet the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Auburn in effect at the time of application. 
 
6. Lots with frontages on curves with a radius of less than two hundred (200) feet shall have a minimum chord distance of two hundred (200) feet. 
 
7. Land of such character that cannot be used safely for building purposes because of exceptional danger to health due to high water table or flooding or other hazard shall not be permitted for occupancy or use that may increase danger to health, life or property, until appropriate measures have been taken by the owner or his agent to eliminate such hazards.  
 
8. Lot sizes shall be adequate to provide off street parking, loading facilities and landscaped buffers in Commercial and Industrial zoned areas, as required by the Auburn Planning Board. 
 
9. All lots shall have a minimum of one (1) contiguous acre of dry land. 
 
9.08   Open Space Requirements 
 
1. In any non-clustered subdivision where the land to be subdivided consists of a parcel containing forty (40) acres or more, and, if it is the opinion of the Auburn Planning Board that the impact of said subdivision, when developed, would create a need for open space in that area, then the applicant for subdivision approval shall be required to dedicate a maximum of five (5%) percent of the total area of the subdivision for the benefit of the subdivision to open space.  Such dedication shall be required at the time of the initial subdivision.   
 
2. In reaching a decision on a parcel containing forty (40) acres or more, the Auburn Planning Board's considerations shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the proposed use of the subdivision, the number and size of the lots to be created, the location of the subdivision with respect to existing and proposed development, and the Town of Auburn's needs. 
 
3. Areas reserved for dry hydrants and green areas in centers of cul-de-sacs shall be considered as open space, and shall be considered towards any open space dedication which the Planning Board may deem necessary. 
 
4. Clustered developments shall meet or exceed the open space requirements set forth in Section 9.18. 
 
9.09   Landscaping and Planting 
 
1. Installation and preservation of landscaping and preservation of natural and scenic features shall be undertaken by the applicant wherever possible, to enhance the environment of the subdivision and the Town of Auburn. 
 
2. All esplanade or planting strip areas at sides of streets shall receive a minimum of four (4) inches of compacted, friable, fertile, natural, free draining loam.  The material shall be free of sods, clay and stones over one (1) inch in diameter, and all organic material over 1/8 inch in diameter shall be raked out and removed. 
 
3. After placement of loam, planting strips shall be seeded with first quality lawn seed, free of dirt and weed seeds, containing at least 30% Kentucky Blue Grass, 45% Creeping Red Fescue, 10% Red Top and 15% Domestic Rye.  Fertilizer, where permitted, should be a commercial grade 10-20-20. 
 

4. All new earth slopes shall be mulched and seeded.  All mulch on slopes shall be anchored. 
 
5. All disturbed portions of the lot shall be loamed, mulched, seeded, and where permitted, fertilized. 
 
6. The completion of required landscaping and plantings shall be a condition of all Final Subdivision Approvals.  The Planning Board may require that the applicant bond for completion of landscaping and plantings. 
 
7. The Board may require the preservation of natural buffer areas between subdivisions where it deems appropriate, and may also require the creation of buffer areas through plantings when it deems such to be appropriate. 
 
9.10  Street Construction 
 
1. All top soil, stumps, brush, roots over 1-inch diameter, boulders and like materials shall be stripped and removed between the slope lines of the proposed street.  Whenever practical, natural vegetation outside of the slope lines shall be retained, protected and supplemented. 
 
2. All street gravel base shall consist of twelve (12) inches of bank run gravel or crushed stone (coarse), as defined by the State of New Hampshire Highway and Bridge Specifications, latest edition; installed in two 6-inch lifts, compacted to a minimum of ninety-five (95%) percent of the soil’s modified proctor dry density. 
 
3. All streets shall receive a 6-inch upper base coarse of crushed gravel or crushed stone (fine) as defined by the State of New Hampshire Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges, latest edition.  Said course shall be compacted to ninety-five (95%) percent of its modified proctor maximum dry density. 
 
4. The maximum size of stone particles of the lower gravel base shall not exceed 3/4 of the compacted thickness of the layer being placed, and in no case larger than six (6) inches. 
 
5. The street surface itself shall consist of a 2 1/2-inch layer of 3/4-inch (Type B) binder course of bituminous concrete pavement and a 1 inch layer of 3/8-inch (Type F) wearing course of bituminous concrete pavement.  Both binder and wearing courses shall conform to the State of New Hampshire Roads and Bridge Specifications, latest edition.  The pavement roller shall be an 8-12 ton steel wheel roller.  All pavement within the travel lanes must be placed by machine.  The use of small bodied pavers is prohibited. 
 
6.    The street shall have a cross slope from centerline to edge of shoulder of ¼-inch per foot and from edge of street to edge of shoulder of 5/8-inch per foot. 
 
7.    Ledge and boulders shall be removed to at least eighteen (18) inches below sub-grade and replaced with sand or bank run gravel. 
 
8.    All loam, muck, stumps and other improper foundation material shall be removed from within the limits of the fully extended street shoulders, including the area beyond the edge of the shoulder equal to two times the depth of the fill.  In roadway fill areas, suitable foundation material meeting the applicable New Hampshire Department of Transportation specifications for earth roadway fill shall be placed in one foot layers and compacted to form a stable sub-grade.  If blasted rock is to be used in embankment fills, the developer must provide the fill details and procedures with roadway construction details for review by the Town Engineer. 
 
9.    The pavements shall be applied by an approved paving contractor in accordance with the State of New Hampshire Roads and Bridge Specifications, latest edition, and with the supervision of the Town Engineer. 
 
10. Approved street signs and culvert posts shall be installed as directed by the Auburn Planning Board and paid for by the developer. 
 
11.   Sub-base shall be installed by the developer prior to the issuance of building permits. 
 
12.   Bituminous pavement wearing course shall be installed by the developer after the sub-base and binder coarse has been in place for a minimum of one winter season, which shall be defined as running from November 15th to April 15th. 
 
13. It shall be the obligation of the developer planning a new street to do the following: 
 
(A). Advise the Selectmen of his intent in order to secure approval for the proposed right-of-way.  All items of the engineer’s inspection checklist shall be reviewed at the pre-construction conference required by Section 7.01 of these Regulations. 
  
(B).  To request inspection and approval of the right-of-way sub-grade before base gravel is applied.  
 
(C). To request inspection and approval of the right-of-way and sub-grade after finish gravel has been brought to grade, but before bituminous concrete pavement is installed.  Compaction tests of the gravel base and base shall be performed. 
 
(D). Have stakes set one (1) foot off the edge of gravel and on the centerline with finish grades marked on them at least every fifty (50) feet for the entire length of the street or the street side staked with distance and grades marked before each inspection. 
 
(E). Before final inspection, the developer shall remove all trash from the right-of-way and the center of the turn around, and shall repair any damage done to the roadway, shoulders, etc. 
 
(F). The developer shall establish an escrow account with the Town to cover all costs pertaining to engineering inspection and testing for the roadway.  No construction shall begin prior to the institution of the escrow account.  Inspections, samples and core test may be taken by the Town of Auburn before final acceptance, and all costs incurred shall be reimbursed by the applicant. 
 
(G). The developer shall be responsible for the costs of all required traffic control during construction. 
 
14.  Although these Regulations do not require construction of sidewalks or curbs or the setting of edge stones, curbs or edge stones, when such are provided, they shall be constructed or set in accordance with the policy and specifications agreed upon with the Auburn Planning Board. 
 
15.  All pavement joints shall be saw cut, but not perpendicular to the roadway centerline. 
 
9.11   Drainage Requirements 
 
1.   Proper drainage shall be installed subject to the approval of the Auburn Planning Board, Auburn Road Agent and Auburn Town Engineer.  Engineering inspection shall be as follows during installation of drainage pipe: first day of pipe work will have full-time monitoring; if all requirements are complied with as determined by the Agent of the Planning Board, the level of construction monitoring may be reduced to daily stop-by monitoring. Natural watercourses shall be cleaned and increased in size where necessary to handle storm run-off. 
 
2.   Drainage ditches shall be at least twenty-six (26) inches in depth at their midpoint below centerline grade and shall be constructed within or near the street right-of-way on both sides of the roadway.  Drainage ditches shall be designed to provide for the proper flow of storm run-off.  
 
3.   All drainage structures and swales shall be designed to handle a rain storm with a return interval of fifty (50) years.  The Rational Method or SCS TR-20 Method shall be used for the drainage calculations. 
 
4.   Culvert pipes shall consist of heavy gauge galvanized steel corrugated metal pipe,  Class IV RCP or smooth interior wall High Density Polyethylene pipe having a minimum interior diameter of eighteen (18) inches, and must meet the AASHTO requirements.  All pipes must be used and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. 
 
5.   All culvert pipes shall be placed with a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches of cover to centerline road grade, and have reinforced concrete or concrete and masonry head walls or flared end connections conforming to the State of New Hampshire Roads and Bridge Specifications, latest edition. 
 
6.    Culverts in embankments over fifteen (15) feet high shall be of Class V reinforced concrete pipe. 
 
7.   Where a subdivision is traversed by or requires the construction of a water course or a drainage way, an easement of adequate width shall be provided for such purpose. 
 
8.   Open roadside drainage ditches in excess of five (5%) percent grade shall be lined with erosion stone as required by the Auburn Planning Board. 
 
9.   The Town of Auburn Road Agent and Town Engineer shall have final say over all questions arising during construction of new roads.  All field changes must be approved by the Town Engineer. 
 
10.  All roadways with the abutting land sloping away from the roadway at slopes of greater than 4:1 shall have a vehicle restraining system (i.e. guard rails) of a type and construction approved by the State of New Hampshire D.O.T. and meeting AASHTO requirements. 
 
11.  All questions arising during road construction relative to construction methods, materials or specification shall be answered by reference to the most current State of New Hampshire Department of Public Works and Highways Standard Specifications for Roads and Bridge Construction. 
 
12.  Easements shall be provided for storm water drainage pipes, culverts or swales that may need to be installed in the future to serve undeveloped land within the watershed that drains across the area of the proposed subdivision. 
 
9.12   Under Drains 
 
1.    During the Design Review Phase, if utilized, or the Final Review Phase if Design Review is not utilized, under drains shall be reviewed.  Under drains shall be proposed in all locations where the existing Seasonal High Water Table is within four (4) feet of the proposed finish grade. 
 
2. Under drains shall be six (6) inches minimum diameter perforated SDR 35 PVC or slotted HDPE pipe, with a filter fabric sock, installed at the bottom of the trench with a minimum of twelve (12) inches of coarse septic or concrete sand above and on both sides of the pipe.  Filter fabric, which has weight of 0.3 lbs/sq yd and a flow rate of 12 GPM shall be placed over the top of the underdrain trench (Mirafi 140N or equal). 
 
3.    If it is observed by the developer or the Town Engineer during construction that additional under drains are required, the developer shall supply and install them in accordance with an approved method and design. 
 
9.13 Structural Design Requirements 
 
1.
 Retaining Walls 

 

(A)
 The intent of the Town is to discourage the use of retaining walls within Town right-of-ways. If a retaining is to be allowed, as determined by the Planning Board, a typical detail of the proposed retaining wall must be included in the plans.  The following requirement must be included with the typical detail: “The stamped shop drawings and calculations for the actual retaining wall must be provided for review and approval at or prior to the project’s required preconstruction meeting.” 



 (B). All retaining walls shall be designed by a professional engineer with expertise in this field.  A note must appear on the plans requiring that the provided plans and supporting calculations address the following criteria: 
 
(i). Design calculations stamped by a Professional Engineer of the appropriate discipline, licensed in New Hampshire; 
(ii). Stability calculations (including bearing capacity, global stability, overturning and sliding) 
(iii). Geogrid pullout and other pertinent data & evaluations 
(iv). Construction installation specification 
(v). Lateral earth pressure coefficient 
(vi). Surcharge load, embedment depth 
(vii). Both a plan and profile of each wall section 
(viii). Guardrail / handrail installation details and geogrid penetration procedures 
(ix). Location of the required pedestrian barrier 
 
(C).  If requested by the Planning Board or the Town Consulting Engineer, a pedestrian barrier, (i.e. 4’ chain link fence), must be installed at the top of the proposed retaining wall.  If guardrail is also proposed, the requested pedestrian barrier must be installed between the guardrail and the top of the retaining wall. 
 
(D). A note must appear on the approved plans and the stamped shop drawings requiring the design engineer, after the retaining wall construction is completed, provide a stamped letter certifying that: “the retaining wall was fully constructed per the approved design plans and will function as intended.” 
 

2.
 Box Culverts, Bottomless Spans, Bridges, Headwalls, and Wingwalls 

 
(A). A typical detail of the proposed structure(s) must be included in the design plans.  The following requirement must be included with the typical detail: “The stamped shop drawings and calculations for the actual structure(s) must be provided for review and approval at or prior to the project’s required preconstruction meeting.” 
 
(B). All structural designs shall meet or exceed HS 25-44 loading. 
 
(C). These structures shall be designed by a professional engineer with expertise in this field.  A note must appear on the plans requiring that the provided plans and supporting calculations must address and/or include the following criteria: 
 
(i). Hot dipped galvanized hardware connection details; 
(ii). Cementitious patching of all hardware pockets; 
(iii). Flexible sealant, (i.e. Sika 1A or equal), specified between structure sections; 
(iv). Connection details for headwalls and/or wingwalls; 
(v). Specify steel shimming material; 
(vi). Cast in place concrete minimum design strength equal to 4,000 psi; 
(vii). Precast concrete minimum design strength equal to 5,000 psi; 
(viii). Note requiring the structure to also meet all New Hampshire D.O.T. roadway and bridge design standards ; 
(ix). Design elevations such as top/bottom of footing, top of structure, finish grade, select gravel and pavement thicknesses, etc.; 
(x). Dimensions for all pieces; 
(xi). Backfill specifications and compaction requirements; 
(xii). Subgrade preparation requirements, minimum of 12” of crushed gravel; 
(xiii). Epoxy coated rebar to be used for all bridge decks and box culverts with less than five (5) feet of cover and all rebar to be 60 grade steel; and 
(xiv). Applicable membrane and/or coatings for both backfilled and exposed surfaces  


 
9.14  Fire Protection 
 
The following fire protection measures shall be constructed and approved by the Town Engineer and Fire Chief before a building permit will be issued for construction of a dwelling or structure. 
 
1.    All subdivisions creating greater than nine (9) new house lots or with the potential of creating same in the future, (i.e. subdivision of parcels larger than 20 acres), must be located within one half of a mile of an adequate dry hydrant, cistern, or pressure hydrant. 
 
2.    A dry hydrant will be considered adequate if it is capable of providing 30,000 gallons of water during the driest time of the year, (based 1000 G.P.M. for 30 minutes), and is protected by a six (6) foot high chain link fence surrounding its entire dry perimeter. 
 
3.   If fire suppression equipment exists within one half of a mile of a proposed subdivision, but is not deemed adequate by the Chief of the Auburn Fire Department, it will be the responsibility of the applicant to perform whatever work would be necessary to provide adequate storage capacity as specified under paragraph 9.14 (2) above.  All costs incurred will be borne by the applicant. 
 
 4.  If no dry hydrant, cistern or pressure hydrant exists within one half of a mile of a proposed subdivision, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to construct, at the applicant’s own cost, an adequate impounding area to maintain a supply of 30,000 gallons of water during the driest time of the year, within one half of a mile of the proposed subdivision, or a 30,000 gallon cistern. 
 
(A). The applicant shall also be responsible for providing all screens, pipes, elbows, fittings and caps necessary for the Auburn Fire Department to connect a four (4) inches diameter suction hose to the supply connection. 
 
(B).  In all cases, in order to be deemed as adequate, a six (6) foot high chain link fencing will be required around the dry perimeter of the dry hydrant.  This cost will be borne by the applicant. 
 
5.   If it becomes physically impossible to locate or construct a dry hydrant, cistern or pressure hydrant within one half of a mile of the proposed subdivision, the subdivision will be considered premature, and will be denied subdivision approval due to inadequate fire preventive resources. 
 
6.    The design of dry hydrants and cisterns shall be subject to the review and approval of the Chief of the Auburn Fire Department as well as the Planning Board.  Dry hydrants and cisterns shall be conveyed to the Town of Auburn by the applicant with a warranty deed. 
 
7.   Pressure hydrants connected to the Manchester Water Works Water Distribution System and located within one half of a mile of a proposed subdivision may be accepted by the Auburn Planning Board as meeting the requirements of these preceding sections, but the Board may deem it necessary for the developer to extend or improve the existing water system. 
 
8.    Dry hydrants and cisterns shall be located a maximum of seven (7) feet above the seasonal low water of the fire pond or bottom of cistern, and be located at the property line. 
 
9.   Dry hydrant piping shall be installed and configured in accordance with Auburn  Fire Department Regulations for same. 
 
10.  Cisterns shall be designed by a New Hampshire registered professional engineer. The design and construction shall be in accordance with all appropriate local state and BOCA or NFPA building requirements and shall meet H-20 loading requirements. 
 
11.  Adequate precautions shall be designed into the structure to resist freezing of the cistern contents. 
 
12.  Cistern design and construction shall be in accordance with Auburn Fire Department Regulations for same. 
 
13.  The Chief of the Auburn Fire Department will be the final authority for adequacy of all pressure hydrants, cisterns, dry hydrants as well as any other fire protection measures. 
 
14.
 Specifications for 30,000 - Gallon Fire Cisterns 



 
(A). General: 
 
   (i). Acceptable Tank Manufacturer: FRP Tanks, Xerxes Corporation, Containment Solutions, or equal. 
   (ii). Manufacturing Standards: 
    (a). Manufacturer shall be able to provide documentation that the tank shell has been built to the applicable requirements of Underwriters Laboratories Standard UL 1316. 
    (b). Tank manufacturer shall be in the business of manufacturing tanks to UL 1316 standards. 
   (iii). Materials: 
    (a). FRP Tank:  Fiberglass Reinforced Plastic:  Tanks shall be manufactured of 100% resin and glass-fiber reinforcement, with no sand fillers and no exposed glass fibers. 
 
(B). Submittals: 
 
(i). Applicant shall submit to the Auburn Fire Department 4 (four) copies of shop drawings and anti-flotation calculations three (3) weeks prior to the start of installation for review and approval.  The plans and calculations must address the following: 
 
 (a). Tank 
 (b). Piping 
 (c). Filter Fabric 
 (d). Deadmen 
 (e). Painting 
 (f). Hatch 
 (g). Pea Gravel 
 
(ii). If more than 6 months has passed since the most recent review and approval of the construction designs, the installer must re-submit the designs to the Fire Department for review, using the current cistern requirements at that time, prior to the commencement of construction. 
 
(iii). A current and completed Fire Cistern Permit Application must be submitted to the Fire Department with the required shop drawings. 
 
 
(C). Products: 
 
(i). Single-Wall Fiberglass Underground Tanks: 
 
(a). Product-Storage Requirements:  Tank shall be vented to atmospheric pressure as the tank is not designed as a pressure vessel.  Tank shall be designed for maximum product-storage temperature of 150°F. 
 
(b). Loading Conditions:  Tank shall meet the following design criteria: 
 
     - Internal Load:  Tank shall withstand a 4-psig air-pressure test with 5:1 safety  factor.  Installer shall air-test each tank for leakage prior to installation.  Maximum test pressure is 4 psig. 
 
- Vacuum Test:  To verify structural integrity, each tank up through 10-foot diameter shall be vacuum tested by the manufacturer at the factory to 11.5 inches of mercury. 
 
- Surface Loads: Tank shall withstand surface H-20 axle loads when properly installed according to manufacturer's current installation instructions. 
 
    - External Hydrostatic Pressure and Burial Depth: Tank shall be capable of being buried in the ground with a maximum 6 feet of overburden, the excavation fully flooded, and a safety factor of 5:1 against general buckling. 
 
    - Accessories: The tank shall support accessory equipment - such as drop tubes, as shown on tank drawings and when installed according to tank manufacturer's recommendations. 
  
     - Tank models: FRP - Tanks shall be a Xerxes or Containment Solutions 30,000-gallon tank, 10-foot diameter, or equal. 
 
   (ii). Accessories: 
 
    (a). Anchor Straps: Straps shall be FRP anchor straps for FRP tanks as supplied by tank manufacturer.  The number and location of straps shall be shown on tank drawings. 
 
    (b). Manways: All manways shall be flanged and 30-inch ID, complete with UL-listed gaskets, bolts and covers.  Location(s) shall be shown on tank drawings. 
 
  - Manway extensions shall be made of the same materials as the tank. 
 
  - A manufactured manway access hatch designed for entry control, shall be installed two (2) inches above grade around the tank entry access port. The cover will allow for and be secured in place by a “Knox” padlock, purchased by the installer. Acceptable access hatch designs will be reviewed and approved by the Town engineer and Fire Department. 
 
    (c). Gauge Plates: Gauge plates/striker plates shall be installed under the manway opening. 
 
    (d). Internal Anti-Vortex Device: An internal anti-vortex plate shall be factory installed by tank manufacturer. 
 
    (e). Tank Fittings:  
 
     - Pipe connection fittings shall be welded, unless noted otherwise. 
 
    - Standard threaded fittings shall be full-couplings, and a minimum of 6-inch diameter.  Reducers are to be used for smaller sizes where shown and provided by contractor. 
 
     - All fittings shall be located on top centerline. 
 
    - All NPT fittings shall withstand a minimum of 150 foot-pounds of torque and 1,000 foot-pounds of bending, both with a 2:1 safety factor. 
 
    (f). Internal Piping: The tank shall be provided from the manufacturer with an 8” diameter FRP suction pipe with a gusseted flanged connection at the crown of the tank and a flanged connection to the anti-vortex device. 
 
(D). Execution: 
 
   (i). Testing and Installation: 
 
    (a). Tank shall be tested and installed according to manufacturer's current underground storage tank installation instructions. 
 
   (ii). Backfill Material: 
 
    (a). Tank Backfill Material: 
 
     - Pea stone (mix of rounded particles) must have a minimum diameter of 1/8" and a maximum dimension of 3/4", with a maximum of 2% passing a No. 200 sieve. 
 
     - Crushed stone shall be washed crushed stone particles with a mix of angular particle between 1/8" and 2" and must meet ASTM C-33 para. 9.1 requirements, with a maximum of 2% passing a No. 200 sieve. 
 
- No more than 5% of the backfill shall pass a No. 8 sieve. 
  
    (b). Common Fill Material: The common fill material placed above the tank shall be a native friabe soil with 100% passing a 3” sieve, with a maximum of 15% passing a No. 200 sieve. 
 
    (c). Compaction Requirements: Compaction of the backfill shall be every 12" lift, compaction shall be mechanical means with every effort made to avoid directly contacting the tank with tools and equipment during backfilling procedures. 
 
  (E). Vehicle Pad: 
 
(i). Requirements: 
 
    (a). The vehicle pad shall be constructed to the dimension shown on the plans and meet the following requirements: 
 
     - The minimum pavement slope shall be 2%.  The maximum shall be 4%. 
 
     - The pavement and gravel materials and compaction requirements shall meet the most recent edition of the Town’s Subdivision and Site Plan Regulations. 
 
     - “No Parking” signs must be installed at both ends of the apron, with arrows pointing towards the apron. 
 
  (F). Establishing Grass Growth: 
 
(i). Requirements: 
 
    (a). All affected areas related to the installation of the fire cistern which are not paved shall have grass growth established.  The following materials are required: 
 
     - Loam – 4” min. of screened loam.  5% min. organics and a max. of 70% sand content and 20% max. silt or clay content (70 passing a No. 200 sieve) 
 
     - Seed – the seed mix shall include the following or meet the seeding schedule on the associated, approved site or subdivision plan: 
•
 40% Tall Fescue 


•
 30% Perennial Rye Grass 


•
 10% Red Clover 


•
 10% Bird’s Foot Trefoil 



 
     - Fertilizer – the fertilizer shall be spread at a rate of 40 lbs./s.f. and shall be 10/20/10. 
 
- Hay mulch – hay mulch shall be applied at a rate of 100/lbs./1,000 s.f. 
 
     - Slope stabilization – all slopes in excess of 3:1 shall received jute mapping or equal. 
 
G. External Cistern Piping: 
 
(i). Requirements: 
 
(a). All external suction, vent, level indicator and fill piping shall be Schedule 40 steel. 
 
(b). All bends shall be long sweep bends. 
 
(c). All horizontal piping shall slope away from the road, towards the tank at 2%. 
 
(d). Pipe-to-tank connections shall be flanged connections with the exception of the liquid level gauge, which shall be a 6” NPT full threaded coupling. 
 
(e). All underground, exposed piping shall be coated with one application of CIM 1000. 
 
(f). All above-ground piping shall be painted with the following: 
 
- 4 mils of epoxy primer 
- 4-6 mils of “Safety Red” epoxy paint (bollards to be “Safety Yellow”) 
- 2-3 mils of urethane cover coat 
 
(g). The pipe diameters are to be: 
 
- Suction – 8”   
- Fill – 6”  
- Vent – 8”   
- Fill Gauge – 4” 
 
(h). The fill fitting shall be a Kochek five (5) inch Storz connector with locking cap, and the connection cap will be securely chained to the fill pipe or coupling. 
 
(i). The suction fitting shall be a four and one half (4 ½”) inch male NPT fitting with locking cap, and the connection cap will be securely chained to the fill pipe or coupling.  The centerline of the suction point must be 25 inches to 27 inches above the finish pavement of the paved apron at that fitting. 
(j). The bollards shall be located four (4) feet apart, with the fill and suction pipe connections at the center of this measurement, one foot in front of the suction and fill connections.  
 
(H). Warranty: 
 
(i). Requirements: 
 
    (a). The fire cistern tank warranty shall be 2 years. 
 
    (b). A copy of the written warranty shall be provided to the Auburn Fire Department prior to the final acceptance of the fire cistern. 
 
(I). Testing: 
 
(i). Requirements 
 
(a). After backfilling of the tank and the manway and miscellaneous piping is installed, the contractor shall schedule the required flow test with the Fire Department.  The tank shall be filled approximately half  (½ )full. The cistern must be able to provide at least 1,000 gallons per minute for a period of five (5) minutes. 
 
(b). If the tank passes the flow test, the tank must be filled with potable water to within 1 inch of the manway.  The installer may allow the filled tank to sit for one (1) day prior to commencement of the test.  The test duration will be fourteen (14) calendar days.  The tank level measurements will be made and recorded by the agent of the Auburn Fire Department.  The Fire Department will provide the specified lock and key for use by the agent to secure the manway cover during the test.  The test is a zero leakage test.  After the fourteen-day test, if leakage is verified, the tank and or components must be repaired to stop the leak.  Any repairs made must be acceptable to the Auburn Fire Department.  Any repairs made to the tank must be done with prior written recommendation by the tank’s manufacturer and noted in the written warranty. 
 
  (J). Inspection Sign-Off Sheet: 
 
(i). Distribution: 
 
    (a). Two copies of the attached Inspection Sign-off Sheet shall be issued at each preconstruction meeting for a fire cistern installation.  One copy shall be held by the developer/installer.  The other copy shall be held by the agent of the Auburn Fire Department.   
 
    (b). After a milestone inspection item on the sign-off sheet has been successfully completed, the two copies of the sign-off sheet shall be signed by the noted parties. 
 
(K). Inspection, Inspection Escrow Account, and Acceptable Surety: 
 
(i). Inspection/Inspection Escrow Account: 
 
    (a). Inspection of the cistern installation by the agent of the Auburn Fire Department is mandatory. The hourly rates, including travel time and mileage, will be the same as the present rates for the Planning Board.   
 
    (b). Administration charges incurred by the agent of the Fire Department shall include project manager charges, clerical time, and miscellaneous expenses. 
 
    (c). As of June, 2011, the estimated total cost to be placed in an escrow account with the Town of Auburn Planning Department, in advance of the start of construction, shall be determined by the Town’s Consulting Engineer or the Fire Chief.  The required escrow amount shall increase 5 percent annually from the above-stated date. See Section 8 of these Regulations pertaining to performance guarantees. 
 
    (d). All inspection and construction administration costs associated with the installation of a fire cistern shall be borne by the applicant.  It should be noted that the escrowed amount is only an estimate.  If costs exceed the estimated amount, the applicant will be responsible for those costs. 
 
(ii). Two-Year Maintenance Warranty and Bond: 
 
    (a). Prior to acceptance of the completed fire cistern by the Town, acceptable two-year surety must be submitted by the applicant for the fire cistern in the amount of ten (10%) percent of the original surety value. 
 
9.15   Driveways 
 
1.    Driveways shall not interrupt the natural or constructed roadway ditch lines and/or drainage flow. 
 
2.    Driveways shall slope away from the finish roadway elevation at a grade of two (2%) percent for twenty (20) feet from the edge of pavement. 
 
3.    Driveway culverts shall be designed to adequately handle the anticipated storm water flows within the ditch lines, and shall in no case be less than twelve (12) inches in diameter and twenty (20) feet long. 
 
4.    All driveway culverts shall be constructed with inlet and outlet flares or head walls. 
 
5.    Minimum driveway width shall be twelve (12) feet with a maximum width of  twenty (20) feet at the street, and a desirable width of fourteen (14) feet. 
 
6.    All driveways must have two hundred (200) feet sight distance in each and/or every traffic direction. 
 
7. Driveways shall intersect the roadway at a preferred angle of ninety (90) degrees, but in no case shall the intersecting angle be less than sixty (60) degrees. 
 
8.    Return radii for driveway flares shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet nor greater than twenty-five (25) feet. 
 
9.    Maximum grade for all driveways shall be ten (10%) percent. 
 
10.  Driveway aprons and flares from the edge of road pavement to the property line shall be paved with a 2-in thickness of roadway binder asphalt. 
 
11.  Driveways shall be constructed at a minimum of well draining granular material resulting in firm and parable drive surfaces for all season passage. 
 
12.  Final driveway acceptance shall rest with the Planning Board or its designated agent. 
 
13.  No driveway shall be constructed within fifty (50) feet of another driveway nor within one hundred (100) feet of an intersecting road. 
 
14.  All driveways constructed after acceptance of the subdivision’s roadways shall require issuance of a driveway permit, and shall be constructed in accordance with these Regulations. 
 
15.  A driveway permit fee and construction escrow shall be required of each and every driveway constructed after roadway acceptance. 
 
16.  All driveways shall be constructed in accordance with these Regulations and the typical driveway detail for the Town of Auburn, New Hampshire, as shown in Appendix A. 
 
17.  Driveways shall be maintained vegetative clear for their full width and thirteen (13) feet above the finish drive surface. 
 
18.  Driveway profiles shall be shown on the subdivision plan for each lot.  Each lot shall be accessed by its own driveway.  Common driveways are prohibited. 
 
19.  Driveway pavement shall be installed flush with the Town's road surface.  Re-paving of the driveway shall require cutting the driveway six (6) feet from the edge of the road, removing material and finishing flush with the roadway.   
 
20. Roadway re-paving shall require making certain the finish elevation of the road surface remains flush with driveway surfaces.  The driveway shall be cut six (6) feet back from the edge of the road, the material removed, and paving re-installed level with the roadway. 
 
9.16  Utilities 
 
1.    All electric, telephone and cable TV distribution systems within the subdivision shall be placed underground, unless the Auburn Planning Board determines such placement is not feasible. 
 
2.    The applicant shall coordinate subdivision design with the appropriate utility companies to ensure adequate and suitable area for underground installation. 
 
3.    The applicant shall be responsible for providing for water mains, manholes, sanitary sewers and catch basins if required. 
 
4.    All sanitary sewer construction will conform to the requirements of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services. 
 
5.    Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary, and shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide. 
 
9.17  Monuments 
 
1.    Monuments shall be constructed of concrete or stone. 
 
2.    Monuments shall be at least 4" x 4" on the top and at least 36" long. 
 
3.   Monuments shall be set at all property corners and at all changes of horizontal alignments. 
 
4.    Iron pins shall be allowed as temporary property corners along new roadways being constructed, but shall be replaced with concrete or stone bounds before final subdivision approval and acceptance, and after a duly noticed public hearing. 
 
5.   The Planning Board shall verify that all monuments are in place before the Town of Auburn will give final acceptance to any new roadways.  The Planning Board may require that the applicant bond for the setting of final monumentation. 
 
9.18   Cluster Development Specific Design Requirements  
 
 1. General:  These design requirements shall be considered additional design requirements for clustered developments.  The specific requirements set forth herein shall supersede any lesser requirement set forth in the general subdivision design requirements.  These requirements shall also supplement the requirements set forth in the Town of Auburn Zoning Ordinance for clustered development. 
 
 2. Site Plan Requirements:  A site plan of the entire tract shall be presented to the Planning Board and shall conform to all the Town's Regulations and Ordinances in effect at the time of submittal, plus meet the following specific design requirements. 
 
(A).    Clustered residential use in the development shall be limited to one, two, three or four family townhouse dwellings and/or a membership clubhouse for the exclusive use of the residents of the cluster development, except in the event that a subdivision application for a clustered development includes a statement of intent indicating that the development is intended to qualify as a workforce housing development, and the developer proposes “multi-family housing” as part of such development.  In such cases, buildings containing more than four (4) dwelling units may be permitted. 
 
(B).    Cluster developments shall, at a minimum, have a landscaped buffer suitably located to provide an adequate division or transition between abutting land uses.  Wells, leach fields and passive recreation will be allowed in the landscaped buffer.  The buffer shall be twenty (20%) percent of the average width of that tract with a minimum of one hundred (100) feet and a maximum of two hundred fifty (250) feet. 
 
(C).   All parking within the cluster residential development shall be provided in paved off-street locations, at a ratio of not less than three spaces per dwelling unit, or in accordance with Auburn’s Site Plan Review Regulations for commercial and industrial development. 
 
(D).   Emergency vehicle access shall be provided to all structures within the cluster development.  The definition of “structure” shall be the definition set forth in the Zoning Ordinance. 
 
(E).    The clustered residential net density within the developed area shall not exceed four (4) dwellings per acre, except in the case of workforce housing developments as set forth above in Section 9.17(2)(A). 
 
(F).   Cluster developments shall not be required to conform to the minimum frontage, setback, and lot size required in the Zoning Ordinance, but shall be so designated and constructed as to achieve the purposes of cluster development set forth in these Regulations, with the following exceptions: 
 
(i). Frontage - No buildings in the clustered development shall front on any public street, existing or proposed, unless the street provides access exclusively to the clustered development and is situated entirely within the clustered development. 
 
(ii). Front Yard - There shall be a minimum depth of fifty (50) feet between the edge of the nearest private right-of-way and the front of any building or structure. 
 
(iii). Side and Rear Yard - Structures shall not be located closer than sixty (60) feet for residential and one hundred and fifty (150) feet for commercial and industrial. 
 
(iv). Structure Heights - Heights of structures shall not exceed those permitted for the zoning district in which the clustered development is located. 
 
(G).    The water supply and wastewater treatment system for a clustered development shall be designed in accordance with the standards and requirements of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services and the Town of Auburn. 
 
(H).    The minimum required open space for the clustered development shall be calculated in accordance with the provisions of Article 7 of the Auburn Zoning Ordinance.  Parking areas, streets, driveways and other vehicle access facilities shall not be considered in calculating open space.  In addition, any land on which future development rights are reserved by the developer or a declarant shall not be considered in calculating open space. 
 
(I).    The site plan for the entire tract shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements of Article 3 of these Subdivision Regulations, and the locations of parks, open space, and recreational areas shall be shown on the plan. 
 
(J).  All commercial and industrial development shall be planned in accordance with Non-Residential Site Plan Review Regulations of the Town of Auburn. 
 
(K).  The cluster development plan shall show the layout of all roads which shall be built to the Auburn requirements for new public roads.  
 
9.19  Preservation of Natural Features and Amenities 
 
Existing features which would add value to residential development or to the Town as a whole, such as trees, watercourses and falls, historic buildings, historic spots, and similar irreplaceable assets shall be preserved in the design of the subdivision.  No trees shall be removed nor any change of the grade of the land to be subdivided shall commence in anticipation of subdivision, until the Planning Board has reviewed the preliminary plan, construction plans and grading plans. 
 
9.20  Other Improvements 
 
The applicant shall be responsible for improvements or connections to adjoining developed areas, unless relieved of that responsibility by the Planning Board.  The applicant shall be responsible for such off-site improvements in unaccepted streets as may be necessary, in the opinion of the Board, to achieve continuity of improvements. 
   
In cases in which the proposed development adjoins any other land which may be developed in the future, and in which the Board requests provision for a future street connection or utility easement to that area, the applicant shall provide engineering of future improvements in accord with the Town’s specifications, and shall provide a deed to the Town of the area necessary for that future street or utility easement. 
 
9.21 Temporary Signs 
 
 1. The developer shall obtain and post signs to warn motorists of construction and construction vehicles in the area of the proposed roadway construction. All signage shall be in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices published by the Federal Highway Administration. 
 
 2. The developer shall be required to post a notice at the entrance to the subdivision stating the following:  “Notice: Unaccepted street.  Maintenance is the responsibility of the developer or abutters, not the Town of Auburn.  Pass at your own risk.” 
 
9.22  Conditions During Construction 
 
The developer shall be responsible for minimizing and avoiding, to the extent possible, conditions which result in hardship, inconvenience or annoyance to early occupants of the development or abutters from construction activities, including but not limited to such conditions as unreasonable hours of operation, erosion, dust, odor, smoke, temporary changes of surface water runoff, or other similar conditions during construction activity.  All construction shall take place in conformance with any applicable ordinances of the Town.  The developer shall also be responsible for exercising reasonable care to avoid and prevent hazardous conditions on the site during all phases of construction. 
 
In the event the developer fails to take reasonable steps to minimize hardship, or through construction creates an avoidable nuisance, the Building Inspector may issue a Cease and Desist Order requiring immediate corrective action. 
ARTICLE 10 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND  
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL REGULATIONS 
 
10.01 General 
 
The purpose of this Article is to control runoff and soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from site construction and development.  Subdivision plans shall include plans for managing stormwater and controlling erosion and sedimentation as provided herein. 
 
10.02 Definitions 
 
The following definitions apply to this Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control Regulation. 
 
1.   Best Management Practice: ("BMP"): A proven or accepted structural, non-structural, or vegetative measure the application of which reduces erosion, sediment, or peak storm discharge, or improves the quality of stormwater runoff. 
 
2.     Critical Areas: Disturbed areas of any size located within fifty (50) feet of a stream, bog, water body, or poorly or very poorly drained soils; disturbed areas exceeding two thousand (2,000) square feet in highly erodible soils; or, disturbed areas containing slope lengths exceeding twenty-five (25) feet on slopes greater than fifteen (15%) percent. 
 
3.    Development: Any construction or land alteration or grading activities other than for agricultural and silvicultural practices. 
 
4.    Disturbed Area: An area where the natural vegetation has been removed exposing the underlying soil. 
 
5.    Erosion: The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice, or gravity. 
 
6.    Highly Erodible Soils: Any soil with an erodibility class (K factor) greater than or equal to 0.43 in any layer as found in Table 3-1 of the "Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Urban and Developing Areas in New Hampshire."  (See Section 10.06 (1), below). 
 
7.    Project Area: The area within the subdivision boundaries. 
 
8.    Sediment: Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by erosion. 
 
9.    Stabilized: When the soil erosion rate approaches that of undisturbed soils.  Soils which are disturbed will be considered protected when covered with a healthy, mature growth of grass or a good covering of hay or straw mulch (2 tons/acre).  Mulch is only a temporary measure; ultimately, the site needs vegetation.  
 
10.  Stormwater Runoff: The water from precipitation that is not absorbed, evaporated, or otherwise stored within the contributing drainage area. 
 
11.  Stream: Areas of flowing water occurring for sufficient time to develop and maintain defined channels, but which may not flow during dry portions of the year.  Includes, but is not limited to, all perennial and intermittent streams located on U.S. Geological Survey maps. 
 
10.03 Applicability 
 
1. The applicant shall submit a stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation control plan to the Planning Board for any tract of land being subdivided, where one or more of the following conditions is proposed: 
 
(A).    A cumulative disturbed area exceeding twenty thousand (20,000) square feet; 
 
(B).    Construction or reconstruction of a street or road; 
 
(C).    A subdivision of more than three building lots; and/or 
 
(D).    Disturbed critical areas. 
 
 2.   The applicant shall also comply with all requirements of the United States Environmental Protection Agency’s (E.P.A.) General Permit requirements for the Town of Auburn.  The Town of Auburn is designated as an MS4 community under the E.P.A’s General Permit Regulations.  The E.P.A.’s Regulations require, among other things, that a Notice of Intent be filed prior to any site disturbance that will affect one (1) acre or more. 
 
10.04 Waiver 
 
1.   The Planning Board may waive the requirement for all or part of a stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation control plan if it determines that a plan is unnecessary because of the size, character, or natural conditions of a site. 
 
2.    All requests for waivers and actions thereon shall be made in writing by the applicant, and shall be accompanied by supporting technical documentation to demonstrate minimal environmental impact. 
 
10.05 Minimum Requirements 
 
1.    The following minimum requirements apply to all projects, regardless of size: 
 
    (A). A site drawing of existing and proposed condition, including: 
 
(i). Locus map, at the Town map scale, showing property boundaries; 
 
(ii). North arrow, scale (not more than 1"=50'), date; 
 
(iii). Property lines; 
 
(iv). Easements; 
 
(v). Structures, utilities, roads, and other paved areas; 
 
(vi). Topographic contours (maximum interval of ten (10) feet); 
 
(vii). Critical areas; 
 
(viii). Surface water, wetlands, drainage patterns, and watershed boundaries; 
 
(ix). Vegetation; 
 
(x). Soils information for design purposes or for determining highly erodible soils shall be determined from a National Cooperative Soil Survey (NCSS) soil series map; 
 
(xi). Temporary and permanent stormwater management and erosion and sediment control BMPs; 
 
(xii). Areas and timing of soil disturbance; and 
 
(xiii). A schedule for the inspection and maintenance of all BMPs. 
 
 (B). A narrative section, including discussion of each measure, its purpose, construction sequence, and installation timing as they apply to the site. 
 
 
10.06 Design Standards 
 
The following standards shall be applied in planning for stormwater management and erosion and sediment control: 
 
1.    All measures in the plan shall meet, as a minimum, the Best Management Practices set forth in the "Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Urban and Developing Areas in New Hampshire," Rockingham County Conservation District, NH Department of Environmental Services, Soil Conservation Service, (now the Natural Resources Conservation Service), August 1992, as amended, a copy of which is available in the Planning Board office. 
 
2.    Whenever practical, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected, or supplemented.  The stripping of vegetation shall be done in a manner that minimizes soil erosion. 
 
3.   Appropriate erosion and sediment control measures shall be installed prior to soil disturbance. 
 
4.    The area of disturbance shall be kept to a minimum.  Disturbed areas remaining idle for more than thirty (30) days shall be stabilized. 
 
5.    Measures shall be taken to control erosion within the project area.  Sediment in runoff water shall be trapped and retained within the project area using approved measures.  Wetland areas and surface waters shall be protected from sediment. 
 
6.   Off-site surface water and runoff from undisturbed areas shall be diverted away from disturbed areas, where feasible, or carried non-erosively through the project area. The integrity of downstream and offsite drainage systems shall be maintained. 
 
7.    Measures shall be taken to control the post-development peak rate of runoff so that it does not exceed pre-development runoff for the storm events required below. 
  
8.    Priority should be given to preserving natural drainage systems, including perennial and intermittent streams, wetlands, swales, and drainage ditches, for conveyance of runoff leaving the project area. 
 
9.    All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be removed after final site stabilization.  Trapped sediment and other disturbed soil areas resulting from the removal of temporary measures shall be permanently stabilized within thirty (30) days, unless conditions dictate otherwise. 
 
10.07  Technical Requirements 
 
1.
 Rainfall Intensity – The rate at which precipitation occurs at a given instant.  Rainfall intensities (24 hour) for Auburn shall be as follows (if updated by a national or state study, those revised, state approved depths will be used): 

  2 year event  2.9 inches 
  5 year event  3.8 inches 
  10 year event  4.3 inches 
  25 year event  5.1 inches 
  50 year event  5.7 inches 
100 year event  6.3 inches. 
 

2.
 All runoff, erosion, and sediment control measures and the design of all drainage structures and systems shall meet the design standards and specifications set forth in these Regulations or in the current “Manual on Drainage Design for Highways” published by the New Hampshire Department of Transportation and the most recent New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services Alteration of Terrain manuals.  



 
3.
 All private drainage systems are to be maintained as necessary and minimally on an annual basis.  Upon request, written records verifying compliance with this requirement shall be provided to the Town.  A note requiring this annual report must appear on the recorded cover sheet and site plan.  


4.
 No LID drainage structures (i.e. rain gardens, bio-retention basins, underground infiltration systems, etc.) may be installed within the Town right-of-way or in any drainage easements to be maintained by the Town. 



 
5.
 All projects which require United States Environmental Protection Agency SWPPP Plan and NOI Permit must provide copies of the SWPPP inspection reports to the Town and the Town’s Consulting Engineer within three (3) days of each report. 



 
6.
 All drainage computations and related submissions shall be certified by a Professional Engineer. 



 
7.
 The design shall not direct concentrated flows across property lines where the flows were not concentrated in the existing conditions.   



 
8.
 The drainage design shall model the pre- and post-development 2-year, 10-year, 25-year, and 100-year storm events for the site using the rainfall intensities shown in the definition in Section 10.07 (1). The design shall demonstrate no increase of runoff at any point along the border of the site for any of the modeled events.  The entire event shall be modeled and the hydrograph for each structure shall be shown. 



 
9.
 The drainage system shall be sized as follows: 



 
Closed Drainage System = 50-Year storm event  
Open Drainage System = 50-Year storm event 
Cross-Culverts Connecting Wetlands or outletting to a Wetland = 100 Year 
Detention Ponds = 100-Year with 1’ freeboard to the top of the berm 
Bridges = 100-Year with zero surcharge. 
 
10.
 Pipes and culverts shall not be surcharged.  Outlet control structures (relating to detention ponds only) may be surcharged. 

 

11.
 Minimum cover for closed drainage systems, measured between the pipe crown and finished grade, shall be as follows: 



 
Under paved roads:  Three (3) feet for all culvert material 
Residential driveways:  One (1) foot for all culvert material 
Under grass areas:  Two (2) for all culvert material 
 
12.
 Acceptable pipe material for roadway and driveway drainage is: reinforced concrete pipe (RCP), smooth interior polyethylene pipe (HDPE) and ductile iron pipe (DI).   

 

13.
 Water shall not be impounded adjacent to roadways. The 100-Year pond elevation shall be designed to be a minimum of (ten) 10 feet from the edge of the right-of-way or otherwise a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the edge of pavement. 


14.
 BMP’s shall be used to provide eighty (80%) percent removal of total suspended solids from paved surfaces.  The design engineer shall provide calculations showing removal rates using the following criteria: 

 
 Catch basin with 3’ sump = 25% 
 Vegetated Treatment Swale (1 FPS @ 10-Year storm event) = 70% 
 Vegetated Roadside swale = 50% 
 
Note: Storm Septor unit or equal are prohibited from use within a Town right-of-way  
 

15.
 Maximum flow velocity in any pipe during the 25-year storm event is 10 fps. 

 

16.
 Maximum flow velocity in a vegetated channel is 3.5 fps during the 25-year storm event.  Maximum flow velocity in a rock lined channel is 6 fps during the 25-year storm event.  These swales should be analyzed for stability during this storm event.  



 
17.
 When the computed outlet pipe velocity is in excess of 10 fps, additional outlet protection shall be employed. 



 
18.
 Culverts with a span of ten (10) feet or more will be considered as bridges. 



 
19.
 Culverts shall be placed to fit natural drainage courses. 



 
20.
 All culverts, including driveway culverts, shall be constructed with end sections (flared end section, headwalls, etc.).   



 
21.
 A ditch or swale shall have a minimum grade of 1.0 percent, except for treatment swales which shall have a minimum slope of 0.5 percent. 



 
22.
 A ditch or swale shall have a maximum length of four hundred (400) feet prior to entering a catch basin or drop inlet.  Local conditions may require variations.  Any variations must be approved by the Board or the Town’s Consulting Engineer. 



 
23.
 Minimum flow velocity in a pipe or culvert during a 2-year storm event is 2 fps. 



 
24.
 Minimum pipe diameter in a closed drainage system is 12 inches.  Minimum pipe diameter in an open drainage system or culvert is 18 inches. 



  
25.
 Standard roadway catch basin grates shall be limited to a design inlet flow of 2 CFS unless manufacturer’s data (based on transverse and longitudinal slopes) indicates greater capacity at a gutter line depth of 2 inches.   



 
26.
 Bar grates shall not be used in traffic or pedestrian areas.  



  
27.
 The pipes entering or exiting a catch basin or drain manhole shall be placed to provide a minimum of twelve (12) inches horizontally between pipe walls.  



  
28.
 A minimum drop of 0.25 feet from the lowest inlet invert and highest outlet invert shall be provided in each structure.  When two different diameter culverts enter one basin, the crown inverts shall be matched.  



 
29.
 At least one catch basin will be located at the bottom of a sag.  Depending on roadway classification and design considerations, an additional catch basin on either side could be necessary. 



   
30.
 The spacing between proposed catch basins shall prevent spreading over more than thirty (30%) percent of any travel lane. 



     
31.
 In general, the use of catch basins rather than drop inlets is recommended.  Drop inlets shall be used only where no pipe inlet occurs and where soils and other debris are not likely to enter, on slope drainage, in embankments, and in culverts.  



  
32.
 Manholes shall be placed where a change in grade of alignment of a storm drain occurs.  Storm drains shall not have a manhole, catch basin or drop inlet more than three hundred (300) feet apart.  



  
33.
 The compatibility of grate capacity, pipe capacity and design flow must be considered in closed drainage system design. 



 
34.
 The type of grate chosen will be based on the following usage restrictions: 

 


NHDOT Standards for 
Catch Basin Grates 
 Where Utilized 
 
A. 
 In roadways, ditches, medians where bicycle traffic is not anticipated. 
 
B & B-Alt. 
 In roadways, paved ditches, paved medians where bicycle and pedestrian traffic is anticipated. 
 
C. 
 In unpaved ditches and sumps off the roadway where vehicles cannot make contact with the structure. 
 
D. 
 Where high grate capacity is required and bicycle or pedestrian traffic is not anticipated.  
 


 
35.
 Neither the introduction of large volumes of runoff nor the depletion of water resources entering an existing Prime Wetland is beneficial.  A maximum variation in the rate of runoff for the 25-year storm event (comparing the pre-development storm event to the post-development storm event) is limited to ten (10%) percent with a preferred net change of zero. 



 
36.
 Plans shall reference the 100-year flood plain.  Map panel number and map date shall be referenced from the FIRM.  If the parcel is located within a flood plain, the 100-year flood plain elevation by location (if available) shall also be noted.  If the parcel is not within the 100-year flood plain, the FIRM shall be referenced with the note “Site is not within the 100-year flood plain.”  Flood plain shall be drawn to scale on the site plans.  If an area within the 100-year flood plain is altered or filled, equal or greater incremental (1-foot elevations), compensatory volume shall be provided with calculations to balance the loss at each 1-foot increment. 



  
37.
 Both retention and detention ponds shall provide a minimum of one (1) foot of freeboard at peak elevation during the 100-year storm event.  



  
38.
 Ponds shall be provided with an emergency overflow with an invert above the peak elevation of the 100-year storm event preferably provided as part of the outlet control structure.  Overflow weirs are permitted if designed to fully prevent erosion for the full distance to the receiving waters.    



 
39.
 Interior pond side slopes shall have a maximum grade of 4:1 (extending to the 100-year storm elevation) and exterior slopes shall have a maximum of 3:1.   Above the 100-year storm elevation, the interior side slopes shall be 3:1 or flatter. 



 
40.
 Slopes shall have four (4) inches of loam and be fully grassed.  Permanent fencing  (4-foot minimum) and a locking gating (minimum 12-foot width) shall be required if the pond retains more than twelve (12) inches of water or the peak depth (measured from the invert of lowest outlet to the invert of the emergency overflow) is greater than six (6) feet. 



 
41.
 Pre-treatment of water entering a pond is required unless approved otherwise by the Town’s Consulting Engineer, and can be provided by a water quality inlet BMP, such as a treatment swale, forebay, etc.  



  
42.
 All drainage structures shall be protected by a fully dimensioned easement.  Said easement shall include associated piping and drainage outside of the right of way along with a twelve (12) foot-wide gravel access driveway with a cross slope no greater than two (2%) percent.  The descriptions of these easements shall appear on the recorded plans as well as be provided in written form to be separately recorded at the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds. 



 
43.
 Underground detention facilities (UDF) may be permitted within private site plans.  Full detailing of the UDF on the plans is required.  These will be designed to provide for adequate maintenance by the owner.  



 
44.
 All UDF’s shall be designed with an emergency overflow, which shall be utilized during storm events greater than the design storm or if the system is blinded with sediment. 



 
45.
 All UDF’s must incorporate an isolator row to aid in the separation of sediment. 



 
46.
 All UDF chamber or culvert rows shall be directly connected to the manifold so all rows equally receive stormwater flow. 



 
47.
 All UDF designs shall incorporate infiltration rates shown in the definitions.  The soil types and seasonal high water table elevations are to be determined by test pit data at the location of the proposed facility. 



   
48.
 Slopes and contouring are critical to a drainage system.  Maximum slopes, directly relating to the construction of ponds, swales, or diversions, and cut slopes intercepting the estimated seasonal high water table, shall be limited to 3:1 unless the design engineer provides a geotechnical evaluation showing that steeper slopes are stable and sustainable in a saturated and surcharged condition.  The evaluation shall examine all failure modes and provide calculations with supporting documentation based on individual soil types, compaction requirements, surcharge loads, and moisture content.  Other methods providing additional structural support and stability to a proposed slope may be approved by the Board on a case-by-case basis. 



 
49.
 Subsurface drainage systems (underdrain) shall be provided where the seasonal high groundwater table is within four (4) feet of the finished roadway grade.   



 
50.
 Test pits or borings in roadway cut sections shall be taken, as required or ordered by the Town’s Consulting Engineer, to locate the Seasonal High Water Table (SHWT) and determine the need for underdrain pipe.  This pipe shall be perforated PVC or HDPE with a minimum diameter of six (6) inches, placed one (1) foot outside the edge of pavement at a centerline depth of four (4) feet. 



   
51.
 The applicant shall provide the following information in the drainage report/analysis with adequate description of the drainage system features.  Submission shall include pre- and post-drainage plans with catchments (area, slope, length and flow path) and other drainage system components clearly identified. 



 
(A). Ponds: Elevations, incremental storage capacity, stage-discharge relationship, areas, critical depth, flood elevation, inflows, outflows, outlet information. 
 
(B). Pipes and Culverts:  Inlet and outlet inverts, base flows, material, slope, length, dimensions, roughness, restrictions, and special conditions.    
 
(C). Channels:  Inlet and outlet inverts, base flows, stability, construction and lining, slope, length, dimensions, roughness, restrictions, and special conditions. 
 
(D). Catchments:  Also known as “subcatchments.”  Slope, average length, changes in flow modes, soils, CN, condition, time of concentration, area, rainfall information, description of specific location.    
 
(E). Modeling should include the entire storm event with a minimum time of 24 hours. 
 
52.
 Aquifer Recharge and Site Storm Water Retention:  

 
A minimum ten (10%) percent of the differential between the volume of the pre-development and post-development must be held or infiltrated on site for the duration of the 10-year storm event.  If infiltration is used, the applicant shall identify the soil type and apply the rates show in the definition.  The applicant shall fully demonstrate with a drainage model that the volume reduction is obtained.  Infiltration may also be used to reduce rates of off-site flow.  Infiltration systems shall not be placed within fifty (50) feet of either a well or a septic system and must be a minimum of four (4) vertical feet above the Estimated Seasonal High Water Table (ESHWT) unless an approved filtering layer is designed between the basin bottom and the ESHWT. 
 

53.
 Off-Site Drainage Considerations: 



 
a.
 The applicant’s engineer shall determine the effect of a development on the existing drainage facilities outside of the area of the development (off-site) based on the 100-year storm event and report the conclusions to the Board.  If requested by the Board, the applicant will provide calculations and other necessary information to support the findings.    



 
b.
 Where the Board anticipates that additional run-off incidental to development of the site will increase flow in an existing downstream drainage facility, or there will be adverse effect(s) to private property, or an increase in the expenditure of public funds, the Board may not approve the development until adequate provision is made, at the applicant’s expense, to remedy the downstream drainage.  Additionally, such projects, at the direction of the Planning Board, shall show an equal or decreased total stormwater volume at all analyzed points of interest.  



 
c.
 The Board may accept a recorded drainage easement obtained by the applicant from downhill property owners if an increased storm water flow is expected over such property and the applicant submits a written agreement to hold the Town harmless for any claims for resulting damage.  However, the applicant must also expand the drainage model to demonstrate that there is no increase in flows for all storm events to properties beyond the drainage easement. 



 
d.
 The Board reserves the right to require that the storm drain systems be designed for less frequent, more intense rainfalls where conditions warrant.  



  
e.
 The proposed drainage system shall replicate existing drainage/hydrology patterns. 



 
10.08 Completed Application Requirements 
 
The Planning Board shall require each of the following in the final plan, unless the project is deemed of sufficiently minimal impact to qualify for the minimum requirements specified in Section 10.05 of this Section. 
 
(A). Construction drawings showing  existing and proposed conditions, including: 
 
(i).  Locus map, at the same scale as the Town tax map, showing property boundaries; 
 
(ii).  North arrow, scale (not more than 1"=50'), date; 
 
(iii).  Property lines; 
 
(iv).  Structures, roads, utilities, earth stockpiles, staging areas, equipment storage, and stump disposal; 
 
(v).  Topographic contours at no greater than two (2) foot intervals; 
 
(vi).  Critical areas; 
 
(vii).  Within the project area, and within four hundred (400) feet of the project boundary, surface waters, wetlands, drainage patterns, and watershed boundaries; 
 
(viii).  Vegetation; 
 
(ix).  Extent of the 100-year flood plain boundaries, if published or determined; 
 
(x).  Soils information for design purposes shall be obtained from a National Cooperative Soil Survey (NCSS) soil series map.  Highly erodible soils shall be determined by soil series; 
 
(xi).  Easements; 
 
(xii).  Areas of soil disturbance; 
 
(xiii).  Areas of cut and fill; 
 
(xiv).  Areas of poorly and very poorly drained soils, including any portion to be disturbed or filled; 
 
(xv).  Location of all structural, non-structural, and vegetative stormwater management and erosion and sediment control BMPs; 
 
(xvi).  Identification of all permanent control BMPs; and 
 
(xvii).  Tabulated sequence of construction 
 
(B). Other plan requirements: 
 
(i).  Construction schedule; 
 
(ii).  Earth movement schedule; 
 
(iii).  A proposed schedule for the inspection and maintenance of all BMPs; 
 
(iv).  Description of temporary and permanent vegetative BMPs, including seeding specifications; and 
 
(v).  Description of all structural and non-structural BMPs with detailed drawings of each, as appropriate. 
 
(C).    Report section, including: 
 
(i).  Design calculations for all temporary and permanent structural control BMP measures; 
 
(ii).  A proposed schedule for the inspection and maintenance of all BMPs; 
 
(iii). Identification of all permanent control measures and responsibility for continued maintenance; 
 
(iv). A drainage report with calculations showing the volume, peak discharge, and velocity of present and future runoff;  
 
(v). When detention structures are planned to reduce future condition peak discharge, the soil cover complex method shall be used to compute the runoff volume and peak discharge for designing the structure.  The design will conform to the criteria outlined for those types of structures given in the "Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Urban and Developing Areas in New Hampshire." 
 
10.09 Responsibility for Construction/Installation 
 
1.    The applicant shall bear final responsibility for the installation, construction, inspection, and disposition of all stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation control measures required by these Regulations. 
 
2.   The Planning Board may require a bond or other security in an amount and with surety conditions satisfactory to the Board, providing for the actual construction and installation of such measures within a period specified by the Board and expressed in the bond or the surety. 
 
3.    Site development shall not begin before the stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation control plan receives conditional approval.  Best Management Practices shall be installed as designed and scheduled as a condition of final approval of the plan. 
 
10.10 Plan Review and Approval 
 
1.    Technical review of any stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation control plan prepared under these Regulations shall be conducted by the Rockingham County Conservation District or other qualified professional consultant, as determined to be appropriate by the Planning Board, at the expense of the applicant. 
 
2.    The Planning Board shall indicate approval of the stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation control plan, as filed, if it complies with the requirements and objectives of these Regulations.  Such approval shall be a component of subdivision approval.  If disapproved, a list of plan deficiencies and the procedure for filing a revised plan will be given to the applicant. 
 
10.11 Maintenance and Inspection 
 
1.    A narrative description of on-going maintenance requirements for water quality protection measures required by stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation control plans, after final Planning Board approval, shall be recorded on the deed to the property on which such measures are located.  The description so prepared shall comply with the requirements of N.H. R.S.A. 478:4-a. 
 
2.    The Planning Board may require routine inspections to verify on-going maintenance of water quality protection measures.  Such inspections shall be performed by the designated agent at reasonable times to the landowner. 
 
3.    If permission to inspect is denied by the landowner, the designated agent shall secure an administrative inspection warrant from the District or Superior Court under N.H. R.S.A. 595-B. 
 
4.   The Board of Selectmen may require a fee for routine inspections of water quality protection measures.  The fee shall be paid by the owner of the property.  A fee schedule shall be established by the Board of Selectmen which represents the cost of performing an inspection of various types of water quality protection measures.  The procedure for the adoption of the fee schedule shall be as provided in N.H. R.S.A. 41:9-a. 
 
 
ARTICLE 11 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
11.01   Acceptance of Streets 
 
Nothing herein is intended to modify the requirements of law with regard to the acceptance of streets by the Town.  Nothing herein is intended to modify or control the construction, reconstruction, or extension of roads by the Town or State. 
 
11.02   Other Regulations and Ordinances 
 
In addition to complying with the Regulations established herein, the applicant shall comply with all other applicable Town ordinances and State Regulations and laws, particularly, but not limited to, the Town Ordinances, Town of Auburn Zoning Ordinance, Comprehensive Master Plan, and the State of New Hampshire laws and regulations governing pollution.  Where applicable, the applicant shall also comply with all federal statutes and regulations. 
 
11.03   Enforcement 
 
1. The purpose of this part is to enact locally the administrative and enforcement procedures set forth in N.H. R.S.A. 676 of the existing planning and land use statutes. 
 
2. Any violation of the requirements of these Regulations shall be subject to any and all of the enforcement procedures detailed in N.H. R.S.A. 676 and these Regulations. 
 
 3. These Regulations shall be enforced by the Planning Board or its duly authorized agent(s), which shall include, but not be limited to: the Board of Selectmen, Town Attorney and Town Building Inspector/Zoning Code Enforcement Officer.  The designated agent responsible for enforcement on a day-to-day basis shall be the Auburn Building Inspector and Code Enforcement Officer. The Building Inspector is hereby granted authority under the direction of the Planning Board to use all available statutory remedies to enforce these Regulations, including but not limited to: the issuance of Cease and Desist Orders, all common law remedies, the revocation of building permits, the withholding of building permits, actions to secure civil fines, and actions for injunctive relief. 
 
4. Written Notice of Violation:  A written notice of violation may be issued to the property owner by registered mail or hand-delivery from the designated agent if the agent determines that conditions at the site are in violation of any of the requirements of these Regulations or plans approved under these Regulations.  The notice of violation shall: 
 
 (A). Specify the actions or conditions which violate the requirements of this Regulations or plans approved under these Regulations; 
 
 (B). Identify what needs to be done to correct the violation(s); 
 
 (C). Specify a reasonable time frame within which the violation(s) will be corrected; and 
 
 (D). Be provided to the property owner with a copy to be kept in the official records of the Planning Board. 
 
NOTE:  The issuance of a written notice of visitation shall not be a prerequisite to the issuance of a cease and desist order. 
 
5.    Cease and Desist Order:  A cease and desist order may be issued to the property owner by the designated agent if the agent determines that conditions at the site are in violation of any of the requirements of these Regulations. 
 
 (A). When the designated agent has elected to issue a written notice of violation, a cease and desist order shall not be issued unless the property owner has failed to take the corrective action(s) identified in the written notice of violation within the time frame specified therein, or the noncompliance presents an immediate threat to public health or safety. 
 
6. Revocation:  In addition, the Planning Board may, where it deems appropriate, exercise its prerogative under N.H. R.S.A. 676:4-a to revoke subdivision approval. 
 
11.04   Fees 
 
The Planning Board shall establish fees to accompany the application for Preliminary Plat and Final Plat, and for inspection of construction and installation of improvements.  There shall be no fee for application for the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase review. 
 
11.05   Concurrent and Joint Hearings 
 
The Planning Board may hold a hearing on a subdivision application in conjunction with a Site Plan Review hearing.  A hearing on a subdivision application by the Planning Board may be held at the same time and place that a hearing for a special exception or variance is held for the project by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
 
11.06   Penalty 
 
In accordance with N.H. R.S.A. 676:16, any owner, or agent of the owner, of any land located with a subdivision or proposed subdivision in Auburn, New Hampshire, who transfers or sells any land, before a plat of the said subdivision has been approved by the Planning Board and recorded or filed in the office of the Rockingham County Registrar of Deeds, shall forfeit and pay a civil penalty of $1,000.00 for each lot or parcel so transferred or sold; and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties.  The Town of Auburn, New Hampshire may enjoin such transfer or sale and may recover the said penalty by civil action.  In any such action the prevailing party may recover reasonable court costs and attorney's fees as same may be ordered by the court. 
 
 
 
 
11.07   Court Review 
 
Any appeal from a final decision of the Planning Board shall be governed by N.H. R.S.A. 677:15.   
 
11.08   Amendments 
 
These Regulations may be amended or rescinded by the Board, but only following public hearing on the proposed change, notice of which shall be posted in three places in Auburn and published in a local newspaper at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing.  The Chairman or Secretary of the Board shall transmit a record of any changes so authorized to the Registrar of Deeds of Rockingham County. 
 
11.09   Severability 
 
If any section, article, provision, portion or paragraph of these Regulations shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent authority, such holding shall not affect, impair or invalidate any other section, article, provision, portion or paragraph of these Regulations. 
 
11.10   Validity 
 
Whenever the provisions of this ordinance or rulings made under the authority hereof differ from those of other ordinances or regulations of the Town, that provision or ruling which imposes the greater restriction or the higher standard shall govern. 
 
11.11   Effective Date 
 
These Regulations shall take effect immediately upon adoption by the Planning Board and filing with the Auburn Board of Selectmen and the Auburn Town Clerk. 
 
11.12   Repeal 
 
Upon the valid adoption of these Subdivision Regulations the existing Subdivision Regulations and all amendments thereto are hereby repealed.  In the event that these Regulations are not adopted and put into force and effect, then the existing Subdivision Regulations and all amendments thereto shall continue to be in full force and effect. 
 
 
 
ADOPTED:_________________________ 
 
AMENDED:_________________________ 
 
AMENDED:_________________________ 


 
 
 
 
 
 
TOWN OF AUBURN 
 
SITE PLAN REVIEW REGULATIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Original:  Adopted January 14, 1981 
Revised in the following years:  October 1986, November, 2000, June 15, 2011 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
SECTION 1.00 – GENERAL PROVISIONS      PAGE 
 
1.01 Title  1  1.02 Authority  1 1.03 Policy, Objective and Purposes  1  1.04 Applicability  2 
1.05 Waivers 2 
1.06 Expenses and Fees 3 
1.07 Public Hearings 4 
 
SECTION 2.00 - DEFINITIONS  
 
2.01 Usage 5 2.02 Words and Terms 5 2.03 Other Definitions 9 
 
SECTION 3.00 SITE PLAN APPLICATION SUBMITTAL PROCESS  
 
3.01 Projects Requiring Site Plan Review 10 3.02  Classification of Site Plans  10 3.03  Procedures for Minor Site Plans  10  3.04  Procedures for Major Site Plans  11  3.05  Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase  11  3.06  Submission Requirements for Preliminary Conceptual 
 Consultation Phase  12 3.07  Design Review Phase  12  3.08  Final Review Phase  13 
3.09 Time Table for Final Review Phase 15  3.10  Notice Requirements  16   
SECTION 4.00 – SITE PLAN APPROVAL PROCESS 
  4.01 Written Decision and Filing Requirement  17  4.02  Standards for Final Review and Approval or Disapproval  17 4.03  Approval with Conditions (Conditions Subsequent) 19  4.04  Conditional Approval (Conditions precedent)  20 4.05  Recording of Approved Site Plan and Time Period for Submitting  
 Final As-Built Mylar Plan  21  
 SECTION 5.00 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS   
 5.01 Compliance with Regulations 22   
 5.02 Conformity to Zoning Ordinance and Master Plan 22     
 5.03 Character of Land for Improvement 22 
 5.04 Preservation of Existing Features 22 
5.05 Scattered or Premature Development 23 
5.06 Erosion Control 24 
5.07 Reserved Strips 24 
 
SECTION 6.00 – GENERAL SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
 
 6.01 Regulatory Approvals 25 
 6.02 Soil Tests 25 
 6.03  Driveway Access  25 6.04  Assurances From Applicant  25 6.05  Acceptance of Dedication Offers  25 6.06  Certification of Utilities/Services 25 
 
SECTION 7.00 – CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS
 
7.01 On-site Improvements 26 
7.02 Off-site Improvements 27  7.03  Inspection of Improvements  27 7.04  Proper Installation of Improvements  28 7.05  Acceptance of Streets, Utilities, Other Improvements and Public 
 Land  28  7.06  Change of Design and Improvements 28 
7.07 Soil Test Pits, Boring and Percolation Test Pits 28 
 
SECTION 8.00 – PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE 
 
8.01 Performance Guarantee Required 29 
8.02 Form 29 
8.03 Renewal 29 
8.04 Failure to Complete Improvements 29 
8.05 Release or Reduction of Performance Guarantee and As-Built  
 Requirements 29 
 
SECTION 9.00 – SPECIFIC PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS    
 
 9.01  General Site Development Plan Requirements  31 9.02  Minor Site Plan Submission  31 9.03  Major Site Plan Submission  31 9.04  Drafting and Submission Requirements Common to 
  Both Minor and Major Site Plans -- Existing Features Plan  31  9.05  Other Items for Submittal -- Existing Features  32 9.06  Additional Drafting and Submission Requirements: Major 
  Site Plans -- Existing Features  32 9.07  Drafting and Submission Requirements Common to 
  Both Minor and Major Site Plans -- Proposed Changes 33 9.08  Other Items for Submittal -- Proposed Changes  34  9.09  Additional Drafting and Submission Requirements: 
  Major Site Plans -- Proposed Changes  34  9.10  Construction Plan Requirements Common to Major and 
  Minor Site Plans  34  9.11  Construction Plans: Additional Submission Requirements 
  for Major Site Plans  35  9.12  Other Requirements for Major Site Plans  35 
 
 SECTION 10.00 - GENERAL STANDARDS   
10.01  General Standards  37  10.02  Specifications for Required Improvements  37  10.03  Traffic Control and Access  37  10.04  Storm Water Management and Erosion and Sediment Control  37  10.05  Street Layout and Design  37  10.06  Street Construction  37  10.07  Parking and Loading Areas  38 10.08  Construction of Driveways and Parking Lots  40  10.09  Utilities  42 
10.10  Screening  43  10.11  Storm Drainage  43  10.12  Snow Removal  43  10.13  Lighting  43  10.14  Frontage  52  10.15  Fire Protection  52  10.16  Other Improvements  52  10.17  Open Space  52  10.18  Solid Waste Storage  52  10.19  Signs  52  10.20  Landscaping  52  10.21  Storage  58  10.22  Underground Storage Tanks  58  10.23  Noise Levels  58  10.24  Temporary Signs  59  10.25  Conditions During Construction  59 
10.26 Structural Design Requirements 59 
10.27 Village Center District Design Standards 60 
  SECTION 11.00 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION AND  SEDIMENT CONTROL REGULATIONS 
 11.01  General  65  11.02  Definitions  65  11.03  Applicability  66  11.04  Minimum Requirements  66  11.05  Design Standards  67  11.06  Completed Application Requirements  67  11.07  Responsibility for Construction/installation  70  11.08  Plan Review and Approval  70  11.09  Maintenance and Inspection  70    
  SECTION 12.00 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES   
12.01  Authority  72  12.02  Purpose and Goals  72  12.03  Definitions  73  12.04  Construction Performance Requirements  73  12.05  Required Information  75  12.06  Conditions of Approval  75 12.07  Factors Considered in Granting Decisions  75  12.08  Additional Information Required  76  12.09  Waivers  78  12.10  Bonding Security and Insurance  78  12.11  Removal of Abandoned Antennas and Towers  79  
 SECTION 13.00 - ADMINSRATION AND ENFORCEMENT   
13.01  Occupancy  80  13.02  Other Ordinances  80  13.03  Enforcement  80  13.04  Joint Meetings and Hearings 81  13.05  Appeal  81 
 
SECTION 14.00 - AMENDMENT, VALIDITY, AND EFFECTIVE DATE 
 
14.01  Amendment  83  14.02  Validity  83  14.03  Effective Date  83  
   
APPENDICIES   
APPENDIX A   Fee Schedule  APPENDIX B   Sample Escrow Agreement  APPENDIX C   Application Fee Schedule  APPENDIX D   Application for Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase  APPENDIX E   Application for Design Review Phase  APPENDIX F   Application for Final Review Phase 
APPENDIX G  Includes: 
 
i. Typical Cul-De-Sac Detail 

ii. Typical Roadway  Section- Open Drainage 

iii. Typical Roadway  Section - Closed Drainage 

iv. Typical Roadway  Section Utility Location 

v. Precast Catch Basin Detail 

vi. Type “A” Frame and Grate Detail 

vii. Torrent Frame and Grate Detail 

viii. Type “C” Ditch Grate With Frame Detail 

ix. Typical Headwall Detail 

x. Typical 30,000 Gal. Fire Cistern Plan and Details sht. 1 of 2 

xi. Typical 30,000 Gal. Fire Cistern Plan and Details sht. 2 of 2 

xii. Standard Site Plan Guarantee Worksheet 


   

SECTION 1.00 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 1.01  Title   
These Regulations shall hereafter be known, cited and referred to as the “Site Plan Review Regulations” of the Town of Auburn, New Hampshire. 
 
1.02 Authority   
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Planning Board by the voters of the Town of Auburn on March 10, 1969, and in accordance with the provisions of N.H. R.S.A. 674:43, 674:44, 675:6, 675:7, 675:8, the Auburn Planning Board hereby adopts the following revised regulations governing the approval and disapproval of site plans for the non-residential and multi-family residential development of land in the Town of Auburn, New Hampshire on June 15, 2011.  
 These Regulations replace and supersede the former Nonresidential and Multi-Family Site Plan Review Regulations for the Town which were adopted on June 25, 1986, and revised on November 15, 2000.  
 
Adoption of these Regulations is not intended to invalidate any approval or alter any requirement of an approval under the former Regulations. The provisions of the former Site Plan Review Regulations shall be deemed to apply to all completed applications currently pending before the Planning Board, and to all applications which have been the subject of a first legal notice before the Board, unless determined otherwise by agreement of the Applicant and the Board. 
1.03  Policy, Objective and Purposes
(1).  Policy:  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Town of Auburn to consider the development or change or expansion of use of land for nonresidential uses or for  multi-family dwelling units as subject to regulation by the Town of Auburn Planning Board. The Planning Board is authorized to review and approve or disapprove site plans which develop, change, or expand the use of tracts in the Town for nonresidential uses or for multi-family dwelling units. 
(2).  Objective:  The goal of these Regulations is to enhance the public health, safety and general welfare of Auburn’s citizens and to encourage the appropriate and wise use of land in the Town. These Regulations are adopted to promote balanced, responsible and desirable growth, while considering the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience, by avoiding the haphazard and uncoordinated development of land without the adequate provision of public services or facilities; to ensure that sound site utilization principles are followed; to avoid development that may have a negative environmental or economic impact; to preserve the rural character of the Town and to guide the character of development to conform with the Town’s Master Plan. The general objective of these Regulations is to regulate site plan review in accord with N.H. R.S.A. 674:44. 
  (3).  Purposes:  In accordance with the above-stated policy and objective, these Regulations are adopted for the following purposes: 
 
 (A). To provide for the safe and attractive development or change or expansion of use of the site and to guard against such conditions as would involve danger or injury to health, safety, or prosperity by reason of: 
  (i) Inadequate drainage or conditions conducive to flooding of the property or to 
 the property of another; 
  (ii) Inadequate protection for the quality of groundwater;  
 (iii) Undesirable and preventable elements of pollution, such as noise, smoke, 
 soot, particulates, or any other discharge into the environment which might 
 prove harmful to persons, structures, or adjacent properties; and  
 (iv) Inadequate provision for fire safety, prevention, and control; 
 
(B). To provide for the harmonious and aesthetically pleasing development of the Town of Auburn and its environs; 
  (C). To provide for open spaces and green spaces of adequate proportions; 
 
(D). To require the proper arrangement and coordination of streets within the site in relation to other existing or planned streets, or with features of the official map of the Town of Auburn; 
 
(E). To require suitably located streets of sufficient width to accommodate existing and prospective traffic, and to afford adequate light, air, and access for firefighting apparatus and equipment to buildings, and to be coordinated so as to compose a convenient transportation system; 
  
(F). To require, when appropriate, that plats showing new streets or narrowing or widening of streets be submitted to the Planning Board for approval;   
(G). To require that the land indicated on plats submitted to the Planning Board shall be of such character that it can be used for building purposes without danger to health;  
 
(H). To require innovative land use controls on lands when supported by the Auburn Master Plan; 
 
(I). To permit preliminary review of site plans in appropriate cases; and 
 
(J). To create conditions favorable for the general health, safety, convenience, and prosperity of the citizens of Auburn. 
1.04 Applicability  
These Regulations shall apply to all development of, change in, or expansion of the use of land for nonresidential or multi-family residential uses, as defined herein, located within the corporate limits of the Town of Auburn, whether or not such development includes a subdivision or re-subdivision of the site. 
 
1.05 Waivers   
 
(1). In accordance with N.H. R.S.A. 674:44, III, (e), the Planning Board may, upon written request of an applicant, and after a majority vote taken at a duly noticed public meeting, grant a waiver of any provision(s) or requirement(s) of these Regulations, if the Board finds that: 
 
(A). Strict conformity with the Regulation(s) would pose an unnecessary hardship to the applicant and waiver would not be contrary to the spirit and intent of these Regulations; or  
 (B). Specific circumstances relative to the proposed site plan, or conditions of the land in such site plan, indicate that the waiver will properly carry out the spirit and intent of these Regulations. 
(2). All waivers granted by the Planning Board shall be clearly noted upon the approved plat or plan, or in a separate document attached to the approved and recorded plat or plan. 
1.06 Expenses and Fees  
 (1).  General:  The applicant shall pay for all expenses incurred by the Town for review and hearings associated with the application. The cost of any required publication or posting of notice, and the cost of mailing notices of the hearing via certified mail, shall be paid by the applicant prior to said hearing. All expenses incurred by the Town in having the Town’s engineers, consultants, and Planning Board Attorney review proposed plans shall be borne by the applicant and paid prior to Final Plan approval.  
(2).  Fee Schedule:  A fee schedule for the processing and review of an application shall be set by the Planning Board and periodically revised and updated. See Appendix A. 
(3).  Escrow Account:  The Board shall require that a separate escrow account be established with the Town to cover fee expenses and costs. The applicant shall complete an escrow agreement for the cost of engineering and legal reviews. See Sample Escrow Agreement, Appendix B.  
(4).  Application Fee:  An application fee in the amount set forth in Appendix C shall be paid for each site plan submitted to the Planning Board. An additional fee as set forth in Appendix C shall be paid for each abutter entitled to receive written notice of the proposed site plan. All application fees shall be payable to the Town of Auburn for deposit in the general fund of the Town.  
(5).  Professional Inspection/Review Fees:  Whenever a proposed site plan will involve street construction, the installation of drainage structures or other required improvements, the costs incurred by the Town to have the Town Engineer or Consultant inspect or review the required improvements shall be borne by the applicant. Prior to receiving final approval of a Site Plan involving required improvements, the applicant shall deposit with the Clerk of the Town of Auburn a sum in accord with the fee schedule in the Appendix. The amount deposited under this section shall be held in a special escrow account by the Clerk for the purpose of paying the Town Engineer, Attorney or Consultant to make the necessary inspections and reports. The fee for these services shall be based on the standard rate schedule on file in the Planning Board office.  
(6).  Return of Unused Fees:  Any amount deposited under this section and not used for the purposes stated herein shall be returned to the applicant upon final acceptance of the required improvements and prior to the release of any performance guarantee money deposited under Section 8 of these Regulations. 
1.07  Public Hearings  
(1).  When Required:  Public hearings shall be required when the Board is engaging in the Design Review Phase or the Final Review Phase of a Minor or Major Site Plan. The public hearing may be held at the meeting at which the Application is submitted and accepted.  
(2).  When Not Required:  Public hearings shall not be required when the Board is engaged in the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase, or in considering or acting upon disapproval of applications as incomplete for procedural reasons, such as failure to: include abutter information; meet reasonable deadlines established by the Board; or pay costs of notice or other fees required by the Board.  Such actions by the Board may take place at a public meeting. 
SECTION 2.00 - DEFINITIONS   
2.01 Usage
 
Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the plural include the singular; and the word “herein” means these Regulations.  Reference to a building or structure includes any part thereof.  The terms “used” or “occupied” shall be construed to include planned, designed, or intended uses.  The word “shall” is mandatory; the word “may” is permissive. 
 
2.02 Words and Terms  
 
For the purpose of these Regulations certain words and terms used herein are defined as follows: 
 
(1). Abutter:  Shall be as defined in N.H. R.S.A. 672:3, as may be amended from time to time, which is currently as follows:   
 
 (A). Any person whose property adjoins or is directly across the street or stream from the land under consideration by the Planning Board.   
 
 (B).  For purposes of notification by the Planning Board of a hearing, in the case of an abutting property being under a condominium or other collective form of ownership, the term abutter means the officers of the collective or association, as defined in N.H. R.S.A. 356-B:3, XXIII. 
 
 (C).  For purposes of notification by the Planning Board of a hearing, in the case of an abutting property being under a manufactured housing park form of ownership as defined in N.H. R.S.A. 205-A:1, II, the term “abutter” includes the manufactured housing park owner and the tenants who own manufactured housing which adjoins or is directly across the street or stream from the land under consideration by the Planning Board. 
 
 (D).  For purposes of receiving testimony only, and not for purposes of notification, the term “abutter” shall include any person who is able to demonstrate that his land will be directly affected by the proposal under consideration. 
 
(2). Acceptance:  An affirmative vote by a majority of the Planning Board at a public meeting that an application contains the items required to constitute a complete application sufficient for the Planning Board to invoke jurisdiction in accordance with N.H. R.S.A. 676:4,I(b). 
 
 (3). Active and Substantial Development or Building:  May be defined by the Planning Board with respect to each application.  In accordance with N.H. R.S.A. 674:39, the Board, at its discretion, may require all plans to include a note that shall specify the threshold level of work which shall constitute “active and substantial development or building” for the purposes of fulfilling the requirements of N.H. R.S.A. 674:39, I.  This threshold for “active and substantial development or building” must be reached within twelve (12) months of final approval before the plan will be eligible for the four (4) year exemption, as provided under N.H. R.S.A. 674:39, from subsequent changes in the Town of Auburn Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Regulations, or Non-residential Site Plan Review Regulations.  Upon receipt of a written application demonstrating good cause to do so, the Board may extend this period for up to an additional twelve (12) months. 
 
(4). Applicant/Developer:  The owner of land to be developed, changed in use, or the subject of an expanded use, or his or her agent or representative as may be authorized by signed and notarized statement, on a form sufficient and acceptable to the Planning Board.   
 
(5). Approval:  A final vote by the Planning Board, certified by written endorsement on the plat, that the proposed site plan meets the requirements of these Regulations and satisfies, in the judgment of the Planning Board, all criteria of good planning and design. 
 
(6). Approval, Conditional:  (approval with conditions precedent).  A vote by the Planning Board that the site plan application is approved, contingent upon the completion of specific tasks or items required for final approval.  Until all the requirements for an approval have been met, a conditional approval does not constitute, nor shall it be construed as approval, either implied or granted, of the site plan application.  A conditional approval does not bind the Planning Board to approval of the final site plan. A conditional approval requires that the applicant return to appear before the Planning Board in a public meeting for final approval.   
 
(7). Approval, with Conditions:  (approval with conditions subsequent). A vote by the Planning Board that the site plan  is approved, with conditions subsequent that, once resolved, will constitute final approval without returning to the Planning Board.   
 
(8). Board:  The Planning Board of the Town of Auburn, New Hampshire. 
 
(9). Bond:  Any form of security, including a cash deposit escrow account, surety bond, letter of credit or other instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the Board of Selectmen, the Planning Board and the Town attorney.  The term “performance guarantee” is used generally to cover all forms of security which may be posted to guarantee the applicant’s compliance with the terms of site plan approval. See Section 2.02(25), below. 
 
(10). Buffer or Buffer Strip:  A strip of land along a property line or zoned district boundary line, which shall be free of any building or use other than natural woody growth, landscaping or screening. 
 
(11). Buildable Area:  The required area of contiguous non-wetland acreage within each buildable lot, including each clustered building lot.  The buildable area should not contain protected wetlands, front, side or rear yard setbacks, wetland buffers, cluster perimeter buffers, and slope, drainage or utility easements. 
 
(12). Clustered Residential Development:  Two or more dwellings, whether single family detached or multi-unit, “clustered” or “grouped” on a lot or group of contiguous lots, closer than would otherwise be permitted by the minimum lot size, frontage and yard requirements of the Auburn Zoning Ordinance. 
  
(13). Condominium:  A development containing two (2) or more units in a structure wherein each unit is customarily owned and wherein the owners of such units have an undivided interest in the common area pertaining to the development. 
 
(14). Cul-de-sac:  A local street closed at one end by building lots which comports with the typical cul-de-sac detail set forth in the Appendix - Typical Design Details.  
 
(15). Day(s):  Shall mean calendar day(s) unless otherwise indicated or agreed upon by the Planning Board.  
 
(16). Dedication:  A gift, by the owner, of his property to another party without any consideration being given for the transfer.  Since a transfer of real property is involved, the dedication shall be made by written instrument suitable for recording, and completed with an acceptance. 
 
(17). Design Review Phase: An optional stage of site plan approval for major site plan applicants, which involves non-binding discussions with the Planning Board, beyond conceptual and general discussion, which address more specific design and engineering details. This hearing is intended for the submission of information, which is beyond that of the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase, but which may include less than all of the information required for the Final Review Phase.   
 
(18). Development:  The construction of improvements on a tract or tracts of land for nonresidential use and/or multi-family residential use. 
 
(19). Driveway:  A space located on a lot, which may not be more than twenty-four (24) feet in width at the lot line, built or used for vehicular access by automobiles or trucks to a garage, parking space, or service area. 
 
(20). Easement:  A restriction by a property owner for the use, access or maintenance by another and for a specific purpose, including an acquired privilege or right of use, which one party may have on the land of another, such as a strip of land used or intended to be used for a sanitary sewer or storm, water drainage line, or other utility, when such utilities are not included in the street.   
 
(21). Engineer: The applicant’s duly designated registered professional engineer, licensed in the State of New Hampshire. 
 
(22). Final Review Phase:  The last stage of the site plan application review process.  The first part of this Phase commences upon submission to the Planning Board, at a duly noticed public hearing, a formal application for final review.  The second part of the Final Review Phase commences after the Planning Board has voted, at a duly noticed public hearing, to accept the application for site plan approval. The second part of the Final Review Phase involves the Planning Board’s consideration of the merits of the site plan application and a vote by the Planning Board to approve or deny the site plan application.  
 
(23). Improvements:  All work required to construct the proposed development, including but not limited to site grading, landscaping, utility installation, (water, sewer, electric, drainage, telephone, etc. and their appurtenances), roadways, parking lots, drives, buildings, fencing, signs, etc. meaning and intending to include all work necessary to construct the development as agreed and shown on the approved plat or plan, including all on-site and off-site improvements. 
 
(24). Multi-Family Dwelling Units:  Any structure containing two (2) or more dwelling units. 
 
 (25). Performance Guarantee:  Any form of security, including a cash deposit escrow account, surety bond or other instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the Board of Selectmen and the Planning Board. The term “performance guarantee” is used generally to cover all forms of security which may be posted to guarantee the applicant’s compliance with the terms of site plan approval. 
 
(26). Person: Includes an individual, corporation, partnership, trust, incorporated association, limited liability company or any other legally recognized entity. 
 
(27). Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase:  An optional stage of site plan approval which involves review of the basic concept of the proposal.  The purpose is for the Planning Board to make suggestions which might be of assistance in meeting requirements for final review and approval.  Such consultation does not bind either the applicant or the Planning Board, and statements made by Planning Board members shall not be the basis for disqualifying said members or invalidating any action taken.  The Planning Board and the applicant may discuss proposals in conceptual form only, and in general terms, such as desirability of types of development and proposals under the Town’s Master Plan. 
 
(28).  Special Flood Hazard Area: The land in the flood plain within the Town of Auburn subject to a one (1%) percent or greater possibility of flooding in any given year.  In particular, that area designated as Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) and Flood-Boundary and Floodway Maps (FHBM).   
 
(29).  Street:  Any road or other way which is an existing and/or improved Town street or which is shown on a subdivision plat approved by the Planning Board and recorded at the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds.  A street includes the land between the right-of-way lines whether improved or unimproved.  The Planning Board may exercise its discretion in determining the classification of a street. 
 
(30).  Street, Arterial: A street or highway used primarily for heavy and/or through traffic.   
 
(31). Street, Collector: A street which, in addition to giving access to abutting properties, serves primarily to carry traffic from local streets to arterial streets and to public and other centers of traffic concentration. 
 
(32).  Street, Local or Service: A street used primarily to give access to abutting properties. 
 
(33). Substantial Completion:  Unless otherwise defined by the Planning Board with respect to a particular site plan application, means the completion of all on-site and off-site improvements specified on the approved site plan application, except for those improvements which are specifically deferred by recorded vote of the Planning Board, prior to the expiration of the four-year period specified in N.H. R.S.A. 674:39. 
 
(34).  Town: The Town of Auburn, New Hampshire. 
 
(35). Town Engineer:  The duly designated engineer of the Town of Auburn, or if there is no such office, the planning consultant or official assigned by the Selectmen.  The Planning Board is authorized to enter into a contract(s) with a private engineering firm to serve as the Town Engineer for the Town of Auburn.   
 
(36). Way:  Any public highway, street, avenue, road, alley, park, or parkway, or any private way laid out under authority of statute, and ways provided and maintained by public institutions to which state funds are appropriated for public use. 
 
(37). Zoning Ordinance: The duly enacted Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Auburn. 
2.03 Other Definitions  
Any word or term used in these Regulations which is not defined in this Article, nor a defined word or term in the Auburn Zoning Ordinance or Subdivision Regulations, nor defined in its context, shall carry its customary meaning, unless otherwise stipulated by the Planning Board.  
SECTION 3.00 - SITE PLAN APPLICATION  SUBMITTAL PROCESS
 
3.01 Projects Requiring Site Plan Review 
 The following uses require site plan approval from the Planning Board.  Building permits will not be issued for these uses prior to the receipt of site plan approval from the Planning Board: 
  (1). New construction of nonresidential buildings or uses; 
  
(2). New construction of multi-family structures with more than two (2) dwelling units;  
 
(3). Conversions or additions resulting in a net gain of two (2) or more dwelling units; 
 
(4). Nonresidential additions or conversions from residential structures to non-residential uses; 
 
(5).  Any other non-residential project which involves a change or expansion of use of a site; and  
 
(6). Modification of previously approved site plans. 
 
3.02 Classification of Site Plans  
 
There are two classifications of site plan applications: 
  
(1). Minor Site Plan Application:  A site plan application which meets the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and contains less than five (5) dwelling units for residential projects, and less than three thousand (3,000) square feet of building area for non-residential projects, shall be considered a Minor Site Plan, unless the proposed site plan requires new streets, driveways, parking lots, sewers, or drainage structures.  If the proposed site plan requires new streets, driveways, parking lots, sewers, or drainage structures, then it will be considered a Major Site Plan. 
 
(2). Major Site Plan Application:  All other applications shall be considered Major Site Plans. 
3.03 Procedures for Minor Site Plans  
(1).  General:  Minor Site Plan applicants must comply with all requirements of the Final Review Phase described below in Section 3.08. Minor Site Plan applicants are encouraged to participate in the optional first-phase process consisting of the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase, described in Section 3.05, prior to engaging in the Final Review Phase.  
 
(2).  Process:  The procedures for application submission and Planning Board review and approval of a Minor Site Plan application are set forth below in Sections 3.08, 3.09, Section 4, and Section 5.  General and specific submission requirements are set forth in Sections 6.00 and 9.00 of these Regulations.   
(3).  Costs:  The Minor Site Plan applicant shall bear all costs of providing all necessary notices, design reviews, studies, reports, engineering review, traffic studies, environmental impact studies, and legal review required by the Planning Board, and will be required, at the discretion of the Board, to establish a separate escrow account to pay for such costs, in accordance with Section 1.06.  
3.04 Procedures for Major Site Plans  
 
(1).  General:  Major Site Plan applicants must comply with all requirements of the Final Review Phase described below in Section 3.08.  Major Site Plan applicants are encouraged to participate in both of the optional first and second phase processes consisting of Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase (Phase I), and the Design Review Phase (Phase II). The procedures for participation in these phases are set forth below in Sections 3.05 through 3.07.  
  
(2).  Process:  The procedures for application submission and Planning Board review and approval of a Major Site Plan application are set forth below in Sections 3.05-3.09 and Articles 4 and 5.   
 
(3).  Costs:  The Major Site Plan applicant shall bear all costs of providing all necessary notices, design reviews, studies, reports, engineering review, traffic studies, environmental impact studies, and legal review required by the Planning Board, and will be required, at the discretion of the Board, to establish a separate escrow account to pay for such costs, in accordance with Section 1.06.  
3.05 Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase (Optional)
(1).  Description:  Both Minor and Major site plan applicants are encouraged to participate in the optional Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase which is defined in Section 2.02(27) of these Regulations. This phase provides the applicant with the opportunity to meet with the Planning Board to review the concept of any anticipated development. The Applicant is encouraged to participate in these meetings prior to any substantial investment in planning or engineering of a proposal, and  prior to entering the Final Review Phase described in Section 3.08.  Discussions with the Planning Board during the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase may occur without the necessity of giving formal public notice, but such discussions may occur only at formal meetings of the Board.  
 
(2).  Costs:  The Site Plan approval applicant shall bear all costs of providing all necessary notices, design reviews, studies, reports, engineering review, traffic studies, environmental impact studies, and legal review required by the Planning Board, and will be required, at the discretion of the Board, to establish a separate escrow account to pay for such costs in accordance with Section 1.06. 
 
(3).  Application Required:  Before participating in the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase the Applicant shall submit a completed Preliminary Consultation Phase Application Form, in duplicate, and any required information delineated in Section 3.06 for the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase.  The application form is reproduced in the Appendix and is available at the Town offices.  The application form may also be available on the Town’s website, at the Planning Board’s discretion. The application must be completely filled out prior to submission to the Planning Board. A completed Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase Application shall not be deemed a complete Application for purposes of the Design Review or Formal Application Submission Phases. 
 
(4).  Acceptance of Application:  A duly notified public hearing is not required for acceptance of the completed Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase Application.  Such an application may be accepted at any public meeting of the Planning Board.   The Planning Board shall place on its agenda for consideration the information submitted to it within thirty (30) days, indicating on the agenda the nature of the Application, and the fact that the Applicant will be appearing before the Planning Board for the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase. 
 
(5).  Optional Preliminary Plan:  Applicants are also encouraged to submit a Preliminary Plan for review and comment.  The intent of a Preliminary Plan is to enable the Applicant and the Planning Board to review, discuss and evaluate a proposed site plan at a time when modifications will not result in a substantial engineering or surveying costs to the developer.  Specifications for a Preliminary Plan are set forth in the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase Application set forth in the Appendix to these Regulations. 
 
3.06   Submission Requirements for Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase
 
(1). Minor Site Plan Applicants:  In addition to a fully completed Preliminary Consultation Phase Application for a Minor Site Plan, the applicant should also submit a Preliminary Site Plan for review and comment by the Planning Board.  The Preliminary Site Plan Application should include the items required by the checklist on the Preliminary Consultation Phase Application for a Minor Site Plan and should meet all applicable specific plan submission requirements as set forth in Article 9 of these Regulations. 
 
(2). Major Site Plan Applicants: In addition to a fully completed Preliminary Consultation Phase Application for a Major Site Plan, the applicant should also submit a Preliminary Site Plan for review and comment by the Planning Board.  The Preliminary Site Plan Application should include the items required by the checklist on the Preliminary Consultation Phase Application for a Major Site Plan and should meet all applicable specific plan submission requirements as set forth in Article 9 of these Regulations. 
 
3.07  Design Review Phase (Optional) 
 
(1). Description: Major Site Plan applicants may elect to participate in the optional Design Review Phase, defined in Section 2.02(17) of these Regulations, as either the first or second phase of the Site Plan approval process.  In this phase, the Applicant may engage in non-binding discussions with the Planning Board beyond conceptual and general discussion which involve more specific design and engineering details. Statements made by Planning Board members during the Design Review Phase shall not be the basis for disqualifying said members or invalidating any action taken by the Board.  An Applicant may elect to forego the Design Review Phase, but all Applicants must comply with all requirements of the Final Review Phase, set forth in Section 3.08. 
 
(2).  Costs:  The applicant for Major Site Plan approval shall bear all costs of providing all necessary notices, design reviews, studies, reports, engineering review, traffic studies, environmental impact studies, and legal review required by the Planning Board, and will be required, at the discretion of the Board, to establish a separate escrow account to pay for such costs in accordance with Section 1.06 of these Regulations. 
 
(3).  Application Required:  The applicant shall submit a completed Design Review Application Form, in duplicate, plus six (6) copies of the Site Development Plans and any required information delineated in Sections 3.05, 3.06, and 3.07 for the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase and Design Review. The Design Review Phase Application Form must be completely filled out prior to submission to the Planning Board. A duly notified public hearing is required for acceptance of the completed Design Review Phase application.  A completed Design Review Phase Application shall not be deemed a complete Application for purposes of the Final Review Phase. 
 
(4).  Notice:  The Design Review Phase may proceed only after identification of and notice to abutters, holders of conservation, preservation, or agricultural preservation restrictions, the applicant and every engineer, architect, land surveyor or soil scientist whose professional seal appears on any plat submitted to the Board, by certified mail of the date upon which the Planning Board will engage in the Design Review process.  For those proposals near rivers and streams and downstream of a dam, the Planning Board shall also notify the owners of the upstream dam and the N.H. Department of Environmental Services Dam Bureau by certified mail.  Notice of the Design Review Phase shall also be given to the general public as required by Section 3.10 of these Regulations. The Planning Board shall place on its agenda for consideration the information submitted to it within thirty (30) days, indicating on the agenda the nature of the Application, and the fact that the Applicant will be appearing before the Planning Board for the Design Review Phase.   
 
(5).  Municipal Review:  The Planning Board may elect, when it deems appropriate, to require that the applicant submit its design to the Town of Auburn Fire Department, the Auburn Conservation Committee, and/or the City of Manchester Water Works for review and comment. 
 
(6).  Completion of Design Review Phase:  The Design Review Phase ends upon submission by the applicant of a Final Review application.  In addition, the Planning Board may, in its discretion, determine that the Design Review phase of an application has ended, and shall inform the applicant in writing of such decision within ten (10) days of such determination. 
3.08 Final Review Phase (Required)
The Final Review Phase is required for all Minor and Major Site Plan Applicants.  The process for completion of the Final Review Phase is set forth below: 
 
(1).  Formal Application Required:   
 
 (A).  To commence the Final Review Phase, all Applicants are required to complete the Application Form for a Minor Site Plan or Major Site Plan, as applicable, in accord with the Checklist for such applications, set forth in the Appendix to these Regulations.  The Application Forms for the Final Review Phase for Minor and Major Site Plans are also available at the Town Offices.  
 
 (B).  The submission of a formal application shall include a final Site Development Plan, the recordable Mylar, copies of all specific plats; any required information set forth in Articles 3, 5, 6 and 9 of these Regulations for the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase, Design Review Phase and Final Review Phase.  
 
 (C).  The number of submission copies shall be governed by Section 9.02 for Minor Site Plans and Section 9.03 for Major Site Plans.  
 
 (D).  The application shall include the names and addresses of the applicant and all abutters as indicated in the Town of Auburn records not more than five (5) days before the day of filing.  Abutters shall also be identified on any plat submitted to the Board.  The applicant shall furnish the Planning Board Secretary with pre-printed address labels addressed to all persons requiring notice.   
  
 (E).  Formal acceptance of a completed Final Review Application shall occur at a duly noticed public hearing of the Planning Board, as set forth below.  
 
(2).  Costs:  The site plan applicant shall bear all costs of providing all necessary notices, design reviews, studies, reports, engineering review, traffic studies, environmental impact studies, and legal review required by the Planning Board, and will be required, at the discretion of the Board, to establish a separate escrow account to pay for such costs in accordance with Section 1.06 of these Regulations. 
 
(3).  Filing Deadlines:  The completed application, all application fees, notice fees and other fees required by these Regulations, shall be filed with the Planning Board Secretary, not less than twenty-one (21) days prior to the public meeting at which the application will be submitted to the Planning Board.   
 
(4).  Notice:  
 
 (A).  The applicant, abutters, holders of conservation, preservation, or agricultural preservation restrictions, any engineer, surveyor, architect, or soil scientist, whose professional seal appears on any plat submitted to the Planning Board shall be notified by certified mail of the date on which the application will be formally submitted to the Board.  Notice shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the submission at a public hearing.   
 
 (B).  Notice to the general public shall also be given at the same time by posting the mailed notice in two public places.   
 
 (C).  For any public hearing on the application, the same notice as required for notice of submission of the application shall be given.  If notice of public hearing has been included in the notice of submission or any prior notice, additional notice of that hearing is not required, nor shall additional notice be required of an adjourned session of a hearing with proper notice if the date, time and place of the adjourned session was made known at the prior hearing.   
 
 (D).  All costs of notice, whether mailed, posted or published, shall be paid in advance by the applicant.  Failure to pay such costs shall constitute valid grounds for the Planning Board to terminate further consideration and to disapprove the plat without a public hearing. 
 
 (E).  Notice of all public hearings shall comply with the requirements of N.H. R.S.A.676:4 and these Regulations, unless there is a denial for failure to submit required information, pay fees, or meet Planning Board deadlines. 
 
(5).  Acceptance at Public Hearing:  The completed Final Review application must be submitted to the Planning Board at a duly noticed public hearing. The Board will determine whether to accept the Final Review application as complete, or, alternatively, to deny the application as incomplete.  The Planning Board shall be the sole authority to determine whether an applicant has met all the necessary requirements as set forth in these Regulations and has submitted a complete application.  The Board shall look to these Regulations, the Application form, and the Checklist to determine whether or not an application is deemed to be sufficient for the Board to accept the application and proceed to the second stage of the Final Review Phase.  The Board may elect not to accept an application for commencement of the Final Review Phase for any of the following reasons: 
 
 
       (A)  The application is incomplete; 
 
  (B) The applicant has not paid all necessary fees; 
 
  (C)  Notice of the hearing has not been properly given; 
 
       (D)  The property(s) which is the subject of the application is  
 involved in litigation and the outcome of such litigation may materially affect the decision of the Planning Board; 
 
    (E)  The proposed site plan does not meet the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for the Town of Auburn.  The Board may accept the application if a variance or special exception request is pending before the Zoning Board of Adjustment and the Board has requested that the Planning Board act first on an application.  Any Planning Board action in such an instance shall be conditioned upon any necessary Board of Adjustment action. 
 
(6).  Receipt:  The Planning Board shall furnish the applicant with a printed receipt indicating the date on which the application was submitted to, and accepted by, the Planning Board.  The official submission date for all relevant time periods shall be the date recorded upon the receipt acknowledging acceptance of the completed application. 
3.09 Time Table for Final Review Phase  
(1). Filing Deadline:  A completed Final Review Phase Application shall be filed with the Planning Board secretary at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing at which the application will be considered for acceptance.  
 
(2).  Acceptance of Final Review Application: The Planning Board shall determine if a submitted Final Review Phase application is complete according to the Board’s Regulations, and shall vote upon acceptance of the completed application within thirty (30) days following the submission of the completed application to the Planning Board Secretary, or at the next regular meeting for which notice can be given in accord with the provisions of Section 3.10 and N.H. RSA 676:4, I(b).   
 
(3).   Rejection of Incomplete Applications: If the Board determines that a submitted application is incomplete, the Board shall provide written notice to the applicant of its determination, in accord with N.H. R.S.A. 676:3, and said determination shall describe the information, procedure or other requirement necessary for the application to be complete. 
 
(4).  Vote to Approve/Deny Application:   After the Board has voted to accept a Final Review Phase application as complete, the Board shall begin formal consideration of the application.  The Board shall act to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the application within sixty-five (65) days after submission and acceptance of the application, subject to extension or waiver as set forth below.  The Board may, in its discretion, vote to approve or deny a Final Review Phase application at the same public meeting during which it voted to accept the application.  
 
(5).  Selectmen’s Order: Upon failure of the board to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the application, the Selectmen shall, upon request of the applicant, immediately issue an order directing the Board to act on the application within thirty (30) days.  If the Planning Board does not act on the application within that thirty (30) day time period, then within forty (40) days of issuance of the order, the Selectmen shall certify on the application that the plat is approved pursuant to this paragraph, unless within those forty (40) days the Selectmen have identified in writing some specific subdivision regulation, site plan regulation, zoning or other ordinance provision with which the application does not comply.  Such certification, citing this paragraph, shall constitute final approval for all purposes, including filing and recording. 
 
(6).  Court Approval:  Failure of the Selectmen to issue an order to the Planning Board as described above, or to certify approval of the plat upon the Planning Board's failure to comply with the order, shall constitute grounds for the Rockingham County Superior Court, upon petition of the applicant, to issue an order approving the application, if the court determines that the proposal complies with existing subdivision regulations, site plan regulations, zoning or other applicable ordinances. 
 
(7).  Extension of Final Review Phase:  In those circumstances where the Planning Board deems that it requires an extension of time within which to approve or disapprove  an application, it may apply to the Selectmen for an extension of time for the Final Review Phase, not to exceed an additional ninety (90) days.   
 
(8).  Waiver of Final Review Phase Deadline:  An applicant may waive the requirements for Planning Board action within the time table set forth above, and may consent to any such extension as may be mutually agreeable between the Planning Board and the Applicant. 
3.10 Notice Requirements   
Whenever a public hearing is required by any provision of these Regulations, notice of same shall be provided as follows: 
(1).  Interested Parties:  The Planning Board shall notify the abutters, holders of conservation, preservation, or agricultural preservation restrictions, the applicant, and every engineer, architect, land surveyor, or soil scientist whose professional seal appears on any plan submitted to the Planning Board Secretary, by certified mail, of the date upon which a site plan application will be formally submitted to the Board. Notice shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the submission at a public hearing.  
 
(2).  General Public:  Notice to the general public shall also be given at the same time by posting the mailed notice in two public places.  
 
 (3).  Additional Hearings:  For any public hearing on the application, the same notice as required for notice of submission of the application shall be given. If notice of public hearing has been included in the notice of submission or any prior notice, additional notice of that hearing is not required. Additional notice shall not be required of an adjourned session of a hearing held with proper notice, if the date, time and place of the adjourned session was made known at the prior hearing. 
 
(4).  Applicant’s Responsibilities:  The Planning Board Secretary may require that the applicant provide preprinted labels addressed to all persons to whom mailed notice should be given. All costs of notice, whether mailed, posted or published, shall be paid in advance by the applicant. Failure to pay such costs shall constitute valid grounds for the Planning Board to terminate further consideration and to disapprove the plat without a public hearing. 
 
SECTION 4.00 – SITE PLAN APPROVAL PROCESS 
4.01 Written Decisions and Filing Requirement  
 
(1).  All decisions resulting from the Final Review process shall be in writing. Whenever the Board issues a written decision, the decision shall be placed on file in the Board’s Office and shall be made available for public inspection within five (5) business days after the decision is made.  
 
(2).  The Minutes of the Board shall also be posted in the Town Offices within five (5) business days after all meetings of the Board. All minutes shall be available for reasonable review, inspection and copying, (at a reasonable cost), by the public. 
 
(3).  In cases of disapproval, the Board shall provide the applicant with written reasons for the disapproval.  The written reasons for disapproval shall be recorded in the Minutes of the meeting at which the Board votes to disapprove the application and shall also be reflected in a written decision issued to the applicant.  In the event an application is denied as incomplete according to these Regulations, the Board shall notify the applicant in accord with N.H. R.S.A 676:3 in a written decision which sets forth the areas in which the application has been deemed to be incomplete. 
 
4.02 Standards for Final Review and Approval or Disapproval 
  (1).  General:  The Board may exercise its full statutory, common law, and regulatory discretion in approving or disapproving of a Site Plan Application. In reviewing a Site Plan Application, the Board shall consider the criteria generally outlined in N.H. R.S.A. 674:44, any applicable Site Plan Regulations, any applicable provisions of the Auburn Zoning Ordinance, state and federal law, as well as the provisions, policies and purposes of these Site Plan Regulations. 
  (2).  Reasons for Disapproval:  The Board may disapprove of an application based on one or more of the following findings: 
  
(A). The land is undesirable for development purposes because of topography, flooding potential, environmental hazards or adverse man-made development features;  
 
(B). The site plan would be premature insofar as it would involve danger or injury to health, public safety, or prosperity by reason of the lack of water supply, drainage, transportation, schools, fire and emergency services, or other public services, or would necessitate an expenditure of public funds for the supply of such services;  
 
(C). The site plan, as proposed, fails to provide for a safe and attractive development or expansion of use of the site; 
 
(D). The site plan as proposed involves danger or injury to health, safety, or prosperity by reason of: 
  
(i) Inadequate drainage or conditions conducive to flooding of the property or that of another; 
  (ii) Inadequate protection for the quality of groundwater; 
 
(iii) Undesirable elements of pollution such as noise, smoke, soot, particulates, or any other discharge into the environment which might prove harmful to persons, structures, or adjacent properties; or  
 
(iv) Inadequate provision for fire safety, prevention and control; 
  
(E). The site plan fails to provide for the harmonious and aesthetically pleasing development of the municipality and its environs, as required by these Regulations; 
 
(F). The site plan fails to provide open spaces and green spaces of adequate proportions;  
 
(G). The applicant has not secured all applicable approvals and/or permits from the Town, State or other governmental authority, or the applicant has been denied a necessary permit from the Town, State or other governmental authority; 
 
(H). The site plan fails to suitably locate streets of sufficient width to accommodate existing and prospective traffic; 
  
(I). The site plan fails to suitably locate streets of sufficient width to afford adequate light, air and access to buildings; 
  
(J). The site plan fails to suitably locate streets such that they are coordinated so as to compose a convenient system for transportation within the Town;  
 
(K). The land is of such a character that its use for building purposes presents a danger to health;  
 
(L). The proposed site plan tends to create conditions that are unfavorable for the health, safety, convenience and prosperity of the citizens of the Town of Auburn;  
 
(M). The site plan fails to meet any applicable requirement of the Town of Auburn Zoning Ordinance, Site Plan Regulations or Subdivision Regulations; 
 
(N). The same applicant has, at the time of submission, failed to meet the conditions of approval set by the Planning Board with regard to any other Site Plan or Subdivision Plan in the Town of Auburn;  
 
(O).  The proposed streets within the site plan are not coordinated with other existing or planned streets or with the Official Road Map of the Town of Auburn;    
(P). The proposed streets are not suitably located and/or of sufficient design to accommodate access of emergency equipment or to facilitate evacuation of the area;   
(Q). The proposed site plan would have a significant impact on the environment of the site or surrounding area in terms of water quality, storm drainage, air quality, wetland protection, or other adverse physical impact (such as erosion, sedimentation and similar impacts); 
 
(R). The application is incomplete, notice has not been properly given, fees have not been paid, escrowed sums or required bonds have not been satisfactorily tendered, requested materials necessary for review have not been submitted, or required reports or studies are incomplete;  
 
(S). Adequate utilities are not available nor provided for the proposed development; 
 
(T). The vehicular and pedestrian circulation onsite and on to the public streets will create safety hazards;  
 
(U). The development would significantly overcrowd the site and create an adverse affect on the surrounding area through lack of adequate provisions for parking, loading or other activities normally accessory to the development; 
 
(V). The development would be inconsistent with the type of adjoining development, and adequate screening or protection has not been provided to protect adjoining properties from the adverse effects of lighting, noise, odor or other factors; 
 
(W). The landscaping is insufficient with regard to the surrounding area and does not reflect the Board’ s concern to preserve the generally rural character of the Town;  
 
(X). The development would result in a loss of historic or natural features of the site that could be preserved through a modified plan; 
 
(Y). The development would result in adverse environmental effects to those on the property, or to those adjoining the property; 
  
(Z). Existing site characteristics such as soil conditions, lot configuration or access difficulties could not accommodate the proposed development; 
 
(AA). Adequate information necessary for the proper evaluation of the application has not been provided; 
 
 (BB). The proposed site plan is inconsistent with the policies, objectives, spirit or intent of these Regulations or the criteria outlined in N.H. R.S.A. 674:44. 
 
4.03  Approval with Conditions (Conditions Subsequent)
 
(1). Approval, with Conditions:  The Planning Board may grant approval, with conditions, of a site plan application, which approval shall become final without further public hearing, upon certification to the board by its designee, or based upon evidence submitted by the applicant, of satisfactory compliance with the conditions imposed.  Final approval of a site plan application may occur in the foregoing manner only when the conditions imposed are the following types: 
 
 (A).  Minor plan changes, whether or not imposed by the Board as a result of a public hearing, compliance with which is administrative and which does not involve discretionary judgment; 
 
 (B). Conditions which are in themselves administrative and which involve no discretionary judgment on the part of the Board; 
 
 (C). Conditions with regard to the applicant's possession of permits and approvals granted by other boards or agencies, or approvals granted by other boards or agencies. 
 
(2).  Time Limit:  In granting an approval, with conditions, the Board may specify in its action the time period within which such approval shall be considered valid.  If the conditions for approval have not been met by the deadline set by the Board, then the approval shall lapse. 
 
(A). Extension:  If there have been no amendments to the Auburn Zoning Ordinance, Site Plan or Subdivision Regulations which would make the application non-conforming, the Board may grant a reasonable extension, of not more than ninety (90) days, of the time period for completing the conditions of approval.  A request for an extension must be made by written application and shall require a public hearing with notice in accord with Section 3.10. 
 
(3). Deed Restrictions:.  Where conditions imposed by the Board will run with the land, the Board may require that deed restrictions be placed on the property in order to carry out the condition(s).   
 
 (4).   Compliance Hearing:   
 
(A). The Board shall specify whether a compliance hearing will be held as part of its action in issuing any approval with conditions.   
 
(B).  The Notice requirements of Section 3.10 shall apply to any such compliance hearing. 
 
(C).  Abutter’s Interests:  If the completed application is approved with one or more conditions which are to be fulfilled prior to final approval, and which may, in the opinion of the Board, pertain to abutting interests, the Board shall hold a compliance hearing to determine whether the Applicant has complied with the conditions before issuing a final approval.   
 
4.04 Conditional Approval (Conditions precedent).   
 
(1).  Conditional Approval:  The Planning Board may, by vote, grant a conditional approval of a site plan application.  A conditional approval is not a final approval, as it is contingent upon the completion of specific tasks or items required for final approval.  Until all the requirements for an approval have been met, a conditional approval does not constitute, nor shall it be construed as approval, either implied or granted of the site plan application.  A conditional approval does not bind the Planning Board to approval of the final site plan.  A conditional approval requires that the applicant return to appear before the Planning Board in a public hearing for final approval. 
 
(A).  Time Limit:  Upon the granting of a conditional approval, the applicant shall have ninety (90) days within which such approval shall be considered valid.  If the conditions for approval have not been met within ninety (90) days of the date that the Board voted to grant the conditional approval, then the approval shall lapse. 
 
(B).  Extension:  If there have been no amendments to the Auburn Zoning Ordinance, Site Plan or Subdivision Regulations which would make the application non-conforming, the Board may grant a reasonable extension of the time period for completing the conditions of approval, not to exceed an additional ninety (90) days per extension.   A request for an extension must be made by written application and shall require a public hearing with notice in accord with Section 3.10. 
4.05 Recording of Approved Site Plan and Time Period for Submitting Final As-Built Mylar Plan 
 (1).  Site Plan Recording Required before Construction:  An approved Site Plan shall be recorded with the Registry of Deeds of Rockingham County prior to any site activity, construction or development of the site, and/or prior to the issuance of any building permits for erection of a structure in the proposed site plan. All plans shall be recorded by the Planning Board’s designee. No plan shall be filed or recorded until it has been approved and endorsed by the Planning Board Chairperson, or his or her designee, in writing on the plan.  
 
(2).  As-Built Plans Required:  
(A).  Prior to the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy, “As-Built” plan(s) must be provided to the Town for review and approval.  These plans must be generated with data collected from an on-site survey of the site improvements.  The plan must be stamped and signed by the design engineer and the licensed land surveyor responsible for the collected field survey data.  The approved and “as-built” elevations, locations, and inverts of all improvements must be included on the plan.  
(B).  If the site was constructed per the approved plans and no changes were made, the applicant may request a waiver to this requirement from the Planning Board, upon recommendation of the Town’s Consulting Engineer or the Building Inspector.  Prior to the approval of this waiver request, the Town’s Consulting Engineer shall visit the site and provide a written recommendation on the basis of the accuracy of the site improvements, in relation to the approved plans. 
 
(3).  Recording of As-Built Plan:  The Planning Board’s designee shall record the approved as-built plan with the Registry of Deeds for Rockingham County, and shall notify the Board in writing of the Plan Number and filing date within thirty (30) days of signing. 
  
(4).  Final As-Built Mylar:  The applicant shall provide a final as-built Mylar plan for signature by the Chairman of the Planning Board within one (1) year of approval by the Board or, where applicable, within one year of meeting any conditions of approval.  
 
4.06   Abandonment and Re-Submission:  A plan shall be considered to have been abandoned by the applicant if the applicant has not complied with the bond or escrow requirements, or any other conditions of approval established by the Board, within ninety (90) days, plus any additional extension of time granted by the Board. An abandoned plan shall require a complete new submission for new consideration by the Board.  
SECTION 5.00 – GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
 5.01 Compliance with Regulations  
 (1).  Approval Required Prior to Construction:  No site improvements or utility construction shall be started until a plan, prepared in accordance with the requirements of these Regulations, has been approved by the Board, recorded at the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds, and other required permits have been issued. No building permit shall be issued until a plan has been approved by the Board and any required performance guarantee is in place.  
  
(2).  Other Regulations: The applicant shall be familiar with all State statutes, regulations, Town ordinances and regulations and will be expected to follow the standards set forth in related sections of the Town of Auburn Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Regulations 
 
5.02 Conformity to Zoning Ordinance and Master Plan 
 
All Site Plans shall conform to the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Auburn and to the Site Plan  regulations herewith prescribed; and they shall be guided in their design by any comprehensive plans the Planning Board may have adopted covering the area involved, before receiving final approval. 
 
5.03 Character of Land for Improvement  
 All land to be improved shall be, in the judgment of the Board, of such a character that it can be used for building purposes without danger to the environment or to public health or safety. Land subject to periodic flooding, poor drainage, hazardous environmental contamination or other hazardous conditions, shall not ordinarily be improved. Land with inadequate capacity for sanitary sewage disposal shall not be acceptable unless connected to public sewers.   
Before any construction is commenced on any land which has been significantly altered, special attention shall be given to the subsurface soil conditions and a determination shall be made by the applicant’s engineer that those conditions are acceptable for the construction proposed.  
 The Planning Board, in its sole discretion, may order that the applicant conduct environmental site assessments sufficient to demonstrate that development on a particular parcel does not present a public health or safety hazard to individuals, property or the environment.  
5.04 Preservation of Existing Features  
(1).  Existing features which would add value to the site such as trees, watercourses, waterfalls, brooks, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved by the site plan to the greatest extent possible. 
  
(2).  Land shall be improved in reasonable conformity to existing topography in order to minimize grading, cutting and filling, and in order to retain the natural contours, limit storm water run off and conserve the natural cover and soil. 
 
(3).  The smallest practical area of land should be disturbed at any one time during development. When land is disturbed during development, the disturbance should be kept to the shortest practical period of time. Land should not be left disturbed during the winter months. Where necessary, temporary vegetation or mulching and structural measures may be required by the Town to protect areas disturbed during the development. 
 
5.05 Scattered or Premature Development
  
(1).  Purposes:  The purpose of this section is to provide against such scattered or premature development of land as would involve danger or injury to health, safety, or prosperity by reason of the lack of water supply, drainage, transportation, schools, fire department, or other public services, or necessitate an excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of such services. Therefore, in order to grant approval, in appropriate cases the Planning Board may require an applicant to show: 
  
(A). Through studies approved by the Planning Board and conducted at the expense of the applicant, that the type and/or scope of the proposed development is neither scattered nor premature; and/or 
  
(B). Through both on and offsite improvements made at the expense of the applicant, that the scattered or premature nature of the development is overcome by remedial action of the applicant. 
  
(2).  Problems:  The following items shall be considered by the Planning Board in determining whether the proposed development is scattered or premature:  
  
(A). In the case of residential development, the distance from nearest elementary school; 
  
(B). In the case of residential development, the capacity of the school system and effect on school bus transportation; 
 
(C). Adequacy of access street(s) and/or sidewalk(s); 
 
(D). Adequacy of water supply for onsite use and fire fighting purposes; 
 
(E). Potential health problems due to onsite sewage systems and water supply;  
 
(F). Potential fire protection problems due to location and/or special conditions relative to type of use;  
 
(G). Potential special policing problems; 
 
(H). Potential drainage problems both on the site and downstream; 
 
(I). Excessive expenditure of public funds; and/or 
 
(J). Other potential problems within the meaning or the purpose of this section, as stated above. 
 
(3).  Professional Studies:  The Planning Board may require the applicant to have studies made under guidelines established by the Planning Board to determine the effect that the proposed development may have on any of the problems caused by scattered and/or premature development which are listed above in Section 5.05(2). 
  
(4).  On and Off Site Improvements:  If it is determined by the Planning Board that the proposed development is scattered or premature unless special on and off site improvements are made, the Planning Board may require the applicant to make said improvements prior to, or as condition of, approval of the development. These improvements may consist of, but are not limited to, the following: 
  
(A). Improve any access street to the development to the appropriate street standards if such access would otherwise be inadequate, provided the Town owns or provides the right-of-way; 
  
(B). Extend the public water and/or sewer system(s); 
  
(C). Build or reconstruct sidewalks on any access streets where potential increase in pedestrian traffic will occur, provided the Town owns or provides the right-of-way;  
 
(D). Construct static water supplies (fire ponds) with dry hydrants for fire protection; and/or 
  
(E). Provide traffic signals at intersections and/or rebuild intersection(s) in the immediate area of the proposed development if such intersection(s) would otherwise be inadequate, provided the Town owns or provides the right-of-way. 
  5.06 Erosion Control 
  The applicant shall provide adequate control of stormwater, erosion and sedimentation control, of both a temporary and permanent nature, in accordance with the provisions of Article 11, during all phases of clearing, grading and construction. 
  5.07 Reserved Strips 
  No privately owned reserved strip, except an open space area, shall be permitted which controls access to any part of the development, or to any other parcel of land from any street, or from any land dedicated to public use, or which may be so dedicated. 
  
SECTION 6.00 – GENERAL SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
 
6.01 Regulatory Approvals  
 The Auburn Planning Board shall require written copies of decisions relative to the proposed site improvements made by other land use regulatory agencies, including but not limited to: the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services; the New Hampshire Water Resources Board; the Rockingham County Soil Conservation District; the Auburn Zoning Board of Adjustment; and, any other state, federal, municipal, or county agency.  
 
6.02 Soil Tests  
 Where private individual septic systems are proposed, the applicant shall perform soil tests and meet the minimum specifications and have the written approval of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services, and the Town of Auburn, if a local sanitary code exists regulating on-site wastewater systems. 
  6.03 Driveway Access  
Any driveway access shall be approved by the New Hampshire Department of Transportation or the Town of Auburn, as may be applicable  Such written approval shall be provided to the Board and the location shall be shown on the plan. 
6.04 Assurances From Applicant  
 If land is to be dedicated for public use, a written acknowledgment shall be submitted indicating the applicant’s responsibility for maintenance, and the assumption by the applicant of liability for injuries and damages that may occur on any such land, until such land has been legally accepted by the Town. 
  6.05 Acceptance of Dedication Offers 
 
Acceptance of formal offers of dedication of streets, public areas, easements, and parks shall be by ordinance of the Town. The approval by the Planning Board of a development plan shall not be deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance by the Board of Selectmen or the Town of any street, right-of-way, easement or park shown on said plan. The Planning Board may require said plan to be endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. 
  6.06 Certification of Utilities/Services:  
 
Before any plan is approved by the Board, the applicant shall certify that all arrangements have been made with the appropriate governmental agencies, private utilities and others, including Town departments, to provide and install in the manner customary in the Town, all usual and necessary utilities and service, unless otherwise exempted by the Planning Board. 
   
 
ARTICLE 7.00 -- CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS 
 
7.01 On-site Improvements 
 
(1).  Costs:
 All costs of required improvements shall be borne by the applicant unless specifically required by the Planning Board or regulation to be borne by others. 
 
(2). Applicant’s Responsibility for Improvements:  The applicant is responsible for the satisfactory installation of all required improvements and maintenance of these improvements in a condition satisfactory to the Town, without any cost to the Town, unless and until the improvements are accepted by the Town.  
 
(3).  Site Improvement Agreement: 
 
The Board may require that the Applicant enter into a Site Improvement Agreement to relate to the timing of public improvements to private development, and to minimize hardships and other adverse effects which might arise from unanticipated delays in completion of all required improvements. Failure to comply with the terms of such an agreement may be considered as failure on the part of the applicant to provide the required improvements, and may be considered adequate grounds for action against the applicant’ s bond or other security in order to guarantee the proper completion of the required improvements.  
 
(4).  Completion and Dedication Required:  
 All applicants shall be required to complete, in accordance with the Planning Board’s decision, and to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer and Board of Selectmen, all the street, sanitary, and other improvements of the Site Plan as required in these Regulations, specified in the final plat and construction plans of Articles 5 and 6 of these Regulations, and as approved by the Planning Board, and to dedicate same to the Town of Auburn, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the property and public improvements thus dedicated.  
(5).  Temporary Improvements:  The applicant shall build and pay for all costs of temporary improvements required by the Planning Board and shall maintain the same for a period specified by the Planning Board. Prior to construction of any temporary facility or improvement, the developer shall file with the Auburn Board of Selectmen a separate security for temporary facilities, which shall insure that the temporary facilities will be properly constructed, maintained, and removed.  
(6).  Construction Monitoring:  The Planning Board shall provide for the monitoring of required improvements during their construction. The Planning Board may delegate the responsibility for such monitoring to the Town Engineer, Consultant, Building Inspector or Town Road Agent, as the Planning Board sees fit. If, upon inspection, it is determined that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the Planning Board’s construction standards and specifications, the applicant shall be responsible for completing or correcting the improvements.  
 
(7).  Joint and Several Liability:  Wherever the cost of improvements is covered by a bond or other security, the applicant and the bonding company shall be jointly and severally liable for completing the improvements according to the specifications approved by the Planning Board and/or required by these Regulations. 
(8). Maintenance of Improvements:  The applicant shall be required to maintain all improvements to and on the developed site and provide for snow removal on streets, until acceptance of said improvements by the Town. The Town may give twelve (12) hours notice of its intent to plow a street or effect emergency repairs and charge same to said applicant, and if it is not completed by the applicant, may plow the street or effectuate emergency repairs, charging the same to the applicant or to the applicant’s bond, as the Town sees fit. 
7.02 Off-site Improvements  
(1).  Approval of any site plan shall be conditioned upon the applicant bearing the entire cost of designing and installing such offsite improvements as bear a rational relationship to the needs created by the site plan and the benefits which will be conferred upon the site by the improvements.  
 
(2).  Where offsite improvements will be required solely because of the existence of the site plan, yet will benefit other land or extend beyond the site, apportionment of the expenses between the Town, the applicant, and, where appropriate, other applicants, shall be made by the Planning Board.  Such apportionment shall be based, in part, upon a consideration of:  
 
(A). The standard which the Town presently applies to the construction and maintenance of other offsite improvements; 
 
(B). The use which it can be expected will be made of the offsite improvements by the site, its residents or other applicants;  
 
(C). The use which it can be expected that other residents of the Town will make of the off-site improvements; and 
 
(D). The Town budget and Capital Improvements Plan for such improvements.  
 
(3).  Should the Board decide that the Town’s proportionate share of the cost of any offsite improvements could be met only by an excessive expenditure of Town funds, it may either refuse to approve the application or approve the application on the condition that the applicant volunteer to pay the Town’s share as outlined in Section 7.02(2). Such decision shall be forwarded to the applicant in writing. In case of disapproval, the reasons for such action shall be set forth in a written decision to the applicant and shall be adequately stated upon the records of the Planning Board. 
7.03 Inspection of Improvements
At least five (5) days prior to commencing construction of any required improvements, the applicant shall pay to the Town the inspection fee required by the Board, and shall notify the Secretary of the Board in writing of the time when the applicant proposes to commence construction of such improvements, so that the Board may have the Town Engineer inspect such improvements to assure that all standards, specifications, and requirements shall be met during the construction of required improvements and utilities required by the Planning Board.  
 
7.04 Proper Installation of Improvements
  If the Town Engineer shall find, upon inspection of the improvements performed before the expiration date of any bond or escrow agreement, that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with approved plans and specifications filed by the applicant or any conditions of Planning Board approval, he or she shall so report to the Board of Selectmen and Planning Board. The Board of Selectmen shall then notify the applicant and, if necessary, the bonding company or escrow agent, and take all necessary steps to preserve the Town’s rights under the performance guarantee or escrow agreement. No plan shall be approved by the Planning Board as long as the applicant is in default on a previously approved plan. This action shall be without prejudice to any other enforcement action available to the Town. 
  7.05 Acceptance of Streets, Utilities, Other Improvements and Public Land 
  Before acceptance by the Town of any street, utility system or other improvement, the applicant shall provide a performance guarantee or escrow agreement, approved as to form by the Town Attorney, which shall be in the amount of at least ten (10%) percent of the cost of such improvement, and for a period of two (2) years, to be payable to the Town if the applicant does not correct any deficiency found, or repair damage to any such improvement, during this period.  
 7.06 Change of Design and Improvements  
 If at any time before or during the construction of the required improvements, it is demonstrated that unforeseen conditions make it necessary or preferable to modify the location or design of such required improvements, the Board may authorize changes, provided these changes are within the spirit and intent of the Board’s approval, and do not extend to the modification or substantial alteration of the function of any improvements required by the Board. After a duly notified public hearing, the Board shall issue an authorization under this section in writing. Any authorized change shall be included on the official Site Plan, and notice of the authorized change shall be transmitted to the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds. No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made in any Site Plan after approval has been given by the Board and endorsed in writing on the plan, except as herein provided. In the event that any such plan is recorded without complying with this requirement, the same shall be considered null and void, the Board shall institute proceedings to have the plan stricken from the records of Rockingham County Registry of Deeds, and may also revoke the site plan approval. 
  
7.07 Soil Test Pits, Boring and Percolation Test Pits  
 (1).  Soil borings on proposed roadways and parking fields shall be made at one hundred fifty (150) foot intervals. Borings shall be made for every twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet of affected land area.  
 (2).  No soil test pits or borings, or percolation test pits, shall be conducted without at least ten (10) days prior notification of the Planning Board and Building Inspector as to their date and location within the proposed site plan. The soil test pits, borings or percolation test pits shall be observed by the Building Inspector at a time convenient to his or her schedule. 
 
SECTION 8.00 - PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES 
 
8.01 Performance Guarantee Required 
 
The Planning Board shall require that the applicant post a performance bond, escrow account, direct cash bond, cash security or other satisfactory security at the time of application for final plat approval.  The amount of the performance guarantee shall be calculated by using the Table set forth in the Appendix, after consultation with the Town Engineer and approval by the Planning Board of an amount sufficient to secure to the Town of Auburn, the satisfactory construction, installation, and dedication of the required improvements delineated in the construction plans or required by these Regulations, without cost to the Town. The Planning Board may require that prior to construction of any temporary facility or improvement, the developer shall post a separate suitable performance guarantee pertaining to the completion of temporary facilities or improvements.  Final approval of a plan will not be recorded at the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds until the applicant has either completed all of the improvements specified in the plan or filed a performance guarantee in compliance with the requirements of these Regulations. 
 
8.02 Form   
 
The performance guarantee shall comply with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to the Planning Board and its Attorney as to form, sufficiency, and manner of execution. Direct cash bonds will be deposited by the Board of Selectmen in an interest- bearing savings account. The period within which required improvements must be completed shall be specified by the Planning Board in the resolution approving the final site plan, shall be incorporated in the performance guarantee, and shall not in any event exceed two (2) years from the date of final plan approval.  Such performance guarantee shall also be approved by the Board of Selectmen as to the amount, surety and conditions satisfactory to the Board of Selectmen. All performance guarantees shall include a self-calling provision, so that the security is automatically called in the event of non-performance by the applicant.  The Planning Board may, upon proof of difficulty, and not neglect, recommend to the Board of Selectmen extension of the completion date set forth in such performance guarantee for a maximum period of one (1) additional year.   
 
8.03 Renewal  
 
All performance guarantees shall contain an automatic renewal clause. Renewal shall be the responsibility of the applicant and the performance guarantee must remain effective until the applicant has dedicated to the Town of Auburn all improvements specified in the final plan, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances. 
 
8.04 Failure to Complete Improvements  
 
When a performance guarantee has been posted and required improvements have not been installed within the terms and conditions of subdivision approval, the Board of Selectmen may thereupon declare the performance guarantee to be in default, and require that all improvements be installed regardless of the extent of the building development at the time the performance guarantee is declared to be in default. 
 
8.05    Release or Reduction of Performance Guarantee   
 
(1).  Certificate of Satisfactory Completion:  The Board of Selectmen and Planning Board will not accept dedication of required improvements, nor release nor reduce a performance bond, until the Town Engineer has submitted a certificate stating that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed, and until the applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the Town Engineer, through submission of detailed "as built" survey plan of the site plan, indicating locations, dimensions, materials, and other information required by the Planning Board or Town Engineer, that the layout of the line and grade of all public improvements and lot monuments is in accordance with the final plan and construction plans for the site, that a title insurance policy has been furnished to and approved by the Planning Board, that all improvements are completed and ready for dedication to the Town of Auburn and are free and clear of any and all liens and encumbrances.  Upon such approval and recommendation, the Town may thereafter accept the improvements for dedication in accordance with the established procedure. 
 
(2).  Reduction of  Performance Guarantee:  A  performance guarantee may be reduced upon actual dedication of public improvements and then only to the ratio that the public improvement dedicated bears to the total public improvements for the subdivision.  In no event shall a performance guarantee be reduced below twenty-five percent (25%) of the principal amount, prior to issuance of the Certificate of Satisfactory Completion. 
 
(3).  Town’s Use of the Performance Guarantee: If the Board finds that the developer has not installed improvements satisfactorily, has not completed those improvements within the approved time for completion, or has not maintained those improvements in a satisfactory condition, the Board may provide notice to the developer and may take such further action or make such use of the performance guarantee as may be appropriate in the judgment of the Board to complete the improvements. 
 
SECTION 9.00 – SPECIFIC PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS 
  9.01 General Site Development Plan Requirements
  All Site Development Plans submitted to the Planning Board shall be drawn to a convenient scale of not more than fifty (50) feet to the inch, and the sheets shall be numbered in sequence if more than one (1) sheet is used. No sheet shall be larger than twenty-two by thirty-four (22 x 34) inches, and shall show or be accompanied by the pertinent information set forth in this section. All site plans and related plans must be prepared by a land surveyor licensed in New Hampshire or a Professional Engineer registered in New Hampshire. Drafting quality shall be acceptable for recording at the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds. 
  9.02 Minor Site Plan Submission 
  Five (5) copies of all plans, the Application, and accompanying drawings or diagrams shall be submitted with a Minor Site Plan. Unless waived by the Planning Board, the applicant shall submit the following plans: a plan which shows the existing features and conditions; a plan which shows the proposed changes and all remaining features and conditions; and all construction plans.  
 9.03 Major Site Plan Submission
  Six (6) copies of all plans, the Application, and accompanying drawings or diagrams shall be submitted with a Major Site Plan. Unless waived by the Planning Board, the applicant shall submit the following plans: a plan which shows the existing features and conditions; a plan which shows the proposed changes and all remaining features and conditions; and all construction plans. 
  
9.04 Drafting and Submission Requirements for Both Minor and Major Site Plans - Existing Features Plan 
  Every proposed site plan, whether Major or Minor, shall include a plan of land which meets the following drafting requirements and which depicts the following existing features: 
  
(1). Name and address, including telephone number, of legal owner(s) owning ten (10%) percent or more of the property, and citation of last instrument conveying title to each parcel of property, giving grantor, grantee, date, and land records reference; 
  
(2). Location of site, tax map and lot number, names and addresses of all abutting property owners and landowners within two hundred (200) feet of the site; 
  
(3). Name, address, and telephone number of applicant, if different from owner;  
 
(4). Name, address and telephone number of person or firm preparing the plan, and the name, address, and telephone number of person or firm preparing other data and information if different from the preparer of the plan; 
  
(5). North arrow at top of sheet, bar scale in feet, date, area of site revision box; 
 
(6).  Citation of any existing legal rights-of-way or easements affecting the property; 
  
(7).  Boundary lines of the area included in the site, including angles or bearings of the  lines, dimensions and the lot area, and note regarding the source of such information; 
  
(8). Existing grades and topographic contours at intervals not exceeding two (2) feet intervals with spot elevations where the grade is less than five (5%) percent,  otherwise not exceeding five (5) foot intervals, with existing contours to be shown as dashed lines; 
 
(9). Location and widths of adjacent streets and interior streets and drives within two hundred (200) feet; 
 
(10). The shape, size, height and location of existing structures located on or within two hundred (200) feet of the site; 
  
(11). Natural features such as streams, marshes, lakes, or ponds, water courses, water bodies, wetlands, one hundred (100) year flood plains, ledges and boulders, areas with slopes over twenty-five percent (25%) and existing wooded areas;  
 
(12). Percolation test locations and results, when septic system is contemplated; 
 
(13). Location, sizes, elevation, and slopes of existing sewers, water mains, culverts and other underground structures, and location and size of all other public and private  utilities within the site and one hundred feet (100) in all directions around the site; 
  
(14). Zoning district(s) and boundaries; and. 
  
(15). A locus map drawn at town tax map scale, depicting streets and surrounding lots with lot numbers.  
 
9.05 Other Items for Submittal for Both Minor and Major Site Plan Applications – Existing Features 
 
In addition to the Existing Features Plan required by Section 9.04, the following other items shall be submitted for both Major and Minor site plans: 
  
(1). Copies of existing covenants on the property, if any; and 
 
(2). Citations of easements or rights-of-way (ROW). 
  
9.06 Additional Drafting and Submission Requirements for Major Site Plans – Existing Features 
  Major Site Plans shall meet the following additional drafting requirements and shall submit the following additional information pertaining to existing features: 
 
(1). Soil types and approximate soils boundaries, based upon Soil Conservation Service data; 
 
(2). Whenever the site plan covers only part of an applicant’s contiguous holdings, the applicant shall submit, at the scale of not more than two hundred (200) feet to the inch, a supplemental sketch of the proposed development area and the perimeter boundaries of the entire contiguous holdings of the applicant; 
  
(3). A vicinity map showing streets and other general development of the surrounding area, and all zoning district lines on and adjacent to property with zones properly designated; and  
 
(4). Photographs, to be minimum of 4” x 6”, with camera locations and direction of view, with minimum views of both up and down frontage road, plus view from frontage road into lot, and views from interior of lot towards frontage road. 
 
9.07 Drafting and Submission Requirements for Both Major and Minor Site Plans – Proposed Changes 
  Every proposed site plan, whether Major or Minor shall include a plan of land which meets the following drafting requirements and which depicts the following proposed changes: 
  
(1). Proposed grades, drainage systems, structures and topographic contours at two (2) foot intervals with spot elevations where the grade is less than five (5%) percent, otherwise not exceeding a five (5) foot contour interval; 
  
(2). The shape, size, height and location of the proposed structures including expansion of the existing buildings; 
 
(3). Proposed streets, driveways, parking spaces, sidewalks, curbs with indication of direction of travel for one way streets and drives, dimensions, inside radii of curves, and total number of parking spaces; 
  
(4). The size and location of all proposed public and private utilities; 
  
(5). The location, type and size of all proposed landscaping and screening, and identification of a buffer zone of dense planting where the site abuts a zone boundary; 
  
(6). Exterior lighting plan and proposed signs to be located on the site; 
 
(7). A storm drainage plan, including plans for retention and slow release of stormwater, where necessary, and plans for snow removal and storage; 
  
(8). A circulation plan of the interior of the lot showing provisions for truck, auto and pedestrian circulation; 
  
(9). An access plan showing means of access to the site and proposed changes to existing public streets, including any traffic control devices necessary in conjunction with the site development plan, increases and decreases in traffic volume and patterns generated by the development, and sight distances at the point of access on to Town roads; 
  
(10). Offset dimension between all major structures and property line; and 
 
(11). Public or common land. 
  9.08 Other Items for Submittal for Minor and Major Site Plans 
 The following other items shall be submitted for both Major and Minor site plans:  
 
(1). Engineering calculations used to determine drainage requirements based upon a rainstorm with a return frequency of twenty-five (25) years and a duration of twenty (20) minutes;  
 
(2). Legal descriptions or easements, condominium association documents; and  
 
(3). Such additional information as the Board deems necessary in order to assure the health and safety of the citizens of Auburn and to apply the Regulations contained herein. 
  
9.09 Additional Drafting and Submission Requirements: Major Site Plans -- Proposed Changes 
  Major Site Plans shall meet the following additional drafting requirements and shall submit the following additional information pertaining to proposed changes: 
  
(1). A community facilities impact study consisting of a written description of the physical and economic impact of the proposed development in relation to facilities existing in the town at the time of development, including but not limited to roads, schools, public buildings, fire, police, sewer and water; 
  
(2). An environmental impact statement or analysis; and 
 
(3). Agreement for any proposed land conveyance to the Town. 
  9.10 Construction Plan Requirements for Both Major and Minor Site Plans  
 (1). Construction Plans:  Construction plans shall be prepared showing all required improvements for both Major and Minor site plans. Plan sheets shall be of the same size as the Site Development Plans, The following shall be shown: 
 
(A). Plans and construction details of all areas to be disturbed for construction of streets, drives, parking lots, sidewalks, drainage and structures, sewers, water and electric lines, erosion and sediment control structures and other areas to be disturbed for the construction of improvements; and  
 
(B). Erosion and sediment control plans and other information indicating how increased runoff, sedimentation, and erosion shall be controlled during and after construction of required improvements.  
 (2).  Architectural Plans:  Architectural Plans shall be prepared and submitted in duplicate, one copy for review by the Auburn Volunteer Fire Department, for all proposed buildings or building expansions. These shall include plans and elevation views of proposed improvements, with information on building and construction materials and operations within the building. For applications which include land contained within the Village Center District, as described in the Auburn Zoning Ordinance, architectural plans must include all information required by the applicable provisions of the Auburn Zoning Ordinance pertaining to architectural requirements.  The applicant shall pay the fee for this review. No building permit shall be issued until this review is completed.  
 9.11 Construction Plans: Additional Submission Requirements for Major Site Plans 
  The following additional items shall be submitted with the construction plans for a Major Site Plan Application: 
  
(1). Profiles of all proposed streets, driveways, sewers and drainage structures, which shall show existing and proposed elevations along the center lines of all proposed improvements and proposed inverts, grades, slopes and construction materials, for all structures, piping and other materials, Profiles shall be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet horizontal scale and one (1) inch equals five (5) feet vertical scale; 
  
(2). Cross-sections of all proposed streets and driveways at one hundred (100) foot stations and at all catch basins or culverts showing the streets, driveways, etc., and all areas to be disturbed for the construction showing all existing grades, proposed subgrades, proposed final grades and all utilities and other structures, which cross- sections shall be drawn to a convenient scale of not less than one (1) inch equals ten (10) feet, and both the horizontal and vertical scales shall be the same; and  
 
(3). Landscaping Plan for entire site, including details for screening devices. 
 9.12 Other Requirements for Major Site Plans 
 
Where applicable to a specific Major Site Plan development, the following are required, in form as approved by the Town Attorney and/or Engineer, prior to final approval of the development plan, the cost of which will  be borne by the Applicant: 
 
(1). Agreement to convey to the Town land to be used for streets and other public purposes, with transfer of title to such interests to be effective on such date as the Town accepts such land; 
  (2). Easements and rights-of-way over property to remain in private ownership; 
  
(3). A copy of proposed covenants or deed restrictions as may be intended to apply to the property in whole or in part; 
 
(4). Rights to drain on to or across other property, whether public or private, including a street; 
 
(5). A copy of the Condominium Association documents and the Declaration establishing the homeowners association or other such form of ownership, such documents to include a clear indication of the owner’s maintenance responsibility for all facilities and service functions, including, but not limited to, items such as animal control, snow removal, septic systems, water systems, landscaping, exterior of buildings, and road maintenance. 
   
 
 
 SECTION 10.00 - GENERAL STANDARDS 
 10.01 General Standards 
  In considering applications for site plan approval, the Planning Board shall adhere to and be guided by the standards hereinafter set forth. These standards shall be considered the minimum standards and shall be modified by the Board only when in its opinion specific circumstances surrounding a development, or the condition of the site, indicate that such modification will properly implement the purpose and intent of the Town of Auburn Master Plan, the Town of Auburn Zoning Ordinance, the Town of Auburn Subdivision Regulations, and these Regulations. 
  10.02 Specifications for Required Improvements 
 
All required improvements shall be constructed or installed in accordance with good engineering design practice; in accordance with Town standards, which may be obtained from the Town Engineer, and in accordance with these regulations. 
 10.03 Traffic Control and Access  
 Traffic circulation and access shall be designed to ensure the safety of vehicles and pedestrians according to AASHTO standards. Necessary improvements to existing streets may include increased pavement, increased road width, signal devices, turning lanes, modifying ditch lines, etc. Required modifications will be based on the results of traffic studies. All drives and accesses shall be a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet from an intersection of existing or proposed roadways.  
 10.04 Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control 
  Site Plans shall include plans for managing stormwater and controlling erosion and sedimentation as required in Section 11.00 Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control. 
  10.05  Street Layout and Design 
 
Street layout and design shall be in accord with the Street Layout and Design standards set forth in Section 9.04 of the Town of Auburn Subdivision Regulations. 
  10.06 Street Construction 
  All street construction shall be in accord with the Street Construction requirements set forth in Section 9.10 of the Town of Auburn Subdivision Regulations. 
 
 
 
 
10.07 Parking and Loading Areas
 
(1). New commercial and industrial development shall provide ample parking and loading spaces on the premises to accommodate vehicles of employees and customers.  Parking spaces shall be designed so as to require no backing or maneuvering in a public street.  Parking aisles shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet in width.  Parking spaces shall meet the following dimensional requirements: 
 
(A). Grocery markets, building supply stores or warehouses and any other commercial application where the Board may assume the use of carts or carriages to move goods to parked vehicles:   
 Dimensions shall be 10' wide by 22' long 
(B).  Professional park/office building or similar use where the Board may assume that the majority of the vehicles are employees and the cycling parking rate is low: 
 Dimensions shall be 9' wide by 18' long 
(C).  Retail or similar use where the Board may assume a high cycling parking rate: 
 Dimensions shall be 10' wide by 20' long 
(D).  Within a retail use, employee parking that is physically separated and properly signed as "employee parking only" where the Board may assume a low cycling parking rate: 
 Dimensions shall be 9' wide by 18' long 
(E). 10% of the required parking spaces may be designated as “compact car” spaces. 
 Dimensions shall be 8’-6” wide by 16’ long. 
(F).  Residential site plans: 
 Dimensions shall be 10' wide by 20' long 
 
(2). No required off-street parking area shall be used as an off-street loading area. 
 
(3). The parking spaces at proposed fueling stations must be designed to not block or conflict with the proposed circulation around the fuel pumps. 
 
(4). Loading areas shall be located so that they are not visible from adjacent major roadway(s).  All loading areas shall be paved and designed to withstand the service and parking of loaded tractor-trailer rigs.  All loading dock areas shall be fronted with a concrete slab for vehicles. 
 
(5). Parking for physically handicapped persons shall be provided on every site and shall be in addition to the following parking requirements.  At a minimum, five percent (5%) of all spaces, but not less than 1 space per use, shall be provided and specifically designated.  All such spaces shall be designed in accord with the Americans with Disabilities Act (A.D.A.) standards for the design of handicapped parking spaces. 
 
(6). The following schedule of required off-street parking spaces shall be the minimum required under these regulations: 
 
  Use     Number of Parking Spaces Required  
 
  (A). Dwelling Unit    3 per unit  
 
  (B). Rooming & Boarding Houses  1 per each sleeping room  
 
  (C). Hotel, motel and tourist homes  1 per guest room, plus 1 per employee, plus 1 for each 200 square feet of public meeting room and restaurant space  
 
  (D). Hospital or Nursing Home   1 per bed at design capacity, plus 1 per employee 
 
 (E). Places of Public Assembly   1 per 2 seats in principal assembly   room   
 
  (F). Bowling Alleys    2 per alley, plus 1 per 
        employee 
 
   (G). Eating & Drinking Establishments  1 per 3 seats, plus 1 per 
           employee   
 
  (H). Drive-In Establishment   1 per 50 square feet of floor space, plus 1 per employee 
 
  (I). Service Station/Gasoline Station  2 per service bay, plus 1 per employee, plus 1 per 200 square feet of sales area   
 
  (J). Retail Trade and Personal Services  1 per 200 square feet of sales area, plus 1 per employee  
 
  (K). Wholesale Trade and Warehousing  1 per employee, plus 1 per 1,000 square feet of floor space 
 
  (L). Office Use     1 per 400 square feet of gross floor space, plus 1 per employee 
 
  (M). Industrial Use    1.5 per employee at highest expected employee occupancy 
 
  (N). Home Occupation    1 per employee, plus dwelling unit requirements 
 
Where multiple uses are proposed on a site, the required parking shall be the aggregate of each use. 
 
10.08 Construction of Driveways and Parking Lots 
 
(1). Driveways shall not interrupt the natural or constructed roadway ditch lines and/or drainage flow. 
 
(2) The use of porous pavement is encouraged on private residential and commercial site plans. 


  
(3). Driveways shall slope away from the finish roadway elevation at a grade of 2% for seventy (70) feet from the edge of pavement. 
 
(4). Driveway culverts shall be designed to adequately handle the anticipated storm water flows within the ditch lines and shall in no case be less than twelve (12) inches in diameter and thirty (30) feet long. 
 
(5). All driveway culverts shall be constructed with inlet and outlet flares or head walls. 
 
(6). Minimum driveway width shall be twenty (20) feet with a maximum width of thirty (30) feet at the street, and a desirable width of twenty-four (24) feet. 
 
(7). All driveways must have a minimum of two-hundred (200) feet of sight distance in each and/or every traffic direction. 
 
(8). Driveways shall intersect the roadway at a preferred angle of ninety (90) degrees, but in no case shall the intersecting angle be less than sixty (60) degrees. 
 
(9). Return radii for driveway flares shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet nor greater than twenty-five (25) feet. 
 
(10). Maximum grade for all driveways shall be eight (8%) percent. 
 
(11). Parking lot grades shall: 
 Have a minimum slope of one (1%) percent. 

 On-Street parking (perpendicular, parallel, diagonal, etc) shall not exceed six (6%) percent slope in any direction.  

 Off-street parking lots, parking pods or clusters, etc. shall not exceed four (4%) percent slope in any direction.   



(12). Prior to construction, all top soil, stumps, brush, roots over one (1) inch diameter, boulders and like materials shall be stripped and removed between the edges of the proposed driveway or parking lot.  Whenever practical, natural vegetation outside of the slope lines shall be retained, protected and supplemented. 
 
(13). Parking lots shall be constructed with the following, minimum cross-section: 
• Twelve (12) inches of NHDOT 304.2 bank run gravel or 304.5 crushed stone coarse 

• Six (6) inches of NHDOT 304.3 crushed gravel or 304.4 crushed stone fine 

• Two (2) inches of 3/4” aggregate pavement (binder course) 

• One (1) inch of 3/8” aggregate pavement (wearing course) 


Shared, private, access roads/driveways servicing multiple sites shall be constructed with the following, minimum cross-section: 
• Eighteen (18) inches of NHDOT 304.2 bank run gravel or 304.5 crushed stone coarse 

• Six (6) inches of NHDOT 304.3 crushed gravel or 304.4 crushed stone fine 

• Two and one half (2.5) inches of 3/4” aggregate pavement (binder course) 

• One (1) inch of 3/8” aggregate pavement (wearing course) 


All construction procedures including, but not limited to, placement, compaction, testing, and acceptance, of these materials, set forth in the Auburn Subdivision and Site Plan regulations are applicable to all site plans. 
All construction details set forth in the Auburn Subdivision and Site Plan regulations are applicable to all site plans. 
 
(14). Final driveway acceptance shall rest with the Planning Board or its designated agent. 
 
(15). No driveway shall be constructed within one hundred (100) feet of another driveway, nor with one hundred fifty (150) feet of an intersecting road. 
 
(16). All driveways constructed after acceptance of the roadways shall require issuance of a driveway permit and shall be constructed in accordance with these Regulations. 
 
(17). A driveway permit fee and construction escrow shall be required of each and every driveway constructed after roadway acceptance. 
 
(18). All driveways shall be constructed in accordance with these Regulations and the typical driveway detail for the Town of Auburn, New Hampshire as shown in the Appendix. 
 
(19). Driveways shall be maintained vegetative clear for their full width and eighteen (18) feet above the finish drive surface. 
 
(20). Driveway pavement shall be installed flush with the Town's road surface.  Re-paving of the driveway shall require cutting the driveway six (6) feet from the edge of the road, removing material and finishing flush with the roadway.   
 
(21). Roadway re-paving shall require making certain the finish elevation of the road surface remains flush with driveway surfaces.  The driveway shall be cut six (6) feet back from the edge of the road, the material removed and paving re-installed level with the roadway. 
 
(22). All parking lots shall be constructed a minimum of ten (10) feet from the side lot line, twenty (20) feet from the front lot line, and thirty (30) feet from the rear lot line. 
 
(23). Granite or precast concrete at the edge of surfaced areas, except access driveways, in order to protect landscaping, abutting structures, properties and sidewalks. 
  10.09  Utilities 
 
(1). All electric, telephone and cable television distribution systems within the site shall be placed underground unless the Planning Board determines that such placement is not feasible. 
  
(2). The applicant shall coordinate site design with the appropriate utility companies to ensure adequate and suitable area for underground installation. 
 
(3). The applicant shall be responsible for providing for water mains, manholes, sanitary sewers and catch basins if required. 
 
(4). All sanitary sewer construction will conform to the requirements of the New Hampshire Water Supply and Pollution Control Commission. 
  
(5). Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary, and shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide. 
  
(6). The intent of the Planning Board is to require that all buried utilities be located outside of the Town’s paved roadway. 
 
(7). Design standards for underground and above ground storage tanks are set forth in Section 10.22 of these Regulations. 
  10.10 Screening 
 
Screening to protect visual impact to adjacent properties and/or public highways may be required by the Planning Board. In so far as practical, natural landscape materials shall be used for screening purposes, in lieu of fences, walls and/or other barriers. 
  10.11 Storm Drainage 
 
All drainage designs, including underdrain requirements and details must comply with the technical drainage criteria required in the Subdivision Regulations, Section 10.07. 
 
10.12 Snow Removal 
  Provisions shall be shown on the plan for snow removal or storage during winter months. 
  10.13 Lighting 
  (1). Purpose :  The purpose of these outdoor lighting standards is to provide requirements for residential subdivisions and site plans within the Town of Auburn to ensure that each developed site plan will address concerns resulting from light trespass, excessive glare, and to protect the nighttime environment, while at the same time providing adequate safety, energy efficiency and security for nighttime business and industrial operations. The goal of this lighting regulation is to recognize the benefits of outdoor lighting and provide clear guidelines for its installation. Appropriately regulated and properly installed outdoor lighting will maintain the Town’s character and contribute to the safety and welfare of the residents of the Town.  
 
(2).  Applicability:  The lighting requirements of this section shall apply to all outdoor lighting in all residential subdivisions, and to all developments requiring a site plan approval from the Planning Board, as well as new and replacement lighting in those properties.  
 
(3).  Terms and Definitions:  
 
(A).  CRI: Color Rendering Index – A measurement of the amount of color shifts that objects undergo when lighted by a light source as compared with the color of those same objects when seen under a reference light source of comparable color temperature. (Range 0-100).  
 
(B).  Direct Light: Light emitted directly from the lamp, off of the reflector, or the reflector diffuser, or through the refractor or diffuser lens, of a luminaire.  
 
(C).  Fixture: The assembly that houses the lamp or lamps, and can include all or some of the following parts: a housing; a mounting bracket or pole socket; a lamp holder; a ballast;, a reflector or mirror; and/or a refractor or lens.  
 
(D).  Flood or Spot Light: Any light fixture or lamp that incorporates a reflector or a refractor to concentrate the light output to a directed beam in a particular direction.  
 
(E).  Full Cutoff Luminaire: A luminaire provided with shielding or constructed so that light rays emitted by the fixture are projected below the horizontal plane passing through the lowest point on the fixture from which light is emitted.  
 
(F).  Foot-Candle: Measure of light falling on a given surface. One foot-candle is equal to the amount of light generated by one candle shining on a one (1) square foot surface one (1) foot away. Unless otherwise noted in this Regulation, foot candles are measured on a horizontal surface at ground level.  
 
(G). Glare: Light emitting from a luminaire with an intensity great enough to reduce a viewer’s ability to see, and in extreme cases, causing momentary blindness.  
 
(H). Height of Luminaire: The height of a luminaire shall be the vertical distance from the ground directly below the center line of the luminaire to the lowest direct-light emitting part of the luminaire.  
 
(I).  IESNA: Illuminating Engineering Society of North America.  
 
(J).  Indirect Light: Direct light that has been reflected or has scattered off other surfaces.  
 
(K).  Lamp: The component of a luminaire that produces the actual light.  
 
(L).  Light Trespass: The shining of light produced by a luminaire beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located.  
 
(M).  Lumen: (A unit of luminous flux) One foot-candle is one (1) lumen per square foot. For the purposes of this Regulation, the lumen output values shall be the INITIAL lumen output ratings of a lamp.  
 
(N).  Luminaire: This is a complete lighting system. A lamp or lamps and a fixture.  
 
(O).  Luminance: The amount of light falling on a surface, measured in lux (lx) or foot candles (fc).  
 
(P).  Nit(s): a luminance unit equal to one candela (one candle) per square meter measured perpendicular to the rays from the sources. From the Latin word nitere, meaning “shine”, nits are used to measure display intensity, or brightness. Nits, when used in conjunction with contrast ratio and viewing angle, determine the quality of the image in the desired application. 
 
(Q).  Outdoor Lighting: The nighttime illumination of an outside area or object by any man-made device located outdoors that produces light by any means.  
 
(R).  Security Lighting: Lighting primarily for safety of persons and property, which is part of an overall security plan for a site which includes at least illumination, surveillance, and response.  
 
(S).  Temporary Outdoor Lighting: The specific illumination of an outside area or object by any man-made device located outdoors that produces light by any means for a period of less than thirty (30) days, with at least one hundred eighty (180 )days passing before being used again.  
 
(T).  Uniformity Ratio: The ratio of maximum to minimum luminance. 
 
(4). Residential Subdivisions and Site Plans – General Requirements:  The intent of this Regulation is to reduce the problems created by improperly designed and installed outdoor lighting, by establishing regulations which limit the areas that certain outdoor lighting luminaires can illuminate, and by limiting the total allowable illumination of commercial and industrial developments located in the Town of Auburn. 
 
(A). Prohibited Lighting:  All types of flashing, blinking, moving or apparently moving light sources intended to attract attention to a business location are prohibited. Searchlights and laser beam lights for attracting attention are also prohibited 
(i). Lighting Plans: All plans submitted to the Planning Board shall include a lighting plan, prepared and sealed by a professional engineer with expertise in lighting design, which shows all the exterior lighting to be installed as part of the plan development.  
 
(ii). Code Requirements: All site lighting designs shall conform to the applicable requirements of the NH Energy Code (New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules, Chapter P.U.C. 1800, New Hampshire Code for Energy Conservation in New Buildings), The National Electrical Code (NEC), latest edition, and The International Building Code (IBC). 
 
(iii). Lighting Plan Specifications: The lighting plan shall contain:  
 
(a). Details of the lighting fixtures proposed to illuminate all buildings, signs, roadways, service areas, landscaping, parking and pedestrian areas, including the location, height, make, model, lamp type, and wattage of each outdoor fixture.  
 
(b). Specifications and illustrations of all proposed lighting fixtures including pole heights, height of luminaire, photometric data, Color Rendering Index (CRI) of all lamps, and other descriptive information.  
 
(c). Maximum pole mounted light fixture height shall be twelve (12) feet, as measured from the ground to the top of the fixture. 
 
(d). A narrative that describes the hierarchy of site lighting, how lighting will be used to provide safety and security and esthetic effects.  
 
(e). For plans with more than twenty (20) parking spaces or high traffic volumes (over 10 vph after darkness), the Lighting Plan shall include the following additional information:  
--A photometric diagram that shows horizontal illumination levels at ground level on the site from all externally visible lighting sources, including existing sources, to show the amount of illumination that will be provided and that the standards for light maximum and uniformity set by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) , will not be exceeded.  
--Illumination levels should not exceed the levels to provide safe conditions.  
--As a guide, poles and fixtures should be proportionate to the buildings and spaces they are illuminating, and designed with good engineering practices.  
--The plan should consider the ultimate size of the trees that could obscure the lighting or create dark spots.  
--Lighting shall not “trespass” on to adjacent properties or create dangerous conditions due to glare on adjacent roadways. No upward lighting or bare bulbs should be used in the exterior Lighting Plan.  
--Buffers, screen walls, fencing, and other landscape elements should be coordinated with the lighting plan to shield neighboring properties from light trespass.  
--Wherever practicable, lighting design should include the installation of timers, photo sensors, and other energy saving devices to reduce the overall energy required for the development and to eliminate unnecessary lighting.  
--Electrical service to outdoor lighting fixtures shall be underground except for fixtures mounted directly to utility poles.  
--All commercial and industrial outdoor site lighting levels shall be reduced to the lighting levels required for security lighting within one (1) hour after closing.  
--Where commercial or industrial zones abut residential uses, the light levels at the edge of the commercial or industrial property abutting the residential property shall be reduced to a maximum of 0.1 horizontal foot candles (fc) and 0.1 vertical foot candles 5 feet above the ground on a plane parallel to the property line, attributable to the commercial development. The 0.1 fc level shall be measured as an average level measured over any ten (10) foot interval, and the maximum level at any point in this interval shall not exceed 1.0 fc.  
--Where commercial or industrial zones abut residential uses, lighting from the commercial or industrial site shall produce no glare or reflectance so as to cause a nuisance on the adjacent residential properties. Each site plan bordering residential uses shall have a note stating that “No lighting, glare or reflected lighting from this site shall be allowed to shine or reflect on to neighboring residential properties.”  
 
(B). Luminaire Designs:  Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of more than 1800 lumens, and all flood or spot luminaries with a lamp or lamps rated at more than 900 lumens, shall be full cut-off fixtures. 
 
(C).  Lamp Types:  Lamp types shall be selected for optimum color rendering index (CRI) as listed by the manufacturer. Lamps with a CRI lower than 50 are not permitted except for security lighting. 
 
 
(D). General Exceptions: 
(i).  Any single luminaire with a single lamp or set of lamps rated at a total of 1800 lumens or less, and all single flood or spot luminaries with a lamp or set of lamps rated at 900 lumens or less, may be used without restriction to light distribution or mounting height, except that if any luminaire of 900 lumens or less is aimed, directed, or focused so as to cause direct light from the luminaire to be directed toward residential buildings on adjacent or nearby land, or to create glare perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public ways, the luminaire shall be redirected or its light controlled, as necessary, to eliminate such conditions.  
 
(ii). All hazard warning luminaries required by federal agencies are exempt from the requirements of this regulation to the extent that federal requirements cannot otherwise be achieved.  
 
(iii). Outdoor light fixtures producing light directly by the combustion of fossil fuels, (kerosene, gas, etc.), are exempt from the requirements of this regulation.  
 
(5).  Parking Lot Lighting:  Parking lot lighting shall be designed to provide the minimum lighting necessary to ensure adequate vision and comfort in parking areas, and to not cause glare or direct illumination onto adjacent properties or streets. Such lighting shall be subject to the following requirements. 
 
(A). All lighting fixtures serving parking lots shall be full cut-off fixtures (luminaries). Metal halide lamps are preferred for color rendition.  
 
(B). Light poles should be incorporated within planting areas or landscape islands to avoid damage from vehicles and plows.  
 
(C). Should the design for a particular site suggest the use of parking lot lighting fixtures of a particular “period” or architectural style, as either alternatives or supplements to the lighting described above, the alternative fixtures shall either be “full cut-off fixtures”, or the maximum lumens generated by each fixture shall not exceed 2000 (equivalent to a 150 watt incandescent bulb). 
 
(D). Parking lot lighting standards shall be as follows:  
 
(i).  Minimum Illumination Level (at darkest spot in the paved area, not including access roads) - no less than 0.2 fc;  
 
(ii). Uniformity ratio (Maximum to Minimum) – 20:1 or 15:1 for enhanced security;  
 
(iii). Uniformity ratio (Average to Minimum) – 4:1; and 
(iv). Minimum CRI – 50.  
 
(6).   Lighting of Gasoline Station/Convenience Store Aprons/Canopies:  Lighting levels on gasoline station/convenience store aprons and under canopies shall be adequate to facilitate the activities taking place in such locations and shall meet the following requirements:  
 
(A).  Areas on the apron away from the gasoline pump islands used for parking or vehicle storage shall be illuminated in accordance with the requirements for parking. If no gasoline pumps are provided the entire apron shall be treated as a parking area.  
 
(B).  Areas around the pump islands and under canopies to ten (10) feet outside the canopy footprint shall be illuminated so that the maximum horizontal luminance at grade level does not exceed thirty (30) foot candles in the service area and is at least one (1.0) foot-candles and no more than eight (8) foot-candles at the edge of the service area. The uniformity ratio (max to min.) shall be at least 15:1.  
 
(C).  Light fixtures mounted on canopies shall be recessed so that the lens cover is recessed or flush with the bottom surface (ceiling) of the canopy so that light is restrained to no more than eighty-five (85) degrees from vertical. (five (5) degrees below horizontal)  
 
(D).  Lights shall not be mounted on the top or sides (fascias) of the canopy and the sides of the canopy shall not be illuminated.  
 
(7). Lighting of Exterior Sales/Display Areas:  The applicant shall designate on the plan areas to be considered display/sales areas and areas to be used as parking or passive vehicle storage areas.  Such areas are subject to the following requirements:  
 
(A). Areas designated as parking or passive vehicle storage areas shall be illuminated in accordance with the requirements for parking areas.  
 
(B).  Areas designated as exterior display/sales areas may be illuminated so that the average horizontal luminance is no more than twenty (20) foot-candles. The uniformity ratio shall be no greater than 20:1(max. to min) and 4:1(avg. to min.) adjacent to the roadway frontage. The average and minimum shall be computed only for that area designated as exterior display/sales area.  
 
(C).  Light fixtures shall be full cut-off luminaries and shall be located, mounted, aimed and shielded so that direct light is not cast onto adjacent properties.  
(8). Security Lighting:  If security lighting is to be installed, the purpose and need for such lighting must be demonstrated as part of an overall security plan which designates the area to be illuminated for security purposes. The use of sensor (i.e. motion, beam interrupt) activated lights in security systems and dual switching for security purposes is encouraged.  Security lighting is also subject to the following requirements: 
 
(A).  In addition to the application materials set forth in the general provisions of this Regulation, applications for security lighting installations shall include a written description of the need and purposes for the security lighting. The site plan shall show the area to be secured and the location of all security lighting fixtures, specifications of all fixtures, the horizontal and vertical angles at which the lights will be directed, and adequate details to show how light will be directed only onto the areas to be secured. 
 
(B). All security lighting fixtures shall be shielded and aimed so that illumination is directed only to the designated area and not cast into other areas. In no case shall lighting be directed in a horizontal plane through the top of the lighting fixture and the fixture shall include shields that prevent the light source or lens from being visible from adjacent properties and roadways. The use of general floodlighting fixtures is discouraged.  
 
(C).  Security lights intended to illuminate a perimeter (such as a fence line) may include motion sensors and be designed to be off unless triggered by an intruder.  
 
(D).  Lighting standards in designated secure areas shall be as follows:  
 
(i).  Average Horizontal Illumination Level on Ground - no more than 1.5 fc.; 
 
(ii).  Average Illumination Level on Vertical Surface measured five (5) feet above the ground- no more than 1.5 fc.; and 
 
(iii).  Minimum CRI – 20. 
 
(9).  Illumination of Building Facades and Landscaping:  In general, the exterior lighting of building facades is discouraged. When buildings are to be illuminated, the design for the illumination shall be approved by the Planning Board and the following provisions shall be met.  
 
(A).  The maximum illumination on any vertical surface or angular roof surface shall not exceed 5.0 foot-candles.  
(B).  Lighting fixtures shall be carefully located, aimed, and shielded so that light is directed only on the building facade. Lighting fixtures shall not be directed toward adjacent streets, roads or properties.  
 
(C). Lighting fixtures mounted on the building and intended to “wash” the façade with light are prohibited. 
 
(D). Lighting fixtures shall be directed downward (i.e. below the horizontal) rather than upward. 
 
(E).  When landscaping is to be illuminated, it shall be part of the landscaping plan approved by the Planning Board. The lighting plan shall show the location of all lighting fixtures and what landscaping features each fixture is to illuminate, and shall demonstrate that the installation will not generate excessive light levels, cause glare, or direct light beyond the landscaping into the night sky. 
 
(10).  Sports Lighting:  Sports venue lighting is exempt from any lumens per square foot standards for the playing field only. Full-cutoff fixture design is required and the light trespass requirements apply. 
 
(11).  References:  
 
(A).  Regional Planning Commission, May 1966. 
 
(B).  Route NHOSP Technical Bulletin 16, Outdoor Lighting, Summer, 2001. 
 
(C). Outdoor Lighting Manual for Vermont Municipalities, Chittenden County 101A Community Guidebook, Draft 06/10/02. 
 
(D). NH Citizens for Responsible Lighting, New England Light pollution Advisory Group, International Dark Sky Association & Sample Lighting Ordinances, distributed by NHOSP, April, 2002. 
 
(E). Lighting Improvement Ordinance Framework – The Indiana Council on Outdoor Lighting. - http://home.att.net/~icole/ord_framework.html 
 
(F). Model Site Plan Regulations, Nashua Regional Planning Commission, June, 2002. 
 
(G). The IESNA Lighting Handbook, Reference and Applications, 2000 Edition, Illumination Engineering Society of North America.  
 
 
 
10.14 Frontage   
Proposed sites must contain the minimum area and frontage requirements as specified in the Auburn Zoning Ordinances and Subdivision Regulations in force at the time of approval. 
  10.15   Fire Protection 
  Improvements not located within one-half of a mile of an adequate dry hydrant will be required to construct adequate fire protection in accordance with the Town of Auburn Subdivision Regulations. 
  10.16 Other Improvements 
  The applicant shall be responsible for improvements or connections to adjoining developed areas unless relieved of that responsibility by the Board. The applicant shall be responsible for such off-site improvements in unaccepted streets as may be necessary, in the opinion of the Board, to achieve continuity of improvements. 
  
10.17  Open Space 
 
(1). No more than forty (40%) percent of the lot shall be covered by impervious material, including but not limited to, building, concrete, and asphalt. 
  
(2). A minimum of forty (40%) percent of the development site shall remain as green area or undeveloped. 
  (3). Maximum building area coverage shall be twenty (20%) percent of the lot area. 
  10.18 Solid Waste Storage 
  Solid waste materials shall be stored in containers and/or buildings specifically designed and constructed for that purpose. Waste storage areas shall be screened from view from the adjacent roadway(s). 
  10.19 Signs  
 All signs shall conform to The Town of Auburn Zoning Ordinance. 
  10.20  Landscaping 
 
(1) Purpose:  The following requirements are intended to enhance the appearance and natural beauty of the Town of Auburn, and to protect property values through preservation of existing vegetation and planting of new screening and landscaping materials.  Particularly in retail design, these standards are intended to reduce excessive heat, glare and accumulation of dust, to provide privacy from noise and visual intrusion, and to prevent the erosion of the soil, run-off of drainage water, and the consequent depletion of the ground water table and the pollution of water bodies.  These requirements are intended to encourage high quality building design which improves the aesthetic character of the community, to allow diversity of building design and architectural styles, to avoid monotonous and bland buildings typical of strip commercial development and to minimize conflicts between residential and commercial uses. 
 
 (2) Definition of Terms: 
 
(A). “Landscaping” shall mean the permanent installation of hardy lawns, trees, shrubs and other plantings.  In so far as practical, existing mature trees shall be retained and incorporated into the overall landscape plan.  Materials such as bark mulch, chipping, crushed or fragmented stone, etc. may be used for accent purposes.  However, such materials shall not be used as ground cover for more than ten (10%) percent of the original lot area.   
 
(B). “Landscape Materials” shall mean any combination of living plant materials and non-binding materials such as mulch, pebbles, decorative walls, fountains and other decorative materials. 
 
(C).  “Shade Tree” shall mean a deciduous tree with a minimum of two (2) inch diameter at four (4) feet above grade where the tree is planted and a minimum of six (6) feet tall at planting. 
 
(D). “Evergreen Tree” shall mean an evergreen tree a minimum of six (6) feet high at planting. 
 
(E). “Evergreen Shrub” shall be a minimum of two (2) feet high unless the species is a low-growing variety. 
 
(F). “Deciduous or Flowering Shrub” shall be three (3) feet high, unless the species is a low- growing variety. 
 
(G). “Ground Cover” shall mean a low-growing plant, other than turf or grass, which forms a continuous cover over the ground surface. 
 
(H). “Turf Ground Cover” shall be composed of one or more species of perennial grass which is grown as a permanent lawn. 
 
(3). General Requirements:  As a condition of final approval, the applicant must obtain the Planning Board's approval of the design and placement and materials of all landscaping features, to assure that the plan complies with the goals of harmonious existence with the neighborhood and the environment as outlined in the purpose section above. 
 
(4). Landscaping Requirements: 
 
(A). General: 
(i). A landscaping plan shall be required upon application for site plan review.  The final landscaping plan shall be drawn to scale, including dimensions, and shall show clearly existing features, and the locations, size, description, and common name of all proposed trees and shrubs.  Existing trees, shrubs and plant beds that are to be retained can be indicated and described generally. 
 
(ii). All significant features within the site including, but not limited to, large trees, watercourses, natural stone outcroppings, and other scenic features shall be shown on the plan.  Planning Board approval shall be obtained before removal of such features.  Removal of any existing tree exceeding six (6) inch caliper is strongly discouraged. 
 
(iii). All landscaping plans shall incorporate existing trees and landscaping into the proposed site design as is reasonable as determined by the Planning Board. 
 
(iv). Any portion of a developed lot or property which is to be disturbed but is not used for the location of buildings, structures, accessory uses, off-street parking and loading areas, sidewalks or similar purposes, shall be landscaped and maintained in such a manner as to minimize storm water runoff. 
 
(v). Landscaping, trees, and plants required by these Regulations shall be planted in a growing condition according to accepted horticultural practices and shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition.  Any landscaping, trees, and plants which are in a condition that does not fulfill the intent of this Regulation after the first winter or at any time during the second year after planting, shall be replaced by the developer during the next planting season for the particular plant material.  All proposed plantings shall be appropriate for soils, weather conditions and environmental conditions of the specific site.  Particular attention should be paid to potential road salt and other deicing chemicals.  Plant materials should be of specimen quality conforming to the American Standard for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1-1980 or later revision) and should be guaranteed for at least one and one-half years. 
 
(vi). All landscaping approved under this regulation shall be subject to surety requirements as required by the Planning Board. The surety shall be sufficient to cover the cost of replacement of all plantings.  The term of the surety requirement shall be equal to two (2) years from the time of planting.  At the end of the two (2) year period, any unused portion of this surety will be returned to the applicant along with accrued interest.  This required surety shall meet the required criteria set forth in Section 8.02 of these Regulations. 
 
(vii). All landscaping, trees, and planting material adjacent to parking areas, loading areas, or driveways shall be properly protected by barriers, curbs, tree wells, or other means from damage by vehicles.   
 
(viii). Existing landscaping, trees and planting materials to be retained should be protected as necessary during construction to avoid damage.  Tree wells over six (6") inches deep or other landscape features that have the potential to present a falling hazard to the public shall have grates, fences or other protective measures installed.  All trees where required shall be welled and protected against change of grade. Existing healthy, mature trees, if properly located, shall be fully credited against the requirements of these Regulations.  
 
(ix). Plastic or other types of artificial plantings shall not be credited against the requirements of these Regulations. 
 
(x). Trash containers, propane storage tanks, transformers and similar above ground utility features shall be screened with vegetation or other method approved by the Planning Board so that they are not visible from off the property. 
 
(xi). On lots or sites abutting State of New Hampshire maintained roads, State regulations for setbacks and sight distances shall take precedence for selection and placement of landscaping features. 
 
(xii). Existing and proposed overhead or underground utilities should be considered when selecting size, type and placement of proposed landscaping to avoid damage or potential future conflicts. 
 
(xiii). All site plans shall include a landscaping plan designed by and stamped with the seal of a New Hampshire licensed landscape architect. 
 
(xiv). No plantings will be allowed within six (6) feet from the outside wall of a proposed or existing structure. 
 
 
(B). Front Landscaped Areas: 
 
(i). Front landscaping areas are intended to enhance the appearance of the use on the lot but not to screen the use from view.  A front landscaped area shall be required.  The required landscaped area shall be covered with grass or other ground cover and shall include trees and shrubs all of which shall be selected to withstand salt and other typical roadside pollution.  At a minimum, one shade tree having a caliper of two (2) inches and a height of six (6) feet shall be planted for each fifty (50) feet or fraction thereof of lot frontage.   
 
(ii). Where lot size and shape or existing structures make it feasible to comply with a front landscape area for landscaped parking area, the Planning Board may substitute planters, plant boxes for pots containing trees, shrubs and/or flowers to comply with the intent of these Regulations. 
 
(iii). Commercial and Industrial Zones: In all commercial and industrial zones, the required front yard, except for the driveway, shall be landscaped a minimum of ten (10) feet back from the front lot line.  View from public streets of large parking lots should be screened with low two and one-half (2 ½) foot to four (4) foot evergreen shrubs, densely twigged deciduous shrubs, evergreen trees, mounds, berms, walls, or a combination thereof, provided that adequate sight distance is maintained. 
 
(C).  Buffer Areas: 
 
(i). Buffer areas shall contain sufficient existing vegetation as approved by the Planning Board, or be planted with evergreen-type plantings of such height, spacing and arrangement as, in the judgment of the Planning Board, will effectively screen the activity on the lot from the neighboring residential area.  At a minimum, the planting shall consist of trees six (6) feet in height planted at intervals of ten (10) feet on center.  Non-evergreen plantings may be included to supplement evergreen planting, but not to take the place of evergreen plantings. 
 
(ii). An earthen berm, wall or fence of location, height, design, and material approved by the Planning Board may be substituted for any portion of the required planting and/or buffer area requirements.  All plants in the buffer area shall be permanently maintained by the owner\occupant so as to maintain a dense screen year-round. 
 
(iii). A landscaped area shall be provided along the perimeter of any parking area, except where the parking area is functionally integrated with adjoining parking areas on abutting lots.  The landscaped area shall have a minimum dimension of five (5) feet, shall be planted with grass or shrubs, and shall include at least one (1) deciduous tree of not less than two (2) inch caliper, at least six (6) feet in height for every fifty (50) feet along the perimeter of the parking area. 
 
(iv). When the proposed use on a site presents the potential for obtrusive sound or noise pollution to adjoining lots, appropriate sound buffering shall be incorporated into the site design.  The use of walls, berms, fencing, dense plantings, or a combination thereof may be required. 
 
(D). Landscaped Parking Areas:  In addition to the front landscaped area and buffer area requirements, parking areas shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
 
(i). Landscape areas shall be provided within parking areas to provide visual and climatic relief from broad expanses of pavement.   
 
(ii). All uses providing twenty (20) or more off-street parking spaces shall have at least five (5%) percent of landscaped open area within the paved portion of the parking area.  This does not include perimeter planting. 
 
(E). Landscaping of Storm Water Treatment Areas: 
 
(i). All storm water treatment areas, such as,, treatment swales,  
detention and retention areas, and mitigation areas created to treat storm water runoff, shall be planted with grasses, shrubs and/or other plantings sufficient to prevent soil erosion and to promote proper treatment of the proposed runoff. 
 
(ii). A wetland landscaping plan shall be prepared by a qualified wetland scientist who has been approved by the Conservation Commission. The wetland landscaping plan shall show all proposed storm water treatment areas within the site and the proposed plantings therein.  The wetland landscaping plan shall be at a scale of not less than 1"=50'. 
 
(F).  Minimum Landscape Coverage: In all applications, a minimum percentage of fifteen (15%) percent of land being developed and reviewed shall remain in its natural state or be maintained as appropriately landscaped area. Undisturbed wooded areas may be included in this calculation.   
 
10.21 Storage  
 There shall be no outside storage of equipment and materials. 
  10.22 Underground Storage Tanks 
 (1). Design Required: All site plan designs submitted to the Planning Board that include underground storage tanks, as defined by the New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules Env-Wm 1401-Underground Storage Facilities, must include underground storage tank design with the complete underground storage tank submittal application to New Hampshire Division of Environmental Services Oil Compliance and Initial Response Section. 
  (2). Specific Design Requirements: The underground storage tank design must comply with all New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services Regulations, (Env-Wm 1401), with the following specific design requirements employed: 
  
(A). Underground Storage Tanks:  All underground storage tanks shall have a secondary containment that includes, but is not limited to, a concrete vault meeting H-20 structural loading which shall be designed to resist floatation forces under worst case conditions (i.e. empty, groundwater to the surface of the excavation). The vault must be lined with a water-proofing liner compatible with the anticipated exposures and shall pass a zero leakage test. 
  In addition, a facility or site with underground storage tanks must have a groundwater monitoring system designed to detect the material contained in the storage tank to at or below the United States Environmental Protection Agency detectable limits.  The monitoring system shall communicate electronically with a facility alarm system monitoring for leak detection twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week. 
 
  (B). Aboveground Petroleum Storage Tanks:  All site plan designs submitted to the Planning Board that include aboveground storage tanks must comply with New Hampshire Code of Administration Rules Part Env-Wm 1402, Control of  Aboveground Petroleum Storage Facilities. 
  10.23 Noise Levels 
  At all times noise levels within the building shall not exceed recognized state and federal standards including United States Environmental Protection Agency and F.M.W.A. sound level criteria for the type of operation being performed. 
  10.24 Temporary Signs 
  The developer shall obtain and post signs to warn motorists of construction and construction vehicles in the area of any proposed roadway construction. All signage shall be in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices published by the Federal Highway Administration. 
  10.25 Conditions During Construction 
  The developer shall be responsible for minimizing and avoiding, to the extent possible, conditions which result in hardship, inconvenience or annoyance to early occupants of the development, or to abutters, from construction activities, including but not limited to such conditions as unreasonable hours of operation, erosion, dust, odor, smoke, temporary changes of surface water runoff, or other similar conditions during construction activity. All construction shall take place in conformance with any applicable ordinances of the Town. The developer shall also be responsible for exercising reasonable care to avoid and prevent hazardous conditions on the site during all phases of construction. 
  In the event the developer fails to take reasonable steps to minimize hardship, or through construction creates an avoidable nuisance, the Building Inspector may issue a Cease and Desist Order requiring immediate corrective action. 
  The developer and design engineer shall submit written statements to the Planning Board certifying the anticipated uses and noise levels generated as a result of activities on the site, The Planning Board may, in its sole discretion, require the developer to submit a sound level assessment study for the site from a qualified sound engineer. Sites shall be designed to have no adverse noise effects on adjacent properties or nearby residences. 
  Where construction vehicle access routes intersect paved or public roads, provisions shall be made to minimize the transport of sediment by vehicular tracking onto the paved surface. Where sediment is transported onto a paved or public road surface, the road surface shall be cleaned thoroughly at the end of each day. Sediment shall be removed from the roads by shoveling or sweeping and transported to a sediment control disposal area. Street washing shall be allowed only after sediment is removed in this manner. This provision shall apply to individual development lots as well as to larger land-disturbing activities. 
 
10.26   Structural Design Requirements 
 
All structures (i.e. box culverts, bridges, retaining walls, etc.) must comply with the structural design criteria required in the Town of Auburn  Subdivision Regulations. 
 
10.27  Village Center District Design Standards 
 
(1). Objectives and Characteristics:  The Village Center District is intended to promote a “town center” area which will provide for the harmonious and aesthetically pleasing development of the Town, and where, through the consolidation of municipal services, small-scale retail/commercial development, limited residential use, and mixed use development, the Town’s rural charm and character is preserved.   The Village Center District is designed to promote and encourage the most efficient, cost-effective and beneficial consolidation of land development which will: preserve open space; create more cost-efficient roads, utilities, and other public and private infrastructures; and improve the ability of the Town to provide more rapid and efficient delivery of public safety services.  This District is also created to provide private property owners with a method for realizing the inherent value of their real property in a manner conducive to the creation of a substantial benefit to the environment and to the Town’s property tax base.  
 
(2). Building Design: 
 
(A). Building Design: Building design within the Village Center District shall conform to the Architectural Design Requirements provided by the Town of Auburn Site Plan Regulations, as adopted and amended by the Planning Board. 
 
(B). Building Massing:  Building massing refers to the number of blocks or basic forms that make up the building’s overall shape.  Building massing in the Village Center District  shall be at a human scale and shall take into account the following criteria: 
 
(i). Height - The design of a building should reduce its perceived height by dividing the building mass into smaller scale components. One way to achieve this breakdown is to provide a well-defined base, middle and top to the building (see example below). 
 
(ii). Bulk - The design of a building should reduce its apparent bulk by dividing the building into smaller masses. Ideally, the internal function of the building may indicate a logical hierarchy for breaking down the mass of the building (see example below). 
  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 By using different architectural features, the perceived height and bulk are reduced to a more human scale. 
 
(C). Building Orientation: 
 
(i). Building placement, setbacks and building lines on the lot should be consistent and should include adjacent outdoor public space for pedestrians such as plazas, sidewalks, and seating areas. 
 
(ii). Building frontages and sides should be oriented towards the street and adjacent outdoor public areas, presenting an active front to the community (see following corner building orientation examples).  Parking and service entrances should be located at the rear of the building. 
 
(iii). Use of grade level display windows, store front entranceways and doors as well as soft building lines and walls are encouraged to promote an easy and comfortable transition for the pedestrian between the building and adjacent public space and parking areas. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By orienting the building to the street, and including adjacent outdoor public space and entranceways, the relationship of the building and the pedestrian, and the building to the street, achieves a more human scale. 
 
 
(D). Sidewalks and Crosswalks:  Sidewalks and crosswalks within the Village Center District shall comply with Americans for Disability Act (ADA) standards and shall be constructed in accordance with the Town of Auburn’s most recently amended Subdivision and Site Plan Regulations. Pedestrian crossings and crosswalks should be placed at highly visible and dedicated crossing points.  The crosswalk shall be marked to be visible to both the pedestrian and driver.  Use of traffic islands and extended curbing to shorten the street crossing is encouraged.  Crossings are encouraged at street corners and mid-block, or 100-150 feet apart in areas of pedestrian activity. New sidewalks and crossings should be linked and connected to existing walkways and bicycle paths. 
 
(3). Village District Lighting: 
 
(A).  Streetscape Lighting:  Outdoor lighting within the Village Center District shall conform to the Town of Auburn Zoning Ordinance and the Lighting Standards as provided in Section 10.13 of the Town of Auburn Site Plan Regulations.  The choice of light fixture 
design should be compatible with the architectural design of the building, the surrounding neighborhood and overall character of the village.  Decorative lighting fixtures are recommended and encouraged (see following photo example).  Maximum pole height shall not exceed twenty (20) feet. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(4).  Drainage Design Guidelines within the Village Center District: 
 
(A). Volumetric Analysis: Development in the Village Center District shall not result in an increase in either the peak rate or total volume of stormwater run off. 
 
(B).Stormwater Quality: Storm water deigns shall incorporate LID recommendations as necessary to comply with the requirement of the N.H. Alteration of Terrain (AOT) permit with a minimum total suspended solids % removal of eighty (80%) percent. 
 
(C). Incentive Bonus for Additional Stormwater Controls: If the Applicant can  demonstrate through accepted engineering practices that the stormwater system design for a project is providing additional stormwater controls resulting in additional pollution reduction of total suspended solids in excess of eighty (80%) percent, each five (5%) percent increase shall permit an increase in allowable impervious lot coverage of five (5%) percent, to a maximum of seventy (70%) percent. 
 
(5). Buffer Zone:  All developments within the Village Center District that abut a residential zone must have a fifty (50) foot wide non-disturb or landscaped  buffer zone between the property being developed and the abutting residential property. 
 
(6). Lot Coverage Guidelines within the Village Center District: 
 
(i). Total Impervious Coverage: 60% 
 
(7).  Village Center District Parking Standards: Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Section 10.07, Parking and Loading Areas, however, a twenty-five (25%) percent reduction in the total number of required spaces may be authorized by the Planning Board for approved multi-family and non-residential uses located within the Village Center District, provided: 
 
(i). Off-street parking shall be located on the side or rear of all commercial and multi-family buildings (see following illustration of preferred and acceptable examples);  
 
(ii). All parking spaces and parking lots are screened by landscaping in accordance with Sections 10.10 and 10.20 of the Town of Auburn Site Plan Regulations; and  
 
(iii). Cross-access easements are secured to encourage shared parking between interconnected parking lot areas, if applicable. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Examples of Preferred, Acceptable and Not Acceptable parking lot configuration in obtaining the 25% parking reduction within the Village Center District are provided in the illustration above (Source: Village of Gurnee, Gurnee, IL). 
 
 
 
 SECTION 11.00 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION AND SEDIMENT  CONTROL REGULATIONS   
11.01 General  
 The purpose of this Regulation is to control runoff and soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from site construction and development. Unless waived by the Board, Major Site Plans shall include plans for managing stormwater and controlling erosion and sedimentation as provided herein. 
  11.02  Definitions 
 
The following definitions apply to this Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control Regulation. 
  
(1). Best Management Practice (“BMP”):  A proven or accepted structural, nonstructura1, or vegetative measure, the application of which reduces erosion, sediment, or peak storm discharge, or improves the quality of stormwater runoff. 
  
(2). Critical Areas:  Disturbed areas of any size located within fifty (50) feet of a stream, bog, water body, or poorly or very poorly drained soils; disturbed areas exceeding two thousand (2,000) square feet in highly erodible soils; or, disturbed areas containing slope lengths exceeding twenty five (25) feet on slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%). 
 
(3). Development:  Any construction or land alteration or grading activities other than for agricultural and silvicultural practices. 
  
(4). Disturbed Area:  An area where the natural vegetation has been removed, exposing the underlying soil. 
  
(5). Erosion:  The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice, or gravity. 
 
 (6). Highly Erodible Soils:  Any soil with an erodibility class (K factor) greater than or equal to 0.43 in any layer as found in Table 34 of the ‘Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Urban and Developing Areas in New Hampshire.” 
  (7). Project Area:   The area within the site plan boundaries. 
  
(8). Sediment:  Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by erosion. 
  
(9). Stabilized:  When the soil erosion rate approaches that of undisturbed soils. Soils which are disturbed will be considered protected when covered with a healthy, mature growth of grass or a good covering of hay or straw mulch (2 tons/acre). Mulch is only a temporary measure; ultimately, the site needs vegetation. 
  
(10). Stormwater Runoff:  The water from precipitation that is not absorbed, evaporated, or otherwise stored within the contributing drainage area. 
  
(11). Stream:  Areas of flowing water occurring for sufficient time to develop and maintain defined channels, but may not flow during dry portions of the year. Includes, but is not limited to, all perennial and intermittent streams located on U.S. Geological Survey maps. 
  11.03 Applicability 
  The applicant shall submit a stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation control plan to the Planning Board for any Site Plan, where one or more of the following conditions is proposed:  
 (1). A cumulative disturbed area exceeding twenty thousand (20,000) square feet; 
  (2). Construction or reconstruction of a street or road; or 
  (3). Disturbed critical areas. 
  11.04 Minimum Requirements
 
(1). The Planning Board may waive the requirement for all or part of a stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation control plan if it determines that a plan is unnecessary because of the size, character, or natural conditions of a site. 
 
(2). All requests for waivers, and actions thereon, shall be made in writing by the applicant in accordance with the requirements for waivers, and shall be accompanied by supporting technical documentation to demonstrate minimal environmental impact. 
 
(3). The following minimum requirements apply to all projects, regardless of size: 
  A site drawing of existing and proposed conditions, including: 
  (A). Locus map, at the Town map scale, showing property boundaries; 
  (B). North arrow, scale (not more than 1“=50’), date; 
  (C). Property lines; 
  (D). Easements;  
 (E). Structures, utilities, roads, and other paved areas;  
 (F). Topographic contours (maximum interval of ten (10) feet); 
  (G). Critical areas; 
  (H). Surface water, wetlands, drainage patterns, and watershed  boundaries; 
  (I). Vegetation;  
 
(J). Soils information for design purposes or for determining highly erodible soils shall be determined from a National Cooperative Soil Survey (NCSS) soil series map; 
 
(K). Temporary and permanent stormwater management and erosion and sediment control Best Management Practices; 
  (L). Areas and timing of soil disturbance; and 
 
(M). A schedule for the inspection and maintenance of all Best Management Practices. 
  A narrative section including discussion of each measure, its purpose, construction sequence, and installation timing as each applies to the site is also required. 
  11.05 Design Standards 
 All drainage designs must comply with the drainage design criteria and technical requirements contained in the Auburn Subdivision Regulations, Sections 10.06 and 10.07. 
 11.06 Completed Application Requirements 
 The Planning Board shall require each of the following in the final plan unless the project is deemed of sufficiently minimal impact to qualify for the minimum requirements specified in Section 11.04 of these Regulations. 
  (1). Construction drawings: 
  (A). Existing and proposed conditions: 
  
(i).   Locus map, including tax map information, at the same scale as the Town tax map, showing property boundaries within 1,000 feet of the subject site boundaries; 
 
(ii). North arrow, scale (not more than 1”=50’), date; 
  (iii). Property lines; 
  
(iv). Structures, roads, utilities, earth stockpiles, staging areas, equipment storage, and stump disposal; 
 
(v). Topographic contours of improved areas at no greater than two (2) foot intervals; 
  (vi). Critical areas;  
 
(vii). Within the project area, and within four hundred (400) feet of the project boundary, surface waters, wetlands, drainage patterns, and watershed boundaries; 
  (viii).  Vegetation; 
 
(ix).  Extent of the one hundred (100) year flood plain boundaries, if published or determined; 
  
(x). Soils information for design purposes shall be obtained from a National Cooperative Soil Survey (NCSS) soil series map, highly erodible soils shall be determined by soil series; 
  (xi). Easements;   
(xii). Areas of soil disturbance; 
  (xiii). Areas of cut and fill; 
  
(xiv). Areas of poorly and very poorly drained soils, including any portion to be disturbed or filled; 
 
(xv). Location of all structural, nonstructural, and vegetative stormwater management and erosion and sediment control Best Management Practices; 
  
(xvi). Identification of all permanent control Best Management Practices; and  
 
(xvii). Tabulated sequence of construction. 
 
(B). Other plan requirements: 
  (i). Construction schedule; 
  (ii). Earth movement schedule; 
  
(iii). A proposed schedule for the inspection and maintenance of all Best Management Practices; 
 
(iv). Description of temporary and permanent vegetative Best Management Practices, including seeding specifications; and 
  
(v). Description of all structural and nonstructural Best Management Practices with detailed drawings of each, as appropriate. 
  (2). Report section, including: 
  
(A). Design calculations for all temporary and permanent structural control Best Management Practices measures; 
 
(B). A proposed schedule for the inspection and maintenance of all Best Management Practices; 
  
(C). Identification of all permanent control measures and responsibility for continued maintenance; 
 
(D). A drainage report with calculations showing the volume, peak discharge, and velocity of present and future runoff; and 
  
(E). When detention structures are planned to reduce future condition peak discharge, the soil cover complex method shall be used to compute the runoff volume and peak discharge for designing the structure, the design will conform to the criteria outlined for those types of structures given in the “Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Urban and Developing Areas in New Hampshire.” 
  
 
 11.07 Responsibility for Construction/Installation 
  
(1). The applicant shall bear final responsibility for the installation, construction, inspection, and disposition of all stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation control measures required by this Regulation. 
 
(2). The Planning Board may require a bond or other security in an amount and with surety conditions satisfactory to the Board, providing for the actual construction and installation of such measures within a period specified by the Planning Board and expressed in the bond or the surety. 
 
(3). Site development shall not begin before the stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation control plan receives conditional approval. Best Management Practices shall be installed as designed and scheduled as a condition of final approval of the plan. 
  11.08 Plan Review and Approval 
  
(1). Technical review of any stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation control plan prepared under this Regulation shall be conducted by the Rockingham County Conservation District or other qualified professional consultant, as determined to be appropriate by the Planning Board, at the expense of the applicant. 
 
(2). The Planning Board shall indicate approval of the stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation control plan, as filed, if it complies with the requirements and objectives of this Regulation. Such approval shall be a component of Site Plan approval. If disapproved, a list of plan deficiencies and the procedure for filing a revised plan will be given to the applicant. 
  11.09 Maintenance and Inspection 
  
(1). A narrative description of on-going maintenance requirements for water quality protection measures required by stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation control plans, after final Planning Board approval, shall be recorded on the deed to the property on which such measures are located. The description so prepared shall comply with the requirements of N.H. R.S.A. 478:4-a. 
  
(2). The Planning Board may require routine inspections to verify on-going maintenance of water quality protection measures.  Such inspections shall be performed by the designated agent at reasonable times to the landowner. 
 
(3). If permission to inspect is denied by the landowner, the designated agent shall secure an administrative inspection warrant from the District or Superior Court under N.H. R.S.A. 595-B. 
  
(4). The Board of Selectmen may require a fee for routine inspections of water quality protection measures. The fee shall be paid by the owner of the property. A fee schedule shall be established by the Board of Selectmen, which represents the cost of performing an inspection of various types of water quality protection measures. The procedure for the adoption of the fee schedule shall be as provided in N.H. R.S.A. 41:9-a. 
   
 SECTION 12.00 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES 
  12.01  Authority 
  These regulations are enacted by the authority granted in N.H. R.S.A. 674:16 and 674:21 , and procedurally under the guidance of 675:1, II, and in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of Auburn. 
  12.02 Purpose and Goals 
  This Ordinance is enacted in order to establish general guidelines for the siting of telecommunications towers and antennas and to enhance and fulfill the following goals: 
  
(1). Preserve the authority of the Town of Auburn to regulate and to provide for reasonable opportunity for the siting of telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and efficiently; 
 
(2). Reduce adverse impacts such facilities may create, including, but not limited to impacts on aesthetics, environmentally sensitive areas, historically significant locations, flight corridors, health and safety by injurious accidents to person or property, and prosperity through protection of property values; 
 
(3). Provide for co-location and minimal impact siting options through an assessment of technology, current locational options, future available locations, innovative siting techniques, and siting possibilities beyond the political jurisdiction of the Town; 
 
(4). Permit the construction of new towers only where all other reasonable opportunities have been exhausted, and to encourage the users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas, by requiring alternative tower structures; 
 
(5). Require cooperation and colocation, to the highest extent possible, between competitors in order to reduce cumulative negative impacts upon the Town of Auburn;  
 
(6). Provide constant maintenance and safety inspections for any and all facilities; 
 
(7). Provide for the removal by the owner of abandoned facilities that are no longer inspected for safety concerns and Code compliance, and a mechanism for the Town of Auburn to remove these abandoned towers to protect the citizens from imminent harm and danger; and 
  
(8). Provide for the removal or upgrade of facilities that are technologically outdated. 
 
12.03 Definitions 
  
(1). Alternative Tower Structure:  Innovative siting techniques that shall mean manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles, and similar alternative design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
 
(2). Antenna:  Shall mean any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, television, personal communication service (PCS), pager network, or any other communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves of any bandwidth. 
 
(3). FAA:  An acronym that shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration. 
 
(4). FCC:  An acronym that shall mean the Federal Communications Commission. 
 
(5). Height:  Shall mean, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from the ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna. 
 
(6). Planning Board or Board:  Shall mean the Town of Auburn Planning Board. 
 
(7). Pre-existing Towers and Antennas:  Shall mean any tower or antenna lawfully constructed or permitted prior to the adoption of this Ordinance. Shall also mean any tower or antenna lawfully constructed in accordance with this Ordinance that predates an application currently before the Board. 
 
(8). Telecommunications Facilities:  Shall mean any structure, antenna, tower or other device which provides commercial mobile wireless services, unlicensed wireless services, cellular/wireless phone services, specialized mobile radio communications (SMR), and personal communications service (PCS), and common carrier wireless exchange access services. 
 
(9). Tower:  Shall mean any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including se1f-supporting lattice towers, guy towers or monopole towers, The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. 
  12.04 Construction Performance Requirements  
 
(1). Aesthetic and Lighting:  The guidelines in this subsection shall govern the location of all towers, and the installation of all antennas. However, the Planning Board may waive these requirements, in accordance with Subsection 12.09, only if it determines that the goals of this regulation are served thereby. 
  (A). New towers shall be built as alternative tower structures. 
  
(B). At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the maximum extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities with the natural setting and built environment.  These buildings and facilities shall also be subject to all other Site Plan Review Regulation requirements. 
 
(C). If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
 
(D). Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the governing authority may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
 
(E). Towers shall not contain any permanent or temporary signs, writing, symbols or any graphic representation of any kind, with the exception of safety warning signs. 
  
(2). Federal Requirements:  All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this Ordinance shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal, in accordance with Subsection 12.11, of the tower or antenna, as abandoned, at the owner’ s expense through the execution of the posted security. 
 
(3). Building Code Safety Standards:   To ensure the structural integrity of towers and antennas, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the Town concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards, If the owner fails to bring such tower into compliance within thirty (30) days, such action shall constitute an abandonment and grounds for the removal, in accordance with subsection 12.11, of the tower or antenna, as abandoned, at the owner’s expense through execution of the posted security. 
 
(4). These requirements shall supersede any and all other applicable standards found elsewhere in Town Ordinances or Regulations that are less strict. 
 
 (A). Setbacks and Separations: 
 
(i). Towers must be set back a distance equal to one hundred twenty-five (125%) percent of the height of the tower from any offsite residential structure. 
 
(ii). Tower, guys and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. 
 
(iii). Towers shall not be located within one-quarter (1/4) mile of any existing tower.  
 
(B). Security Fencing:  Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six (6) feet in height, and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. 
 
(C). Landscaping: 
  
(i). Towers shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from adjacent residential property. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least ten (10) feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound. Natural vegetation is preferred. 
 
(ii). In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived entirely. 
 
(iii). Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large wooded lots, natural growth around the property may be deemed a sufficient buffer. 
  12.05 Required Information 
  In addition to the generally required site plan materials, the applicant shall also be required to submit the information provided for in this Section 12.0. 
  12.06 Conditions of Approval 
  In granting Site Plan Approval, the Planning Board may impose conditions to the extent the Board concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect on the proposed tower on adjoining properties, and preserve the intent of this Ordinance. 
  
12.07 Factors Considered in Granting Decisions 
  The Planning Board shall consider the following additional factors in the site plan review. 
 
(1). Height of proposed tower or other structure; 
  (2). Proximity of tower to residential development or non4ndustrial zones; 
  (3). Natures of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
  (4). Surrounding topography; 
  
(5). Surrounding tree coverage and foliage, and the extent to which the tower protrudes above the tree coverage; 
  
(6). Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
 
(7). Proposed ingress and egress to the site; 
  
(8). Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures as discussed in Section 12.02; 
  
(9). Visual impacts on view sheds, ridgelines and other impacts by means of tower location, tree and foliage clearing and placement of incidental structures; and  
 
(10). Availability and use of alternative tower structures and alternative siting locations. 
  12.08 Additional Information Required 
  Each applicant shall submit a plan in accordance with the Site Plan Review Regulations and further information including: elevation view, topography, radio frequency coverage, tower height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses (up to two hundred (200) feet away), and any other information deemed necessary by the Planning Board to assess compliance with this Ordinance. Furthermore, the applicant shall submit the following prior to any approval by the Board: 
 
(1).  The applicant shall submit written proof that the proposed use/facility complies with the FCC regulations on radio frequency (RF) exposure guidelines. 
 
(2). The applicant shall submit written proof that an evaluation has taken place, as well as the results of such evaluation, satisfying the requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) further referenced in applicable FCC rules. If an Environmental Assessment (EA) or an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) is required under the FCC rules and NEPA, submission of the EA or ETS to the Board prior to the beginning of the federal thirty (30) day comment period, and the Town process, shall become part of the application requirements. 
 
(3). Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall provide to the Planning Board an inventory of its existing towers that are within the jurisdiction of the Town and those within two (2) miles of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, design of each tower, as well as economic and technological feasibility for co-location on the inventoried towers. The Planning Board may share such information with other applicants applying for approvals or conditional use permits under this Ordinance or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the governing authority, provided, however, that the Planning Board is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
 
(4). If the applicant is proposing to build a new tower, the applicant shall submit written evidence demonstrating that no existing structure can accommodate the applicant’s proposed antenna. This evidence can consist of: 
  
(A). Substantial Evidence that no existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant’s engineering requirements, provided that a description of the geographic area required is also submitted; 
 
(B). Substantial Evidence that existing towers are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant’s engineering requirements, and why; 
 
(C). Substantial Evidence that the existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant’s proposed antenna and related equipment; 
 
(D). Substantial Evidence that applicant’s proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structure would cause interference with the applicant’s proposed antenna; 
 
(E). Substantial Evidence that the fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share the existing towers or structures are unreasonable, (costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable); or 
 
(F). Substantial Evidence that the applicant can demonstrate other limiting factors that render existing towers or structures unsuitable; 
 
(5). The applicant proposing to build a new tower shall submit an agreement with the Town that allows for the maximum allowance of co-location upon the new structure. Such statement shall become a condition to any approval. This statement shall, at a minimum, require the applicant to supply available co-location for reasonable fees and costs to other telecommunications providers. Failure to provide such an agreement is evidence of the applicant’s unwillingness to cooperate with the orderly and well-planned development of Auburn, and is grounds for denial. 
  
(6). The applicant shall submit the engineering information detailing the size and coverage required for the facility location. The Planning Board may have this information reviewed by a consultant for verification of any claims made by the applicant regarding technological limitations and feasibility for alternative locations. Cost for this review shall be borne by the applicant in accordance with N.H. R.S.A. 676:4(g). 
 
 
 
  12.09 Waivers  
 
(1). General: Where the Board finds that extraordinary hardships, practical difficulties, or unnecessary and unreasonable expense would result from strict compliance with the foregoing regulations, or the purposes of these regulations may be served to a greater extent by an alternative proposal, it may approve waivers to these regulations. The purpose of granting waivers under the provisions of these regulations shall be to ensure that an applicant is not unduly burdened as opposed to merely inconvenienced by said regulations. The Board shall not approve any waiver(s) unless a majority of those present and voting shall find that all of the following apply: 
  
(A). The granting of the waiver will not be detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare, or injurious to other property, and will promote the public interest; 
  
(B). The waiver will not, in any manner, vary the provisions of the Auburn Zoning Ordinance or Auburn’s Master Plan; 
(C). Such waiver(s) will substantially secure the objectives, standards and requirements of these regulations; and 
 
(D). A particular and identifiable hardship exists or a specific circumstance warrants the granting of a waiver. Factors to be considered in determining the existence of a hardship shall include, but not be limited to: 
  (i). Topography and other site features; 
  (ii). Availability of alternative site locations; 
  (iii). Geographic location of property; and  
 
(iv). Size/magnitude of project being evaluated and availability of co-location. 
 
(2). Conditions: In approving waivers, the Board may impose such conditions as it deems appropriate to substantially secure the objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations. 
  
(3). Procedures: A request for any such waiver shall be submitted in writing by the applicant with the application for Board review. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the waiver and all of the facts relied upon by the applicant. Failure to submit the petition in writing shall require an automatic denial. 
  12.10 Bonding, Security and Insurance 
  Recognizing the extremely hazardous situation presented by abandoned and unmonitored towers, the Planning Board shall set the form and amount of security that represents the cost for removal and disposal of abandoned towers in the event that the tower is abandoned and the tower owner is incapable and/or unwilling to remove the tower in accordance with Subsection 12.11. Bonding and surety shall be consistent with the provision in the Subdivision Regulations. Furthermore, the Planning Board shall require the submission of proof of adequate insurance covering accident or damage. 
  12.11 Removal of Abandoned Antennas and Towers 
  Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned and hazardous to the public health and safety, unless the owner of said antenna or tower provides proof of quarterly inspections. The owner shall remove the abandoned structure within ninety (90) days of receipt of a declaration of abandonment from the Town notifying the owner of such abandonment. A declaration of abandonment shall only be issued following a public hearing, noticed per Town Regulations, with notice to abutters, and to the last known owner/operator of the tower. If the abandoned antenna or tower is not removed within ninety (90) days, the Town may execute the security and have the antenna or tower removed. If there are two or more users of a single antenna or tower, this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. 
 SECTION 13.00 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
13.01 Occupancy   
(1). No development may be occupied or used unless a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Building Inspector. 
 
(2). The Building Inspector shall not issue a certificate of occupancy until these regulations have been complied with and the improvements made or a performance guarantee provided to the Town for unfinished improvements. Failure to construct a site in accord with the approved site plan shall constitute a sufficient reason for withholding a certificate of occupancy. 
  13.02 Other Ordinances 
 
In addition to complying with the Regulations established, herein the applicant shall comply with all other applicable Town ordinances and State Regulations and laws, particularly, but not limited to, the Town Ordinances, Town of Auburn Zoning Ordinance, Comprehensive Master Plan, and the State of New Hampshire laws and regulations governing pollution.  Where applicable, the applicant shall also comply with all federal statutes and regulations. 
 
13.03 Enforcement  
 
(1).  The purpose of this part is to enact locally, the administrative and enforcement procedures set forth in N.H. R.S.A. 676 of the existing planning and land use statutes. 
 
(2).   Any violation of the requirements of these Regulations shall be subject to any and all of the enforcement procedures detailed in N.H. R.S.A. 676 and these Regulations. 
 
(3).   These Regulations shall be enforced by the Planning Board or its duly authorized agent(s), which shall include, but not be limited to, the Board of Selectmen, Town Attorney and Town Building Inspector and/or Zoning Code Enforcement Officer. The designated agent responsible for enforcement on a day-to-day basis shall be the Auburn Building Inspector and Code Enforcement Officer. The Building Inspector is hereby granted authority under the direction of the Planning Board to use all available statutory remedies to enforce these Regulations, including but not limited to: the issuance of Cease and Desist Orders, all common law remedies, the revocation of building permits, the withholding of building permits, actions to secure civil fines, actions for injunctive relief and all statutory remedies as may be available to the Town. 
 
(4).  Written Notice of Violation.  A written notice of violation may be issued to the property owner by registered mail or hand-delivery from the designated agent if the agent determines that conditions at the site are in violation of any of the requirements of these Regulations or plans approved under these Regulations.  The notice of violation shall: 
 
 (A) Specify the actions or conditions which violate the requirements of these Regulations or plans approved under these Regulations; 
 
 (B) Identify what needs to be done to correct the violation(s); 
 
 (C) Specify a reasonable time frame within which the violation(s) will be corrected; and 
 
 (D) Be provided to the property owner with a copy to be kept in the official records of the Planning Board. 
 
The issuance of a written notice of visitation shall not be a prerequisite to the issuance of a cease and desist order. 
 
(5).  Cease and Desist Order.  The designated agent may issue a cease and desist order to the property owner if the agent determines that conditions at the site are in violation of any of the requirements of these Regulations or any plans approved under these Regulations. 
 
(6). Revocation:  In addition, the Planning Board may, where it deems appropriate, exercise its prerogative under N.H. R.S.A. 676:4-a to revoke site plan approval. 
  
(7). The Planning Board may also decline to accept new site plan applications submitted by applicants who are not in compliance with regard to the terms and conditions of a prior site plan approval. 
 
13.04 Joint Meetings and Hearings 
 
(1). An applicant seeking site plan approval may petition the Planning Board and the Zoning Board of Adjustment or other land use boards to hold a joint meeting or hearing when the subject matter of the requested permit is within the responsibilities of those land use boards, Each board shall have the authority on its own initiative to request a joint meeting and each land use board shall have the discretion as to whether or not to hold a joint meeting with any other land use board. The Planning Board chair shall chair joint meetings of the Planning Board that involve the subject matter of the requested permit. In other situations, the  boards which are involved shall determine which board shall be in charge of the joint meeting or hearing. 
  
(2). Procedures for joint meetings or hearings relating to testimony, notice of hearings, and filing of decisions shall be consistent with the procedures established for the individual boards.  In the event of a conflict between the respective board’s procedures, the boards shall reach an agreement prior to the joint meeting or hearing as to which procedures shall be employed. 
 
(3). Every local land use board shall be responsible for rendering a decision on the    subject matter which is within its jurisdiction. 
 
13.05 Appeal
  
An appeal from any final decision of the Planning Board with respect to a site plan application is governed by N.H. R.S.A. 677:15.  In the event that the Planning Board makes a decision or determination on a site plan application which is based upon any construction, interpretation, or application of the Auburn Zoning Ordinance, which would be appealable to the Zoning Board of Adjustment if it had been made by an administrative officer, then an applicant may appeal such decision to the Auburn Zoning Board of Adjustment, pursuant to N.H. R.S.A. 676:5, III.  
  
 
 SECTION 14.00 - AMENDMENT, VALIDITY, AND EFFECTIVE DATE 
  14.01 Amendment  
 Any amendment to this Ordinance, as proposed by the Planning Board or otherwise, shall be adopted in accordance with the procedures required by N.H. R.S.A. 675:6. 
  14.02 Validity  
 If any section, subsection, or phrase of these Nonresidential and Multi-Family Residential Site  Plan Review Regulations is found, for any reason, to be invalid by a court of competent  jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of these  Regulations.  
 14.03 Effective Date  
 The effective date of these Regulations shall be June 15, 2011. 
  
Town of Auburn, New Hampshire
RSA 155- E Excavation Regulations
Reprinted 1997
Tnese regiJlations have been adopted by the Auburn Planning Board
( recrulator) onfk-.,,uhe:i ?o figs: after a duly noticed p1blic hearing held
onTJ,-:n,_.,h,, ?o \"i~s= . ' .
Planning Board (regulator) certification:
~)-?~~
Filed with Board of Selectmen: /I - .2 7 - y;.
Filed with Mtmici:;:al Clerk: '11 -;,. ; -<Y:> ·
Filed with county Registry of Deeds: ---
Section 1
Section 2
Section 3
Section 4
Section 5
Section 6
Section 7
Section 8
Appendices
Purpose
EXCAVATION REGULATIONS
TOWN OF AUBURN, NEW HAMPSHIRE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Definitions
Excavation Permit Application
Submission Documents
Project Site Requirements
Application Procedure
Renewal and Amendment of Excavation Permit
Administration and Enforcement
1
1
2
2
4
6
7
7
A New Hampshire RSA Chapter 155-E "Local Regulation Excavations"
B RSA Chapter 149:8-a "Dredging (Terrain Alteration)"
Town of Auburn, NH
Excavation Regulations
Adopted 1997
Section 1 - Purpose
These regulations supplement the prov1s1ons of RSA 155-E and provide further
clarification of the staMory requirements and their application in the municipality of Auburn, New
Hampshire. They are adopted as provided in RSA 155-E:11, RSA 675:6,7 & 8. Applicants
should familiarize themselves with both RSA 155-E and these regulations to be fully informed as
to penmit requirements.
Section 2 - Definitions
A. Abutter: Any person who owns land within 200 feet of the boundaries of the
land under consideration. A way, as defined in RSA 259:1, XXXV, shall not be
considered to be a banrier, but shall be included in the distance requirement for
purposes of detenmining whether a person is an abutter, RSA 672:3.
B. Applicant: Owner of the excavation site or the owner's designee.
C. Application: A complete submission of information and plans as required by
the statute RSA 155-E, local negulations, and by the excavation penmit
application.
D. Aquifer: Those areas designated by the blue shading or hatching which
appear on statewide mapping prepared by the United States Geological
Survey entitled "Availability of Ground Water ... "
E. Excavation Fee (RSA 155-E:B): A fee of $50.00 submitted by the applicant
to the regulator, following the public hearing and prior to issuance of an
excavation penmit, to defray the costs of processing the application.
F. Excavation Permit (RSA 155-E:B): A penmit issued by the regulator allowing
the excavation of material at a specified site, in a manner consistent with
RSA 155-E and local regulations for the period designated on the penmit
itself.
G. Excavation Permit Application: A fonm and associated documents which
contain excavation project infonmation. The application must be submitted
in duplicate to the regulator and the conservation commission.
H. Owner: An individual or corporation who claims ownership of the land,
containing the excavation site, by virtue of a properly executed deed
filed at the County Registry of Deeds.
I. Permit Fee ( RSA 155-E:11 l : A fee submitted by the applicant to the
regulator, as one of the prerequisites to issuance of an excavation penmit,
for the purpose of defraying costs associated with penmit compliance
inspections. The fee is established by the regulator based on the area
(acreage) and duration of the excavation project.
1
Town of Auburn, NH
Excavation Regulations
Adopted 1997
J. Pit Agreement : An agreement between the excavation site owner and the
contractor describing the procedure for material excavation. (See Section
106.02 of "Standard Specifications for Roads and Bridges" published by the
New Hampshire Department of Public Works and Highways)
K. Regulator : The Planning Board of the Town of Auburn, New Hampshire.
L. Temporary and Statutory Manufacturing and Processing Plants Structural
improvements that are permanent or temporary and that are integral to the
grading, crushing, and stockpiling of excavated material.
Section 3 - Excavation Permit Application
3.01 The applicant shall submit to the regulator and the Conservation Commission the
information and documents specified in RSA 155-E:3 and in the Excavation Permit
Application.
3.02 The Application submission shall include:
1. The application form containing the owner's name, location of project,
abutters' names and addresses, access routes, etc.
2. An excavation plan showing the excavation sile and the scheme for
removal of excavated material.
3. A restoration plan describing the process of site grading and revegetation
following completion of the excavation project, and,
4. Related permit approvals or other documents pertinent to the excavation
proposal including but not limited to Dredge and Fill and Chapter 149:8-a.
Section 4 - Submission Documents
4.01 Excavation Plan. The owner/applicant shall submit a plan describing the specific
location and extent of the proposed excavation project The excavation plan shall
include existing topographic and site boundary information compiled and prepared
by a Licensed Land Surveyor. Other information which must be contained in the plan
is:
1. Proposed topography at the completion of excavation (prior to restoration).
2. Distance between disturbed areas and closest property lines.
3. Zoning district(s).
4. Existing visual barriers to be retained.
5. Aquifer limits/locations as identified by the U.S. Geological Survey or other
sources.
2
Town of Auburn, NH
Excavation Regulations
Adopted 1997
6. Lakes, streams, wetlands and other natural and man-made features.
7. A description of project duration and phasing.
8. The names and addresses of abutting land owners.
9. Photograph(s) of the existing site.
10. Notations as to the size in acres of maximum excavated area, (maximum
excavated area shall not exceed 5 acres at any time), the excavation site
acreage and volumes of material to be removed.
11. The location and design of site access roads leading to and from public
highways.
12. The elevation of the highest annual average groundwater table within or
next to the proposed excavation.
13. Topsoil storage sites during the excavation process.
14. Erosion control and drainage plans.
15. The plan shall be drawn at a scale and contour interval which allows a
through understanding of project scope. Sectional drawings shall be
required by the regulator.
16. Failure to provide all requested infonnation shall ccnstitute grounds for
rejection.
4.02 ~estoration Plan. Excavation site restoration plans shall be prepared and submitted
by all new and existing excavation site owners, except as noted in RSA 155-E:2. As
required by Chapter 481 :3, New Hampshire Laws of 1979, the owners of existing
excavation operations must perfonn restoration in compliance with RSA 155-E:5.
The regulator shall notify all existing excavation operations owners of their site
restoration responsibility. Owners of existing excavation operations shall submit a
restoration plan and appropriate bonding to the regulator within six (6) months of their
notification. The Excavation Pennit Application Fonn shall be used for this
submission.
The restoration plan shall meet, at a minimum, the requirements set forth in
RSA 155-E:5. The character of the restored landscape shall blend with the
surrounding natural features. The restored site shall be rendered in a ccndition
that will not preclude its future use in a manner ccnsistent with the zoning ordinance
and map.
The restoration plan shall be drawn at the same scale and shall use the same base
survey infonnation as the utilized in the preparation of the excavation plan. The
restoration plan shall contain the following infonnation:
3
Town of Auburn, NH
Excavation Regulations
Adopted 1997
1. Restored topography and drainage at the completion of the restoration
phase,
2. The phasing of site restoration showing designated areas and completion
dates,
3. Soil conditioning specifications,
4. Seeding and mulching specifications,
5. The plant materials to be used in restoration, their quantities, and sizes,
6. Sections showing existing, excavated, and restored topography configuration.
7. Failure to provide all requested information shall constitute ground for denial.
Section 5 - Project Site Requirements
The following site development standards shall be incorporated into the site excavation
plan and/or conditions for permit approval:
5.01 Excavation Site Access Roads. Access roads leading to and from the excavation site
shall intersect existing streets and roads at locations that have been duly approved by
the state of local officials and in a manner that will not endanger the safety of highway
users and local residents. The provisions of RSA 249:17 and 18 ("Highway Access")
shall be adhered to by the applicant and shall be shown on the excavation plan. The
applicant shall be required to bear the cost of any and all traffic control measures,
such as flag persons, special duty police officers, flashing lights, barriers, etc. if and
when required by the regulator.
5.02 Traffic Circulation and Truck Routes (RSA 155-E:3 Ill). Permit approval shall be
conditioned on compliance by the applicant with street and highway regulations
promulgated by federal, state and local units.
5.03 Excavation Within Aquifer Areas (RSA 155-E:4 VI). No excavation project shall
substantially damage any aquifer identified on mapping prepared by the U.S.
Geological Survey or on more detailed aquifer mapping if such exists. The regulator
shall determine whether or not substantial damage to an aquifer will be incurred by
considering the following criteria:
1. The excavation shall not detrimentally affect the quality of the ground water
contained in the aquifer by directly contributing to pollution or by increasing
the long term susceptability of the aquifer to potential pollutants.
2. The excavation shall not cause a significant reduction in the long term volume
of water contained in the aquifer or in the storage capacity of the aquifer.
The regulator may require the applicant provide data and reports prepared by a
Professional Engineer or groundwater consultant which assess the potential aquifer
damage caused by the proposed excavation project.
4
Town of Auburn, NH
Excavation Regulations
Adopted 1997
5.04 Topsoil Cover. Prior to the withdrawal of material at a new excavation site, topsoil
material shall be stripped and stored on-site for site restoration use 'Nhen the
excavation project is complete. This should be undertaken in a phased manner to
minimize erosion potential. Topsoil shall be revegetated during the period of storage.
(Maximum area stripped shall not exceed 5 acres total at any one time.)
5.05 Timber Removal. The applicable New Hampshire statutes and regulations pertaining
to forest practice and timber harvesting shall apply to the removal of vegetative cover
at excavation sites.
5.06 Maximum Disturbed Area. Maximum area stripped shall not exceed live (5) total
acres at any one time.
5.07 Pit Erosion. No pit shall be left in such a condition that erosion of the pit during or
after competion of the work may result in water pollution by silt or other deleterious
substances. Pits shall be left in such shape and condition that material will not wash
to block or obstruct drainage ways. The area shall be left as free draining is practical.
5.08 Revegetation:
1. All disturbed areas shall be spread with the original topsoil or sufficient
topsoil to cover disturbed areas to a minimum depth of three (3) inches.
2. Areas for 'Nhich trees have been removed shall be replanted with white
pine seedlings.
3. Areas where low brush or grass has been removed shall either be
planted with seedlings or seeded with a slope seed mixture conforming
to State of New Hampshire Department of Public Works Highways
slope-seed mixture.
5.09 White Pine Seedlings
1. Seedlings shall be two (2) year old plants or plants furnished under a
standard nursery order for white pine seedling.
2. Seedlings without center buds and seedlings with pruned roots will not
be accepted.
3. Seedlings shall be set out in accordance with accepted horticultural
practice at eight (8) foot spacing in both directions.
5.10 Access Roads. Such roads shall be obliterated upon depletion of pit unless requested
to be retained by the regulator.
5.11 Seeding. All seeding shall be a=rnplished in conformance with "The State of New
Hampshire Standard Specification for Road and Bridge Construction" Section 644-
Grass Seed, with exception of Method and Measurement and Basis of Payment,
which shall not apply.
5
Town of Auburn, NH
Excavation Regulations
Adopted 1997
5.12 Visual Barriers. A vegetative or topographical buffer shall be maintained between
surrounding streets, highways, commercial, and residential land uses and the
excavated site. The regulator shall direct the applicant as to specific requirements
for the propcsed excavation site. Existing barriers shall be retained as the excavation
project is conducted.
Section 6 - Application Procedure
6.01 Preparation and Submission. The applicant shall adhere to RSA 155-E:3 and these
regulations during the process of application preparation and submittal. The completed
application shall be submitted in duplicate form (one copy to each) to the regulator as
well as the Auburn Conservation Commission.
6.02 Excavation Fee. An excavation fee of $50.00 (fifty dollars) shall be paid to the
regulator by the applicant prior to issuance of an excavation permit.
6.03 Bonding. The regulator shall establish the amount of the performance bond prior to
issuance of the excavation permit The bond amount shall be adequate to restore the
excavation site in a=rdance with RSA 155-E:5, as well as to restore roads which
access the site if necessary and all roads over which material is to be hauled. The
bond will be returned to the applicant when restoration work has been completed and
;;i final satisfactory site inspection has been conducted by the regulator.
6.04 Action on Pennit Within 20 days of the hearing required in RSA 155-E:?, the
regulator shall make a decision to grant or deny the requested permit. Excavation
permit approval by the regulator shall be in the form of a memorandum citing all
permit issuance conditions, a=mpanied by a permit sign depicting the location of
the excavation site, the signature(s) of the regulator and the permit expiration date.
The permit sign shall be pcsted in a secured manner at a prominent location near the
excavation site. If the application is denied, the owner shall be notified, in writing, by
the regulator stating the reasons for the denial.
6.05 Pit Agreement. A pit agreement between the owner, the contractor and the
governmental unit shall be executed whenever the excavated material is to be used
in the construction of modification of Class I, 11, 111, IV, V highways. A copy of the
agreement shall be submitted for acceptance to the regulator. Excavation shall not
proceed until the regulator has accepted the pit agreement and has been placed in an
assured pcsition that the excavation site will be restored in conformance with RSA
155-E:5. The pit agreement for Class IV and V highway construction projects shall be
essentially the same as the pit agreement set forth in Section 106 of "Standard
Specifications for Highways and Bridges" prepared by the New Hampshire Department
of Public Works and Highways.
6.06 Pennit Validity. The excavation permit shall be valid for a period of one (1) year.
6.07 Completion Notification. The applicant shall notify the regulator in writing when
the excavation of the site has been completed.
6
Town of Auburn, NH
Excavation Regulations
Adopted 1997
6.08 The completed application is to be delivered to the Secretary of the Planning Board
or Selectmen's Secretary, a minimum of twenty-one (21) days before the next
scheduled Planning Board public hearing. The applicant will be notified of the date
and time of their public hearing upon completion of review and acceptance of the
completed application of the Board.
Section 7 - Renewal and Amendment of Excavation Permit
7.01 Permit Renewal. The applicant may renew the excavation pennit and continue
excavation operations by making application to the regulator in the manner set forth
in Section 3 of these regulations. The excavation permit application need only
describe those information items which have been changed in content from the
previous application submission. Fees and bonding shall be as established for new
pennits.
7.02 Permit Amendment. If adherence to the permit conditions (induding the excavation/
restoration plans) cannot be maintained, the owner shall apply to the regulator for a
permit amendment. An application shall be completed and submitted to the regulator
in a manner similar to that provided in Section 5 of these regulations.
Section 8 - Administration and Enforcement
8.01 Pe·rmit Fee Schedule. A fee of $50.00 (fifty dollars) per excavated pit acre for each
site visit shall be levied by the regulator. Only those site visits made by the regulator
(qr itsdesignee) to affirm compliancewith the excavation permit conditions and
res!Dral:ion plan shall be counted for this purpose. The method for and amount of
payments shalt be determined by the regulator.
8.02 Enforcement .(also refer to RSA 155-E:10) The regulator wilt conduct sit,~iospections
to verifypennit compliance on an annual basis unless more frequent site visitation is
necessary.dw.e to special characteristics of the excavation/restoration plans.
8.03 qther Regu~ Where these regulations are in conflict with other locql ordinances
and/or regula~ the more stringent sh;sll apply.
8.04 Trese regulations shalt become eff~ctil(e upon passage and proper filling.
8.05 The violation of any condition of ll1e pit ~rmit ~h~I result in a two (2) week suspension
qf permit for first offense and thirty (30) day suspension for each subsequent offense.
Should violations become chronic and repetitive, the regulator shall revoke permit.
7



