Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 7-13-2011]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
The ordinances, bylaws and articles of the Town of Bedford of a general
and permanent nature adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Bedford,
the former Town Meeting and Board of Selectmen, as revised, codified
and consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code LLC, and
consisting of Chapters 1 through 285, together with the Charter and an
appendix are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code
of the Town of Bedford," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior legislation.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent legislation enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such legislation as is hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or continued
in force.
§ 1-3. Continuation of existing provisions; Charter not affected.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of the legislation in force immediately prior to the enactment of the
Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such legislation
and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall
date from the date of adoption of the prior legislation. Nothing in this
ordinance shall be deemed to affect in any way the provisions of the Charter
of the Town Bedford.
§ 1-4. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-5. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of
the Town Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance, and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Town Clerk, and
such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said Town Clerk
to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all
times while said Code is in effect.
A.
The Town Clerk of the Town of Bedford is hereby directed to make
copies of the Code of the Town of Bedford available at no charge to
members of the Town Council, heads of municipal departments and any
public library within the Town. Any person may inspect the Code at the
office of the Town Clerk at no charge. Any person, other than those
B.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:3
§ 1-6. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Town Council
to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Town of Bedford" shall be
understood and intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments
or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed
and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said
Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-7. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Town of Bedford, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required by law, a copy of this Adoption
Ordinance. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office
of the Clerk for inspection by the public at all times during regular office
hours. The enactment and publication of this ordinance, coupled with the
availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be
deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk, or someone authorized and directed
by the Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing
the Code required to be filed in the Clerk's office for use by the public. All
changes in said Code and all legislation adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the Clerk upon the payment of
a fee to be set by the Town Council, and the Town Council may also arrange
for procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-10. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Town of
Bedford to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or any
part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more
than $1,000.
enumerated as being able to obtain copies of the Code without charge,
shall be allowed to purchase copies of the Code from the Town Clerk.
§ 1-5 BEDFORD CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of Code provisions and ordinance provisions.
§ 1-12. Inconsistent ordinances and bylaws repealed.
All ordinances, bylaws, articles or parts of same inconsistent with the
provisions contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby
repealed; provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of
such inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Town of Bedford which
is not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain
in full force and effect.
§ 1-13. Legislation saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of legislation provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an
independent section or part of a section, and the holding of any section
or a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause
shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
A.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the
holding of any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or
ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or
constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof.
B.
A. Any legislation adopted subsequent to March 8, 2011.
Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or
any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
B.
Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of
this ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C.
Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
D.
Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
E.
Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
F.
Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
G.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted legislation.
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the Town's
indebtedness.
Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
H.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
The annexation or dedication of property or approval of preliminary or
final subdivision plats.
J.
All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
K.
Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
L.
Rules and regulations adopted by the Town's various duly established
boards, committees and commissions having the power to adopt such
rules and regulations.
M.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances, bylaws, and articles for
adoption and revision as part of the Code, certain grammatical changes
and other minor changes were made in one or more of said ordinances,
bylaws and articles. It is the intention of the Town Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances, bylaws and
articles so changed had been previously formally amended to read as
such.
A.
Throughout the Code, references to Building Inspector, Building Official
and Code Official are changed to Building Code Official. This revision
shall be made in future supplementation of the Code should it be
necessary.
B.
In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance,
as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof.
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances and
resolutions as they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
C.
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-14C, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) _________________." Schedule
A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the Town offices.
§ 1-13 BEDFORD CODE § 1-14
1:6
Chapter 13
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conduct of public officials — See Charter, Art.
VII.
§ 13-1. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to RSA 31:39-a and the Town of Bedford
Charter.2 It is intended to guide public servants in balancing private
interests and their obligations to the public, and to ensure consistency
in the application of conflict-of-interest standards. It is further intended
to recognize a distinction between conflicts that may arise when a public
servant is acting in a legislative or quasi-judicial capacity. This chapter
recognizes that the area of matters on which public servants must pass
is of such a wide range that almost every public servant must inevitably
have some interest that may conceivably be affected by some legislative
proposal. It is not the intention of this chapter to prevent persons who
are peculiarly suited for public office by reason of their commercial or
professional experience from contributing their services to the community
and to encourage individuals who do not have a conflict of interest, as
provided herein, to participate in the decisionmaking process.
§ 13-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — Any board, committee, or commission, permanent or special,
appointed or elected.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST — A situation, circumstance, or financial interest
where a public officer votes on a matter in which he or she or a member
of his or her family has a direct, personal and pecuniary interest which is
immediate, definite, capable of demonstration, and not remote, uncertain,
contingent and speculative, such that a person of ordinary capacity and
intelligence would not be influenced by it.
EMPLOYEE — A person who is paid by the Town of Bedford for his or her
services, but who is not an independent contractor.
FAMILY — Any person who is related to the public servant in one of
the following ways: spouse, domestic partner, parent, grandparent, child,
grandchild, sibling, or similar relation to the individual's spouse. This
includes all persons who are members of the same household as the public
2. Editor's Note: See Charter, Art. VII, Conduct of Public Officials.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-2
1:7
servant in question, regardless of whether they are related by blood or
marriage.
LEGISLATIVE CAPACITY — A circumstance where a public servant is
engaged in the enactment of legislation, including ordinances and
regulations, or similar matters.
PECUNIARY INTEREST — Any advantage in the form of money, property,
commercial interest or anything else, the primary significance of which is
economic gain; it does not include economic advantage applicable to the
public generally, such as tax reduction or increased prosperity, generally.
PUBLIC SERVANT — All officials, officers and employees of the Town,
whether elected, appointed, paid or unpaid.
QUASI-JUDICIAL ACTION — Any action where the board or committee
members are acting like a judge or jury, where there is a duty to notify
potential parties, hear the parties, and decide on a matter after weighing
and considering such evidence and arguments as the parties choose to lay
before the board.
RECUSE — To disqualify or seek to disqualify from participation in a
decision on grounds such as prejudice or personal involvement.
§ 13-3. Conflicts of interest enumerated.
A. Public servants should avoid legal conflicts of interest.
Public servants shall not appear on behalf of a client or friend before
any governmental body of which the public servant is a member.
B.
A public servant shall not participate in any quasi-judicial matter in
which he or she, or a member of his or her family, has a personal or
pecuniary interest that may directly affect or influence the performance
of his or her duties. In such instances, the public servant shall recuse
him or herself from discussion and decisionmaking.
C.
No public servant shall inappropriately influence a party in any
business, transaction, or private employment, or have any direct
financial or other private interest that is in conflict with the proper
discharge of his or her official duties.
D.
No public servant shall use or attempt to use his or her position as a
public servant to obtain any financial gain, contract, license, privilege
or other private or personal advantage for the public servant or any
person, firm or organization associated with the public servant.
E.
No public servant shall coerce or attempt to coerce, by intimidation,
threats or otherwise, any public servant to engage in political activities.
F.
No public servant shall receive any type of compensation, except from
the Town, for performing any official duty. The receipt of gifts of a
nominal value which a reasonable person could not construe as being
capable of influencing a decision shall not create a conflict of interest.
G.
§ 13-2 BEDFORD CODE § 13-3
1:8
§ 13-4. List of nominal gifts.4
At the end of each calendar year, the Town Manager shall submit a list of
nominal gifts (over $50 cumulatively from one vendor) received by all Town
employees and boards and commissions. The Town Council Chairperson will
add any Council gifts to that list, and the list will be placed on file in the
Town Manager's office.
§ 13-5. Duty to disclose and to recuse.
Examples of gifts of nominal value would be but are not limited to
business grand openings, benefit golf tournaments, thank-you food
baskets. Appointed officials who are given a gift shall inform the
chairman of the board or commission they sit on. Town employees
shall inform their department head and/or the Town Manager of, and
receive approval for, any gift received. Any Town official who is acting
in a legislative or quasi-judicial matter, who has accepted any type of
gift in the past from a person or company presenting to the board or
commission they sit on must disclose said gift to the rest of the board
prior to any discussion on the item.3
No public servant acting in a legislative capacity may participate in
discussions, deliberations or decisions with respect to a matter in which
he or she has a direct, personal and pecuniary interest different from
that of a member of the general public. Any public servant who has
any interest in the legislative matter shall publicly and on the record
state all dealings, interest, and/or relationships (including employer/
employee) that might compromise the public servant's objectivity or
create a situation in which there was a potential of unfair economic
advantage or the possibility of improper financial gain.
A.
No public servant, acting in a quasi-judicial capacity, shall participate,
by means of discussion, deliberation or vote in any matter in which he
or she has a direct, personal and pecuniary interest which is immediate,
definite, and capable of demonstration, not remote, uncertain,
contingent and speculative, such that a person of ordinary capacity and
intelligence would not be influenced by it.
B.
Public servants have a duty to recuse themselves from participating in
a specific action or discussion where a conflict of interest exists.
C.
A public servant having a conflict of interest may not be seated with
other members during any discussions, deliberations or votes on the
matter in which the conflict exists, but may remain in the hearing room,
and may speak so long as it is clearly stated for the record that that
public servant is doing so only as a member of the general public.
D.
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 13-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-5
1:9
Chapter 21
ELECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conduct of elections — See Charter, Art. II.
Reasons for recusal do not include knowledge of the facts involved
gained in the performance of the public official's official duties.
E.
When uncertainty arises relative to the existence of a conflict where
the public servant is acting in a legislative or quasi-judicial capacity,
the public servant may request, following full disclosure, that the board
vote on the question as to whether that member should recuse him or
herself. Any such request and vote shall be made prior to or at the
commencement of any required public hearing. Such a vote shall be
advisory and nonbinding and may only be requested by board members.
F.
§ 13-5 BEDFORD CODE § 13-5
1:10
ARTICLE I
Closing Dates for Checklist
[Adopted 3-14-1961 by Art. 23]
§ 21-1. Sessions of Supervisors of the Checklist.5
The Supervisors of the Checklist shall be in session for the correction of the
Checklist at some suitable place in Town on the Saturday 10 days prior to
the election and upon which all hearings shall be finally closed, provided
that if the Saturday falls on a holiday weekend, that session shall be held
on Tuesday, seven days prior to the election, between 7:00 p.m. and 7:30
p.m. and at the discretion of the Supervisors for extended hours. Notice of
the day, hour, and place of each session of the Board of Supervisors shall be
given upon the Checklists first posted and shall be published in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Town at least seven days prior to each such
session. The reconvening of any session which has been adjourned shall not
require the publication of notice.
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 21-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-1
1:11

ARTICLE II
Campaigning on Town Property
[Adopted 3-6-1982 by Art. 4]
§ 21-2. Election day campaigning prohibitions.
Candidates for public office or their representatives are prohibited from
campaigning or soliciting votes in any manner within 150 feet of the polling
place on any election day.
§ 21-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-2
1:13
Chapter 29
HEALTH DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Permits for public pools — See Ch. 80.
Food establishment licenses — See Ch. 140.
Septic systems and wells — See Ch. 208.
§ 29-1. Purpose.6
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a local health department as
allowed under RSA 147:1 and RSA 128:3 for the purpose of promoting the
general well being for the individuals that live and work in the Town of
Bedford.
§ 29-2. Health Officer.7
The Town Council shall recommend to the Commissioner of the Department
of Health and Human Services an individual to be appointed as the Bedford
Health Officer as outlined in RSA 128:1. His or her duties shall be
performed as outlined in RSA 128:5. These duties shall be in addition those
required by local ordinances. The Town of Bedford personnel policy and
RSA 128 shall establish the position qualifications. The Health Officer shall
be responsible for periodic review of the municipal health ordinances for
compliance and coordination with all relevant state regulations. The review
reports shall be submitted to the Town Council no less than every three
years or upon a request for an interim review from the Town Council. The
Health Officer shall report directly to the Bedford Fire Chief.
§ 29-3. Deputy Health Officer/Inspector.
The Town of Bedford may appoint a Deputy Health Officer as allowed per
RSA 128:6a and 147:5. The Deputy Health Officer/Inspector shall report
directly to the Town Health Officer.
§ 29-4. Bedford Board of Health.
The Bedford Board of Health shall be comprised of the Health Officer and
the Town Council. The organization of the Board shall comply with the
requirements of RSA 128:3.
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 21-2 BEDFORD CODE § 29-5
1:14
§ 29-5. Appeals.
Wherever any health regulations adopted by the Town reference an appeals
process, unless specifically stated otherwise, the Bedford Board of Health
shall be the appeals board.
§ 29-6. Fees.8
Health Department fees shall be reviewed and approved by the Town
Council. Unless otherwise provided in the Code of the Town of Bedford, fees
amounts are set forth in the Building Department Handbook available in the
Building Department offices.
Chapter 46
PLANNING AND ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Charter, Art. XI.
Building construction — See Ch. 92.
Zoning — See Ch. 275.
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 29-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-6
1:15

ARTICLE I
Establishment of Planning Board
[Adopted 3-10-1953 by Art. 329]
§ 46-1. Establishment and membership.
The Planning Board of the Town of Bedford is hereby established consisting
of nine members as set forth in § C11-1A(1) of the Town Charter.
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 46-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-1
1:17

ARTICLE II
Land Use and Other Powers
[Adopted as indicated in section histories]
§ 46-2. Authority to adopt subdivision regulations. [Adopted
3-9-1965 by Art. 510]
The Planning Board is authorized to adopt land subdivision regulations in
accordance with the provisions of RSA 674:35 et seq.
§ 46-3. Authority to review and approve nonresidential site plans.
[Adopted 3-14-1978 by Art. 311]
The Planning Board is authorized to review and approve or disapprove site
plans for the development of tracts for nonresidential uses, whether or not
such development includes the subdivision or resubdivision of a site, as
provided in RSA 674:43.
§ 46-4. Fees. [Adopted 3-13-1979 by Art. 5]
The Planning Board of the Town of Bedford is herewith authorized to charge
reasonable fees to individuals appearing before said Planning Board, and
the revenue generated by said fees shall be paid to the general fund of the
Town of Bedford.
§ 46-5. Examination and survey. [Adopted 3-13-1979 by Art. 1112]
The Planning Board, its members, officers, or agents and employees are
authorized to enter upon any land for the purpose of making such
examinations and surveys as are reasonably necessary, and to maintain
necessary monuments and marks thereon as provided under RSA 674:1.
§ 46-6. Abutter notification. [Adopted 3-13-1979 by Art. 12]
If in the opinion of the Planning Board a site plan would cause hardship or
discomfort to the abutters of a commercial enterprise, said abutters shall be
notified by mail of a public hearing.
§ 46-7. Traffic impact. [Adopted 3-13-1979 by Art. 13]
A traffic impact assessment may be required to be prepared by the
developer if in the opinion of the Planning Board such development will
have an adverse traffic effect upon the roads in the vicinity of the
development.
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 46-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-7
1:19

ARTICLE III
Zoning Map
[Adopted as indicated in section histories]
§ 46-8. Adoption of map. [Adopted 3-11-1969 by Art. 413]
A Zoning Map for the Town of Bedford is hereby adopted which delineates
all zoning classifications adopted by the Town of Bedford and all duly
adopted amendments thereto.
§ 46-9. Adoption of revised map. [Adopted 3-7-1972 by Art. 614]
The revised map is hereby adopted as the Official Zoning Map of the Town
of Bedford, together with the accompanying document delineating the exact
description of each zone for the Town of Bedford.
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 46-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-9
1:21
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 64
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire alarm systems — See Ch. 130, Art. III.
§ 64-1. Purpose.
§ 64-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM BUSINESS — The business by any individual partnership,
corporation, or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing,
repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or
causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced,
moved or installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure or
facility.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical,
arranged to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry, fire, medical
emergency or other activity requiring urgent attention and to which police,
fire, or medical personnel are expected to respond.
ALARM USERS — The person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind which owns, controls or occupies any
building, structure or facility wherein an alarm system is maintained.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE — A device, which is interconnected to a
telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone
number and transmit by code signal an emergency message indicating a
need for emergency response. Such a device is an alarm system.
The purpose of this chapter is to encourage alarm users and alarm
businesses to assume increased responsibility for maintaining the
mechanical reliability and the proper use of alarm systems, to prevent
unnecessary police and fire emergency response to false alarms and
thereby to protect the emergency response capability of the Town from
misuse.
A.
This chapter governs burglary, robbery, fire and medical alarm systems,
requires permits, establishes fees, provides for discontinuation of
police and fire response to alarms and provides for punishment of
violations.
B.
§ 46-9 BEDFORD CODE § 64-2
1:22
BEDFORD EMERGENCY DISPATCH — The Town facility used to receive
emergency and general information from the public to be dispatched to the
respective Police and Fire Departments.
BURGLARY ALARM SYSTEM — An alarm system signaling an entry or
attempted entry into the area protected by the system.
CENTRAL ALARM COMPANY — An alarm business that interconnects an
alarm system to its own trunk lines and then calls the Bedford Emergency
Dispatch using a human being instead of an automatic dialing device.
FALSE ALARMS — An alarm signal, eliciting a response by police, fire or
medical personnel when a situation requiring a response does not in fact
exist, but does not include an alarm signal caused by violent conditions
of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to
control by the alarm business operator or alarm user.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — An alarm system signaling a fire in an area
protected by the system.
FIRE CHIEF — The head of the Bedford Fire Department or his/her
designee.
INTERCONNECT — To connect an alarm system including an automatic
dialing device to a telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical
device that utilizes a telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line
to transmit a message upon the activation of the alarm system.
MEDICAL ALARM SYSTEM — An alarm system signaling a medical
condition needing immediate emergency response for an occupant of the
area protected by the system.
POLICE CHIEF — The head of the Bedford Police Department or his/her
designee.
PRIMARY TRUNK LINE — A telephone line serving the Bedford Emergency
Dispatch that is designated to receive emergency calls.
ROBBERY ALARM SYSTEM — An alarm system signaling a robbery or
attempted robbery.
SOUND EMISSION CUTOFF FEATURE — A feature of an alarm system
which will cause an audible alarm to stop emitting sound.
SYSTEM RECOVER OPERATIVE — When the alarm system is capable to
eliciting a response by police, fire, or medical personnel.
§ 64-3. Permit required.
§ 64-4. Fines for excessive false alarms.
Every alarm user interconnecting an automatic dialing device to the
Bedford Emergency Dispatch shall have an alarm user's permit for each
system from the Police or Fire Chief.
A.
B. A yearly permit fee shall be established by the Town Council.
§ 64-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-4
1:23
§ 64-5. No-response or disconnect order for excessive false alarms.
§ 64-6. Hearing.
Fines will be assessed by the Police of Fire Chief to the alarm user for
excessive false alarms during any twelve-month period as follows:
(1) Third alarm: $25.
(2) Fourth alarm: $50.
(3) Fifth false alarm: $75.
(4) Sixth false alarm: $100.
(5) Any additional false alarms: $200.
A.
The alarm owner or occupant of a building serviced by an alarm will
be notified of a false alarm either in person by responding police or
fire personnel, written notice, or regular mail. If the fine has not been
received within 30 days of notice and there is no appeal pending on
the validity of the alarm, the Police or Fire Chief may initiate the noresponse
or disconnect process and may also initiate the enforcement
of penalties.
B.
The Police or Fire Chief has the right to waive any or all false alarm
assessments if he or she determines it to be in the best interest of the
Town of Bedford.
C.
The Police or Fire Chief may order no-response and/or disconnect after
six false alarms in a calendar year or failure to pay a fine within 30
days. The Police or Fire Chief will advise the alarm user that there may
be no emergency response, if serviced by a central alarm company or
the Town of Bedford may disconnect the alarm system if interconnected
to the Bedford Emergency Dispatch. If a disconnect or no-response is
initiated, reinstatement can be made by the Fire or Police Chief upon
payment of fines or penalties and/or a finding that a reasonable effort
has been made to correct the false alarms.
A.
The Police or Fire Chief may also order an alarm disconnect or no
emergency response for any other reason deemed in the best interest
of the Town and public safety.
B.
The alarm user has the right to a hearing before any disconnect or noresponse
order goes into effect. A hearing must be requested within 10
days of a notice to disconnect, notice of no response, or notice of a false
alarm. Failure to contest the determination in the required time period
results in a conclusive presumption that the alarm was false and/or the
notice to disconnect or no-response is valid.
A.
The hearing shall be before the respective Police or Fire Chief. The
alarm user shall have the right to present written and oral evidence
B.
§ 64-4 BEDFORD CODE § 64-6
1:24
§ 64-7. Use of revenues.
All revenues generated from this chapter will go to the general fund of the
Town of Bedford.
§ 64-8. Violations and penalties.
Violation of this chapter shall be punishable upon conviction by a fine of not
more than $500, plus any fines due to the Town.
Chapter 74
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dog fouling and leashing in parks — See Ch.
185, Art. VII.
subject to the right of cross-examination. The Chief will arbitrate
whether or not the alarms are false and take appropriate action.
§ 64-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-8
1:25

ARTICLE I
Dogs at Large
[Adopted 1977]
§ 74-1. Running at large prohibited.
§ 74-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AT LARGE — Off the premises of the owner or keeper and not under the
control of any persons by means of personal presence and attention as will
reasonably control the conduct of such dog, unless accompanied by the
owner or custodian.
§ 74-3. Seizure and impounding of dogs.
Any authorized person may seize, impound or restrain any dog in violation
of this article and deliver said dog to a person or shelter authorized to board
dogs. Such dogs shall be handled as strays or abandoned dogs pursuant to
applicable laws.
§ 74-4. Notice of violation.15
In addition to impounding a dog found at large or in violation of this article,
any law enforcement officer may issue, in the name of the owner or keeper
of such dog, a notice of violation.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, it shall be unlawful
for any dog to run at large, except when accompanied by the owner or
custodian, and when used for hunting, herding, supervised competition
and exhibition, or training for such.
A.
For the purposes of this section, "accompanied" means that the owner
or custodian must be able to see or hear, or both, or have reasonable
knowledge of where the dog is hunting, herding, or where training
is being conducted or where trials are being held. Nothing herein
provided shall mean that the dog must be within sight at all times.
B.
Such notice shall impose upon the owner or keeper of such a dog
a forfeiture of $25, which must be paid to the Clerk of the Town
wherein such dog is owned or kept within 96 hours of the date and time
notice is given, in full satisfaction of the assessed penalty. [Amended
5-11-2005]
A.
In the event such penalty is not paid to the Town Clerk within the
time limitations specified, a summons shall be issued for appearance
in District Court or Municipal Court, and any person found guilty of
violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation.
B.
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 74-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-5
1:27
§ 74-5. When effective.16
The provisions of this article are effective pursuant to RSA 466: 30-b.
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 74-5 BEDFORD CODE § 74-5
1:28
ARTICLE II
Dog Fouling
[Adopted 9-10-2008]
§ 74-6. Removal of feces required.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, possessing or controlling a dog
on any sidewalk, street or public area or on any private property neither
owned nor occupied by said person to:
§ 74-7. Enforcement restrictions.
This article shall be enforced only if the failure to appear without a means
of removal or the failure to remove and dispose of said dog feces occurs in
the presence of a law enforcement officer.
§ 74-8. Exception.
This article shall not apply to any dog accompanying a person mentally
or physically impaired and who because of such impairment is unable to
comply with the requirements of this article.
§ 74-9. Violations and penalties.
This violation shall carry a fine of $100.
Fail to carry any article or means to remove any feces left by such dog;
or
A.
Fail to remove and dispose of any feces left by such dog in a manner
consistent with law.
B.
§ 74-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-9
1:29
Chapter 80
BATHING PLACES
§ 74-9 BEDFORD CODE § 74-9
1:30
ARTICLE I
Swimming Pool Enclosures
[Adopted 3-5-1974 by Art. 5]
§ 80-1. Enclosure requirements.
Every person owning land in the Town of Bedford on which there is situated
a swimming pool which contains 24 inches or more of water in depth at
any point shall erect and maintain thereon an adequate enclosure either
surrounding the property or pool area, sufficient to make such body of water
inaccessible to small children.
§ 80-2. Enforcement.17
This article shall be enforced by the Town Council.
§ 80-3. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for violation of this article shall be a fine of $100 for each
offense. Each day during which this article is not complied with shall
constitute a separate offense.
Enclosure specifications. Such enclosure, including gates therein, must
be not less than four feet above the underlying ground; and
A.
Gates specifications. All gates must be self-latching with latches placed
four feet above the underlying ground or otherwise made inaccessible
from the outside to small children.
B.
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 80-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-3
1:31

ARTICLE II
Swimming Pools, Spas and Natural Bathing Areas
[Adopted 11-14-2007]
§ 80-4. Statutory authority.
§ 80-5. New facilities.19
In addition to any requirements provided under Chapter 275, Zoning, Site
Plan Review Regulations, or any other local, state or federal law, all new
facilities meeting the criteria of a public bathing facility/place shall secure
plan review and construction approval from the New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services.
§ 80-6. Definitions.20
Where terms are not specifically defined in this article, their meaning shall
be derived from adopted codes. Where a term is not defined under any
adopted code, its meaning shall be the ordinarily accepted meaning within
the context that the term is used.
HEALTH AUTHORITY — The Health Officer of the Town of Bedford, whose
appointment shall be under the jurisdiction of RSA 128:1, or his designee.
PUBLIC BATHING FACILITY — A public bathing place that comprises a
water-containing structure and associated buildings and equipment,
intended or used for bathing, swimming, or diving purposes.
PUBLIC BATHING FACILITY OPERATOR — The individual who has
responsibility for the daily operation of a public bathing place and who
is trained in the sanitation, safety, and proper maintenance of the public
bathing place and all physical and mechanical equipment associated
therewith.
As permitted by RSA 31:39 and RSA 485-A:26, this article shall regulate
the operation of all swimming pools, recreational spas, hot tubs, and
natural bathing areas that meet the definitions of public bathing places
and facilities as defined in this article. Such facilities regulated by this
chapter shall be referred to herein as "public pools" or "public spas."
A.
All public pools and spas shall be maintained and operated at all times
in accordance with New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules, Env-
Wq 1100 Public Bathing Places. Copies of the Code are available for
review at the Town offices.
B.
If any requirement in Env-Wq 1100 conflicts with any Town ordinance,
the more stringent requirement shall apply.18
C.
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
20.Editor's Note: See Env-Wq 1100 Public Bathing Places, Code of Administrative Rules, for
complete text of definitions applicable hereto.
§ 80-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-6
1:33
PUBLIC BATHING PLACE — A place or location, together with buildings
and equipment, intended or used for recreational or therapeutic bathing,
swimming, or diving, and operated by or for any governmental subdivision,
public or private corporation, partnership, association, or educational
institution open to the public, members, or students, whether on a fee or
free basis.
§ 80-7. Permits.
§ 80-8. Inspections.
Annual permit required. No person, corporation, or other entity shall
operate, maintain, or allow to be used any public pool or spa except
when in possession of a valid permit issued by the Health Department.
The permits shall be issued annually. Annual permits shall expire March
31 of every year.
A.
Expiration of permit. Except as otherwise stipulated in this Code, any
permit issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for a one-year
period and shall expire on the last day of March, annually. There shall
be a late application fee for any permit renewal application received
more than 10 days after its expiration.
B.
Permit to be posted. Any permit issued pursuant to this article shall be
posted in a conspicuous place about the public bathing facility.
C.
Revocation procedure.
Whenever the Health Authority shall find that any public bathing
facility is not in compliance with the terms and conditions of this
article, the Health Authority may cause the operating permit to be
revoked or suspended by any or all of the following methods:
The Health Authority may physically remove the permit from
its posting.
(a)
The Health Authority may notify the owner or operator of the
public bathing facility in writing that the operating permit is
revoked or suspended.
(b)
The Health Authority may post a sign or signs conspicuously
about the public bathing facility to the effect that the operating
permit has been revoked.
(c)
(1)
Revocation proceedings shall be in accordance with Env-Wq
1103.13.
(2)
D.
All owners and operators of public bathing facilities shall allow the
Health Authority entry onto the pool premises at all reasonable times
for the purposes of inspections and sample collection.
A.
The Health Authority shall require an annual pre-opening inspection
prior to the public bathing facility being utilized by the public.
B.
§ 80-6 BEDFORD CODE § 80-8
1:34
§ 80-9. Fee schedule.
§ 80-10. Operational criteria.
Permit holders will be billed for reinspection if the same violation is
noted on two or more inspections in any twelve-month period.
C.
Annual permit fees.
(1) For each indoor pool: $175.
(2) Per outdoor pool or natural bathing place: $125.
Spa and hot tub permits: $125 per tub or spa up to two units and
$100 for each additional unit at each site.
(3)
(4) For municipally owned and operated facilities: no permit fee.
A.
B. Reinspection fee: $50 per visit.
C. Late permit renewals: $25.21
Quality of water.
Public swimming pools, recreational spas, hot tubs, and natural
bathing areas shall be maintained and operated at all times in
accordance with New Hampshire Public Bathing Rules, Env-Wq
1100. A copy of these regulations shall be on file at the Town Health
Department.
(1)
In the event that the Health Officer or the designated
representative deems a biological water test is required, the public
bathing facility shall pay for the water testing fee in addition to the
public bathing place permit.
(2)
Public bathing facilities will be charged separately for the water
test. Failure to pay for the water test will result in the suspension
of the Town of Bedford public bathing places permit.
(3)
A.
Required equipment.
Public pools. All public pools shall be supplied at all times with
the following items of equipment, which shall be maintained in
complete form and proper working order:
Public pools using chlorine as a disinfectant shall be equipped
with a positive displacement chlorinator or a unit that controls
the rate of hypochlorite or bromine tablet erosion, which shall
be maintained in operating condition at all times. Other
systems of disinfections. such as bromine and the like, will
be considered on an individual basis, capable of determining
free, combined, and residual levels or concentrations of the
(a)
(1)
B.
21.Editor's Note: See permit expiration provisions in § 80-7B.
§ 80-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-10
1:35
§ 80-11. Swimmer safety.
disinfecting agent as well as measuring pH, alkalinity and
cyanuric acid.
(b) One shepherd's crook with a minimum handle length of 12 feet.
One ring buoy with a rope attached, the rope to be no less than
1/4 inch in diameter and in length 1 1/2 times the width of the
pool or 50 feet, whichever is less.
(c)
One plastic floatable backboard device for the transportation
of persons with spinal injuries.
(d)
One standard American Red Cross twenty-four-unit first aid kit
or its equivalent.
(e)
Public spas and hot tubs. Public spas and hot tubs used by the
public for recreational purposes shall be operated in accordance
with the following standards:
Adequate shower bath facilities shall be provided at all spa and
hot tub facilities. Showering is required before use of the spa
and hot tub.
(a)
Disinfection shall be by continuous feed equipment with
hypochlorite or bromine being the only acceptable
disinfectants.
(b)
Spa and tub surfaces and surrounding areas shall be smooth,
easily cleanable, and maintained in good repair at all times.
(c)
(2)
In public pools, supervision of bathers shall be provided in accordance
with the following standards:
Where lifeguard service is provided, the lifeguard shall have
satisfactorily completed a senior course of instruction in lifesaving
and water safety equivalent to that offered by the American Red
Cross or the YMCA.
(1)
Where no lifeguard service is provided, a warning sign shall be
placed in plain view, which shall state "WARNING-NO LIFEGUARD
ON DUTY" with clearly legible letters at least four inches in height.
(2)
A.
Certification. Public bathing facility operators shall be certified pool
operators.22
B.
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 80-10 BEDFORD CODE § 80-11
1:36
Chapter 97
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sign standards — See Ch. 275, § 275-68. Building identification signs — See Ch. 275,
Table 6.
§ 97-1. Requirement for all properties.
Every dwelling, building, or structure, whether it is residential, commercial
or industrial (whether existing on the date of adoption of this chapter
or which may exist in the future) located in the Town of Bedford shall
be required to have a number(s) posted upon such dwelling, building,
or structure or upon the property which is under construction or such
improvements exist, so as to be plainly visible from the street which abuts
the main entrance to such property.
§ 97-2. Posting of additional numbers.23
When such posting of a number(s) results in numbers which are not readily
visible from the street year-round, an additional number shall be posted
at the main driveway entering onto the property from a public road. Such
posted number(s) shall be at such a height level and in an area where
the number(s) will not be obstructed by trees, brush, snow banks, parked
vehicles, or any other material.
§ 97-3. Signage.
This number, which represents the legal address as assigned by the Town
of Bedford, shall be a minimum of four inches in height and shall be Arabic
numerals or block style letters.
§ 97-4. Multiple units.
Every dwelling, building, or structure that houses more than one living unit
or business section shall also post appropriate unit number(s) or letter(s)
for each separate living unit or business section, so as to be plainly visible
in the main entrance to such unit or section of the main dwelling, building,
or structure.
§ 97-5. Certificate of occupancy.
No dwelling, building, or structure shall be issued a certificate of occupancy
until the assigned number(s) have been posted in accordance with this
chapter.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 80-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-6
1:37
§ 97-6. Violations and penalties.
The owner of any dwelling, building, or structure who shall fail to post such
number(s) within 30 days after notice from the Town Manager, or his or her
duly authorized agent, shall be fined not more than $25 for each day that
the number(s) is not posted.
Chapter 125
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Refuse disposal at transfer station — See Ch.
§ 97-6 BEDFORD CODE § 97-6
1:38
ARTICLE I
Transfer Station Fees
[Adopted 3-13-1979 by Art. 3]
§ 125-1. Establishment of fees for commercial use.24
Fees and charges for use of the transfer station shall be set from time to
time by the Town Council.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 125-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-1
1:39
Chapter 130
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 64.
Building construction — See Ch. 92.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 97.
§ 125-1 BEDFORD CODE § 125-1
1:40
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 130-1. Adoption of codes.
§ 130-2. Definitions.
Town of Bedford hereby adopts the following National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) codes for the purpose of firesafety, firefighting and
fire prevention:
Code Edition
NFPA 1 Uniform Fire Code* Current edition
NFPA 101 Life Safety Code,* except
Section 23.3.525
Current edition
NFPA 70 National Electric Code* Current edition
NFPA 13, 13D and R Sprinkler Codes* Current edition
*Additional codes referenced in these publications shall be considered
as adopted by the Town of Bedford and enforceable.
A.
Additionally the Bedford Fire Codes shall be equivalent to or offer a
greater degree of life safety than the codes recognized by the New
Hampshire State Fire Marshal.
B.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AHJ (AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION) — The Bedford Fire Chief
or his designee.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Refers to any structure or expansion of an
existing of structure to be built or which is being built. Also for the
purpose of this chapter, whenever there is a change in the occupancy
use group of an existing premises, the structure shall be considered
new construction for the purpose of code and ordinance requirements.
RENOVATIONS — Refer to any modifications made to an existing
structure that are structural, nonstructural and cosmetic. For the
purpose of this chapter renovations in existing structures are
cumulative, and once the accumulated area of renovations equals or
exceeds 50% of the structure area, the entire building must be brought
into compliance with adopted codes and ordinances to the same level
as a new structure.
A.
Where terms are not specifically defined in this chapter, their meaning
shall be derived from adopted codes. Where the terms are not defined
under any adopted code, their meaning shall be their ordinarily
accepted meanings within the context in which they are used.
B.
25..
§ 130-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-3
1:41
§ 130-3. Required plans.
§ 130-4. Inspections.
§ 130-5. Department Fire Code Handbook.
The Bedford Fire Chief or his designee shall create and maintain a
document known as the "Town of Bedford Fire Code Handbook." This
document shall contain and outline the Fire Department policies for
permits, inspections, codes being used and other items as needed to provide
adequate information for design and operational requirements for firesafety
prevention. The Bedford Town Council upon modification or at their request
shall review this document. Once approved by the Town Council it shall be
considered enforceable as part of this chapter.
All new or replacement life safety system designs must be reviewed and
approved prior to the start of installation. The plan submissions must
include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Equipment cut sheets.
(2) Hydraulic calculations (where applicable).
(3) Plans depicting equipment layout.
A.
When in the opinion of the AHJ the submitted plans do not readily
verify code or local ordinance compliance, the Bedford Fire Department
reserves the right to require the plans to be reviewed and certified by a
New Hampshire licensed fire protection engineer.
B.
The AHJ is authorized to inspect, at all reasonable times, any building
or premises for the purpose of:
(1) Verifying code and ordinance compliance.
(2) Place of assembly inspections.
(3) Complaint investigations.
(4) Fire prevention inspections.
A.
All nonresidential occupancies shall, at the time of a change of
ownership or tenancy, notify the Fire Department of said change and
arrange for a life safety inspection.
B.
§ 130-3 BEDFORD CODE § 130-5
1:42
ARTICLE II
Early Warning Devices and Smoke Detectors
§ 130-6. Early warning devices.
If not specified by the adopted codes, all construction shall require the
installation of early warning devices, i.e. heat and/or smoke detectors.
In addition to locations specified within the adopted codes, the Town of
Bedford requires such devices have a maximum spacing of 30 feet in all
code areas.
§ 130-7. Smoke detectors.26
All new construction shall require the installation of an adequate number of
smoke detectors as determined by the Building Code Official.
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 130-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-7
1:43

ARTICLE III
Emergency Lighting, Exit Signs, Fire Extinguishers, and Fire Alarm
Systems
§ 130-8. Emergency lighting.
If not specified by the adopted codes, all new nonresidential construction
and renovations shall have emergency lighting in exits, exit discharges and
in all rest rooms.
§ 130-9. Exit signs.
If not specified by the adopted codes, all new nonresidential construction
and renovations shall have exit signs in exit paths.
§ 130-10. Fire extinguishers.
§ 130-11. Fire alarm systems.
§ 130-12. Fines for false alarm notifications.
Fire extinguishers shall be a minimum of ten-pound ABC or as specified
by the Bedford Fire Department.
A.
If not specified by the adopted codes, all new nonresidential
construction and renovations shall have fire extinguishers at all exits,
and access to the extinguisher shall not exceed a travel distance of 75
feet.
B.
If not specified by the adopted codes, all new nonresidential
construction and renovations of structures shall install an approved fire
alarm system.
A.
All fire alarm systems required by codes and Town ordinances shall
provide for automatic emergency forces notification.
B.
All existing fire alarm systems must be maintained in a manner
consistent with their original approval and acceptance.
C.
All fire alarm systems shall be zoned so that they are separated from
early warning devices. For example, heat and smoke detectors and
alerting devices shall be separated from pull stations and horn strobes.
There shall be a separation of zoning between floors.27
D.
The Fire Chief shall assess fines when personnel and equipment are
dispatched to a structure due to alarm system notifications being
received by Bedford Dispatch due to system malfunctions or
inadvertent triggering of initiation devices. The fines to be assessed for
false alarms within any twelve-month period are as follows:
A.
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 130-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-12
1:45
(1) Third alarm: $100.
(2) Fourth alarm: $150.
(3) Fifth alarm: $200.
(4) Sixth alarm: $250.
(5) Subsequent alarms: $500.
If, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, the automatic initiation and
subsequent dispatch of personnel and equipment is due to blatant
disregard for the protection of alarm system integrity and the lack of
prudent precautions to prevent inadvertent device initiation, then the
fine shall be a minimum of $500 for each and every event.
B.
The alarm system owner or occupant of a building serviced by an alarm
will be notified of a false alarm either in person by responding fire
personnel, written notice, or regular mail. If the fine has not been
received within 30 days of notice and there is no appeal pending on
the validity of the alarm, the Fire Chief may initiate the no-response or
disconnect process and may also initiate the enforcement of penalties.
C.
The Fire Chief has the right to waive any or all false alarm assessments
if determined to be in the best interest of the Town of Bedford.
D.
§ 130-12 BEDFORD CODE § 130-12
1:46
ARTICLE IV
Fire Suppression Sprinkler Systems
§ 130-13. Applicability.28
This article is only applicable to those structures where suppression
systems are not required by any adopted code.
§ 130-14. Residential systems.
§ 130-15. Nonresidential systems.
§ 130-16. Locations without public water supply.
After the date of adoption of this chapter, in locations where a public
water supply presently exists, no new-construction building used or
designed for permanent or temporary human residence, of three or
more stories and/or six or more attached wood-frame units, other than
a single-family dwelling, shall be permitted to be constructed unless
furnished with a sprinkler system installed in accordance with
standards set forth in the current adopted Fire Prevention and Building
Code and NFPA Standard 13, 13D, or where applicable, 13R,
Residential Sprinkler System.
A.
For the purpose of this section, "new construction" shall refer to either
the erection of new structures or the re-erection of existing structures
that have been destroyed or damaged to such an extent as to be
unsuitable or unsafe for human residence, or elevating, relocating, or
remodeling of 50% or more of the existing building.
B.
After the date of adoption of this chapter, in locations where a public
water supply presently exists, all new construction, nonresidential
structures of three or more stories and/or totaling at least 12,000
square feet shall be fully sprinklered.
A.
For the purpose of this section, "new construction" shall refer to
erection of new structures, re-erection of existing structures destroyed
or damaged to such an extent as to be unsuitable or unsafe for
occupancy, or where cumulative remodeling is equal to or greater than
50% of the existing building.
B.
In those cases where additions to existing structures bring the total
gross square footage of the entire structure to or above the threshold of
12,000 square feet, both the new construction and the preexisting area
shall be sprinklered.
C.
All motor vehicle fuel-dispensing facilities shall be protected by a fully
automatic suppression system, complying with NFPA 17, located at the
dispensing location.
D.
28.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 130-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-16
1:47
§ 130-17. System maintenance; documentation.
All systems required by the preceding sections or by any of the adopted
codes must be serviced and maintained per NFPA 25 or the appropriate
governing NFPA standard. Documentation of the maintenance must be
submitted to the Bedford Fire Department on an annual basis.
In locations where a public water supply is within 1,000 linear feet of
the property line, the owner of the property shall be responsible for
extending the waterline to provide fire sprinkler protection for new
construction.
A.
After the date of adoption of this chapter, in those locations where
a public water supply does not exist within 1,000 linear feet of the
property line, new construction started after this date shall be required
to provide sprinkler systems retroactively, i.e., within one year of the
time that water becomes available.
B.
"Public water supply" is defined, for the purposes of this chapter, as a
water supply which has been granted a franchise to operate in Bedford
by the State of New Hampshire Public Utilities Commission.
C.
§ 130-16 BEDFORD CODE § 130-17
1:48
ARTICLE V
Fire Department Access
§ 130-18. Lock (Knox) boxes.
§ 130-19. Fire lanes.
§ 130-20. Gated access to private property.
Requirements.
All buildings and structures of assembly, mercantile, business,
educational, storage, health care, industrial and multifamily
residential with common exits (whether existing on the date of
adoption of this chapter or which may exist in the future) and/or
have a monitored fire alarm system shall have a key depository lock
box installed and paid for by the property owner. The type/style of
Knox box and the location shall be approved by the Fire Chief or
designee.
(1)
For the purpose of this section, "new construction" shall refer to
either the erection of new structures or the re-erection of existing
structures destroyed or damaged to such an extent as to be
unsuitable or unsafe for human residence, elevating, relocating, or
where cumulative remodeling is equal to or greater than 50% of
the area of the existing building.
(2)
A.
Installations. The installation, required keys and list of emergency
contacts shall be in place prior to occupancy. The owner shall notify the
Fire Department whenever locks, keys and or emergency contacts are
to be changed.
B.
Parking in or obstructing fire lanes. It shall be unlawful to park a motor
vehicle on or otherwise obstructing fire lanes at any time.
A.
Marking of fire lanes on private property. The Chief of the Fire
Department or his designee shall approve the marking of fire lanes on
private property devoted to public use.
B.
Violations and penalties. Anyone who violates the provisions of § 130-19
shall be fined not more than $25 and any vehicle parking in violation
of § 130-19 may be towed by the Chief of Police or Chief of the Fire
Department or their agents or by independent contractors engaged by
the Fire Chief or Police Chief or their agents. Any vehicles so towed
shall be stored and released to the owner only upon payment of the cost
of towing.
C.
Access to gated communities and individual properties. The Fire
Department shall have the authority to require Fire Department access
to gated private property through the use of an approved device or
system.
A.
§ 130-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-20
1:49
Access maintenance. The owner or occupant of a structure or area with
the required Fire Department access shall notify the Fire Department
whenever the required access is modified in such a manner as to
prevent Fire Department access.
B.
§ 130-20 BEDFORD CODE § 130-20
1:50
ARTICLE VI
Oil-Burner Permits
§ 130-21. Fee.
The Fire Chief or his duly authorized agent is authorized to charge a fee of
$25 for issuing oil-burner permits pursuant to Chapter 251 Laws of 1947
amended.
§ 130-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-21
1:51

ARTICLE VII
Wood- and Gas-Burning Units
§ 130-22. Label on devices required.
All devices to be installed must bear a label from a recognized third-party
testing agency.
§ 130-23. Permits and inspections.
Permits and inspections are required for the installation of new or
replacement gas-fired devices. The permits are to be secured through the
Building Department.
§ 130-24. Installation requirements.29
The installation of all wood- and gas-burning units must comply with the
manufacturer's installation directions and/or NFPA 54, 52 and 211.
29.Editor's Note: See Fire Department Handbook for specific local requirements.
§ 130-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-24
1:53

ARTICLE VIII
Outdoor Cooking and Recreational Devices
§ 130-25. Outdoor cooking and recreational devices.
The use of any, charcoal, gas, wood or other open flame cooking grill,
barbecue grill, hibachi, chimenea, electric grill, or other similar device shall
be prohibited within the Town of Bedford:
§ 130-26. Cylinders.
Cylinders having water capacities greater than 2 1/2 pounds (1 kg) [nominal
one pound (0.5 kg)] LP gas capacity shall not be located on balconies above
the first floor that are attached to multiple-family residential structures.
§ 130-27. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE — Residential occupancies
containing more than two dwelling units where the occupants are primarily
permanent in nature, including but not limited to:
On or within 10 feet of any combustible balcony, deck, porch, patio or
similar projection of any multiple-family residential structure; or
A.
Within four feet of an exterior wall or nearest exterior projection,
means of egress of any multiple-family residential structure.
B.
A. Apartment buildings.
B. Lodging or rooming houses.
C. Condominiums.
D. Convents.
E. Dormitories.
F. Fraternities and sororities.
G. Monasteries.
H. Row houses.
I. Townhouses.
§ 130-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-27
1:55

ARTICLE IX
Hazardous Materials Control, Containment, and Cleanup
§ 130-28. Purpose.30
The purpose of the article is not to impose upon the Town, or any of
its officers and agents, an obligation to secure or remove any hazardous
material from the Town once safe containment of the material is made or
any obligation imposed by state or federal law is satisfied and specifically
that nothing in the article shall be deemed to permit the possession,
storage, or use of hazardous materials except in conformance with all
federal, state and local laws.
§ 130-29. Jurisdiction.
This article shall apply to all incidents involving hazardous waste or
hazardous materials within the boundaries of the Town of Bedford and to
all persons who may possess such materials found within the Town except
as prevailing state or federal laws or regulations may take precedence and
control over any such incident or person. (See RSA 146-A and RSA 265:
115-118 for examples of such prevailing state law at the time this article is
adopted.)
§ 130-30. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Those substances or material in such
quantities and forms which may pose an unreasonable risk to health and
safety of property, which may include, but are not limited to, explosives,
radioactive material, etiologic agents, flammable liquids or solids,
combustible liquids or solids, poisons, oxidizing or corrosive materials, and
compressed gases which are listed by the Materials Transportation Bureau
of the United States Department of Transportation in Title 49 of the Code of
Federal Regulations and any amendment thereto.
PERSON — Any individual, association, corporation, partnership, trust or
other legal entity.
USER — Any person who manufacturers or transports or owns, uses,
handles, stores, or has the legal authority to control hazardous materials,
specifically including their officers, directors, employees and agents.
§ 130-31. Duty to report.
Any user or transporter who causes or has knowledge of any discharge
or release of hazardous materials under his control or supervision, in any
manner which poses an actual or potential threat to any person, animal,
wildlife, vegetation, property, or the environment, shall immediately report
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 130-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-31
1:57
the incident to the Bedford Fire Department and Bedford Police
Department.
§ 130-32. Response by Fire and Police Departments.
The Bedford Fire Department and the Bedford Police Department shall
promptly respond to each reported incident and take such action as is
necessary to protect public health, safety, property, and the environment.
§ 130-33. Accident reporting, cleanup and restoration of site.
The user or transporter of a hazardous material which is intentionally or
accidentally discharged or released within the Town of Bedford shall, in
addition to reporting the accident as required, take immediate action to
cause the discharge or release to be cleaned up in an environmentally safe
and scientifically sound manner and to restore the site and the surrounding
environment at his own expense.
§ 130-34. Cleanup costs.
The user or transporter of the hazardous material, which was discharged or
released, shall be strictly liable to the Town of Bedford for all cost incurred
in the control, containment, and cleanup of the hazardous materials. For
this purpose, each user and transporter shall be jointly and severally liable,
and a suit in any court may recover the costs from him or her with
jurisdiction over the parties and the amount claimed.
§ 130-35. Intentional discharge or release prohibited.
The intentional discharge or release of a hazardous material within the
Town of Bedford is strictly prohibited.
§ 130-36. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, or corporation found violating any of the provisions
of this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof,
shall pay a civil fine of not more than $500 for each offense.
A.
Each twenty-four-hour period that an accident is not reported shall
constitute a separate offense.
B.
Any penalties assessed shall inure to such uses as the Town of Bedford
may direct, pursuant to RSA 31:39, III. The penalties that may be
assessed pursuant to this section shall be deemed separate from and
in addition to any costs that may be recovered by the Town of Bedford
pursuant to § 130-39.
C.
§ 130-31 BEDFORD CODE § 130-37
1:58
§ 130-37. Use of cleanup costs and civil fines.
All costs and civil fines collected under this article shall be placed in the
general fund to offset appropriations used in the control and containment of
a hazardous material incident.
§ 130-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-37
1:59

ARTICLE X
Enforcement
§ 130-38. Enforcement; assessment of costs.
The Chief of the Bedford Police Department shall be responsible for
enforcing this chapter, and the Town Manager shall be responsible for the
assessment and collection of costs.
§ 130-39. Violations and penalties.31
Where violation penalties are not called out in a specific section of this
chapter; the fines, penalties, and remedies for violations of this chapter
shall be the same as for violations of Title LXIV, as stated in RSA 676:15
and 676:17. Notwithstanding any rental or lease agreements, the property
owner of record shall be considered the responsible party.
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 130-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-39
1:61
Chapter 134
FIREWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fireworks displays in parks — See Ch. 185.
§ 134-1. Sale of fireworks and toy firearms prohibited.
No person, firm, or corporation shall sell, offer, or expose for sale, any
fireworks, toy pistols, or other toy firearms for the explosion of percussion
caps or blank cartridges, without first obtaining a license as hereinafter
provided.
§ 134-2. Application for license.32
Any person, firm, or corporation may apply to the Town Council for a license
to sell fireworks, toy pistols, and toy firearms, such application being in
writing and containing the full name and address of the applicant and a
description of the premises upon which it is proposed to sell fireworks, toy
pistols, or toy firearms, and such other information as the Town Council may
from time to time designate.
§ 134-3. License.33
If, in the opinion of the Town Council, the applicant is qualified to receive
a license and the premises where the fireworks are proposed to be sold
will not in their opinion constitute an undue hazard to others, then the
Town Council, upon receipt by them of a fee of $10, may issue a license
permitting the applicant to sell fireworks, toy pistols, and toy firearms, upon
the premises specified in the application, but not elsewhere.
§ 134-4. Record.34
The Town Council shall keep in a book provided by them the names and
addresses of all such licenses, the date of issue of the license, and a
description of the premises where the fireworks are licensed to be sold.
§ 134-5. Expiration of license.35
The Town Council may revoke the license provided in this chapter at any
time, provided that, if such revocation takes place before July 1 of the
calendar year in which the license is issued, they pay or tender to the
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 130-39 BEDFORD CODE § 134-5
1:62
licensee the sum of $10; if revoked on or after July 1, they shall pay or
tender to the licensee the sum of $5. The license issued under this chapter,
unless sooner revoked as hereinafter provided, shall expire at midnight on
December 31 of the calendar year in which it was issued.
§ 134-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person selling fireworks, toy pistols, or toy firearms in the Town of
Bedford, without having previously obtained a license as herein provided,
except duly authorized agents or servants of a licensed person, firm, or
corporation, shall be fined not more than $10 for the first offense and not
more than $50 for any subsequent offense.
Chapter 140
FOOD AND BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Live entertainment — See Ch. 170, Art. I. Zoning — See Ch. 275.
§ 140-1. Adoption of rules; statutory authority.
§ 140-2. Definitions.
Where terms are not specifically defined in this chapter, their meaning shall
be derived from adopted codes. Where a term is not defined under any
Sanitary Production and Distribution of Food Ordinance. The Town of
Bedford, New Hampshire, adopts the New Hampshire Rules for the
Sanitary Production and Distribution of Food He-P2300 with modified
language to reflect local jurisdiction in accordance with RSA 147:1.
These rules shall be known as the "Bedford Food Service Rules 2300"
(BFSR 2300) and shall be available for review at the Bedford Health
Department and online at http://www.bedfordnh.org. The Town of
Bedford also adopts all future amendments and revisions to the New
Hampshire Rules for the Sanitary Production and Distribution of Food.
The Town of Bedford shall also abide by any of the requirements
stated in the memorandum of agreement it has entered into with the
New Hampshire Department of Health and Human Service Bureau of
Food Protection. All rules set forth in this chapter shall be at least
as restrictive as those contained in the New Hampshire Rules for the
Sanitary Production and Distribution of Food.36
A.
Statutory authority. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority
provided in RSA 31:39, I(i) and (k), and RSA 471:1.
B.
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 134-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-2
1:63
adopted code, its meaning shall be the ordinarily accepted meaning within
the context that the term is used.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Bedford Board of Health whose membership
shall include the Bedford Town Council and the Health Officer for the Town
of Bedford per RSA 128:3.37
FOOD-PROCESSING ESTABLISHMENT — A commercial establishment in
which food is manufactured or packaged for human consumption.
FOOD-SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — As defined in He-P 2301.01 and in
RSA 143-A:3, IV (He-P 2303.01).
HEALTH AUTHORITY — The Health Officer of the Town of Bedford whose
appointment shall be under the jurisdiction of RSA 128:1.
MOA — Memorandum of agreement.38
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation, association, or other
legal entity.
PERSON IN CHARGE — The individual present in a food-service
establishment who is the apparent supervisor of the food-service
establishment at the time of inspection. If no individual is the apparent
supervisor, then any employee present is the person in charge.
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — As defined in He-P 2301.01 (Retail
Food Store) and RSA 143-A:3, VII.
RISK FACTOR VIOLATION — A risk factor violation is a food safety factor
identified in the FDA Food code as being a priority or priority foundation
item.39
SANITARY FOOD CODE — Bedford Food Service Rules 2300.40
§ 140-3. Licensing.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food-service, foodprocessing,
or retail food establishment within the Town of Bedford,
who does not possess a valid license issued to him or her by the Health
Authority. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this
chapter shall be entitled to receive and retain such a license.
A.
Issuance of licenses and fees. Any person desiring to operate a foodservice,
food-processing, or retail food establishment shall make a
written application for a license on forms provided by the Bedford
Health Authority. The Health Authority shall issue a license to the
applicant after receipt of such an application and the designated license
fee and after inspection reveals that the applicable requirements of this
chapter have been met.
B.
37.Editor's Note: The definition of “critial violation, which immediately followed this
definition, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
39.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 140-2 BEDFORD CODE § 140-3
1:64
Duration and renewal.
Licenses are granted for a one-year period and must be renewed
annually prior to the given expiration date. The license period
shall expire at midnight of March 31 every year. The fees shall be
made payable to the Town of Bedford. Each food-service facility
must have at least one supervisory staff member attend a food
safety seminar annually. Documentation must be provided to the
Health Department verifying this requirement at the time of license
renewal.
(1)
The applicant has the right to notice and to a hearing pursuant
to BFSR 2306-04 before the Department takes any adverse
administrative action affecting an application for the renewal of an
existing license.41
(2)
C.
License fee schedule. Fees for new food-service, food-processing and
retail food establishments and for those establishments under new
ownership, change of name and change of location shall be prorated on
a monthly basis until the date of the assigned licensing period. License
fees are as listed in BFSR 2304.05.42
D.
Nontransferability. Licenses shall not be transferable from one person
or place to another person or place. A valid license shall be posted in
every food-service, food-processing, and retail food establishment.
E.
Temporary food establishments. Licenses for temporary food
establishments shall be issued for a period of time not to exceed 14
days.
F.
Establishments outside the jurisdiction of the Health Authority.
Food from service establishments outside the jurisdiction of the
Health Authority of the Town of Bedford may be sold within the
Town of Bedford if such food-service establishments conform to the
provisions of this chapter or to substantially equivalent provisions.
(1)
To determine the extent of compliance with such provisions, the
Health Authority may accept reports from responsible authorities
in other jurisdictions where such food-service establishments are
located.
(2)
In those instances when the establishment is unable to provide
the Health Authority with a current inspection report (less than
six months old) from the jurisdiction where the facility is based,
the Health Authority is authorized to require the establishment to
secure a temporary food-service license from the Town of Bedford
and be subject to all of provisions of this chapter.
(3)
G.
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 140-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-4
1:65
§ 140-4. Plan review and approval for future construction.
§ 140-5. Inspection of establishments.
Construction, remodeling, or conversion.
In addition to any requirements provided under Chapter 275,
Zoning, the Site Plan Review Regulations, or any other local, state
of federal law, when a food-service, food-processing, or retail food
establishment is hereafter constructed or extensively remodeled,
or when an existing structure is converted to use as a food-service,
food-processing, or retail food establishment, properly prepared
plans and specifications that are legible and drawn to scale
showing layout, arrangement, and construction materials of work
areas, including floors, walls, and ceilings, and the location, size,
and type of fixed equipment and facilities shall be submitted to the
Health Authority for approval.
(1)
A building permit shall not be issued until the Health Authority has
given such approval.
(2)
A.
Change of ownership. When an existing food-service, food-processing,
or retail food establishment changes ownership, all equipment shall
meet the current requirements of these regulations. A food
establishment license shall not be issued to a new, remodeled, or
converted establishment or to an establishment under new ownership
until a sanitary inspection has been completed showing no risk factor
violations.43
B.
Mandatory inspections. At least two times per year, the Bedford Health
Officer shall inspect each food-service, food-processing, and retail food
establishment located in the Town of Bedford, New Hampshire.
Additional inspections and reinspections may be made to assure
compliance with the Sanitary Food Code.
A.
Access to establishments.
The Health Authority or Health Agent designated by the Health
Authority, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter at
any reasonable time any food-service, food-processing, and retail
food establishments within the Town of Bedford, New Hampshire,
for the purpose of making an inspection to determine compliance
with this chapter.
(1)
The Health Authority or Health Agent shall be permitted to
examine the records of the establishment in order to obtain
information pertaining to food and supplies purchased, received,
or used, food safety training records and persons employed. The
employees' rights to privacy will not be invaded.
(2)
B.
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 140-4 BEDFORD CODE § 140-5
1:66
§ 140-6. Notice of violation; license suspension and revocation.
Inspection records.44
Whenever the Health Authority or Health Agent makes an
inspection of a food-service, food-processing, or retail food
establishment, the findings shall be recorded on an inspection
report form provided for this purpose, and the Health Authority or
Health Agent shall furnish a copy of the original of such inspection
report form to the license holder or person in charge. The person
in charge shall acknowledge receipt of the inspection report by
signing the report. Such form shall summarize the requirements of
the Sanitary Food Code (BFSR 2305.01).
(1)
A license shall be in effect if the sanitary inspection shows no more
than a total number of eight risk factor violations. This total shall
also include repeat violations.
(2)
As required by the MOA, the inspection records must be kept on
file and made available for reviews by the State of New Hampshire
Department of Health and Human Services Food Protection
Bureau.
(3)
C.
Inspection fees. License holders shall be billed $100 for each inspection
conducted except for:45
(1) The initial provisional licensing inspection.
(2) The two inspections required by § 140-5A.
(3) One inspection associated with complaint investigation.
D.
Written notice of violations. Notwithstanding the other provisions of
this chapter, whenever the Health Authority finds unsanitary or other
conditions in the operation of a food-service, food-processing, or retail
food establishments which, in his or her judgment, constitute a
substantial hazard to the pubic health, a written notice may be issued
to the license holder or operator citing such conditions, the corrective
actions to be taken and may also specify the time period within which
such actions shall be taken.
A.
Issuance of notices.
Whenever a food-service, food-processing, or retail food
establishment does not meet the requirements of the Sanitary Food
Code as listed on the inspection report form, the license holder
or operator shall be notified of such violations by means of a
copy of the inspection report form or other written notice. In such
notification, the Health Authority shall:
(1)
B.
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 140-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-6
1:67
Set forth the specific violation found, together with the demerit
score of the establishment.
(a)
Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for the
correction of the critical violations found.
(b)
In the case of temporary food-service establishments, critical
violations must be corrected within a specified period of time not
to exceed 24 hours. Failure to comply with such notice shall result
in immediate suspension of the temporary license.
(2)
Service of notices.
Notices provided for under this section shall be deemed to have
been properly served when a copy of the original inspection report
form or other notice has been delivered personally to the license
holder or person in charge, or such notice has been sent by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last
known address of the license holder.
(1)
A copy of such notice shall be filed with the records of the Health
Authority. Nothing herein shall preclude a suspension of license
and temporary closing of violators as set forth in these regulations.
(2)
C.
Corrective action plan (CAP). The person in charge must enter into a
CAP, as defined by the Sanitary Food Code, with the Health Authority:46
If risk factor violations are found and cannot be corrected
immediately in the presence of the inspector; or
(1)
If construction items, delineated in BFSR 2303.019, are found
during an inspection for a new or change of ownership license, and
cannot be corrected immediately in the presence of the inspector.
(2)
D.
Suspension of licenses.
Temporary suspension. Licenses may be suspended temporarily by
the Health Authority for failure of the holder to comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
(1)
Immediate suspension. If it is deemed necessary, the Health Officer
may order that the license be immediately suspended, and all food
operations will be immediately discontinued. Any person to whom
such an order is issued shall comply immediately therewith but,
upon written petition to the Health Authority, shall be offered a
hearing within five days after the Health Authority has received the
written petition.
(2)
E.
F. Reinstatement of suspended licenses.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 140-6 BEDFORD CODE § 140-6
1:68
A license holder whose license has been suspended may, at any
time, make application for a reinspection for the purpose of
reinstatement of the license.
(1)
Within five days following receipt of a written request, including
a statement signed by the applicant that the conditions causing
the suspension of the license have been corrected, the Health
Authority shall make a reinspection. The owner must obtain a
sanitary inspection showing no risk factor violations.47
(2)
If the applicant is complying with the requirements of this chapter,
the license shall be reinstated.
(3)
Revocation of licenses.
For failure to fulfill the requirements of a compliance agreement
to correct a critical violation that poses an imminent health hazard
or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this chapter,
or for interference with the Health Authority in the performance
of duties, the license may be permanently revoked after the Health
Authority has provided an opportunity for a hearing.
(1)
Prior to such action, the Health Authority shall notify the license
holder in writing and state the reasons for which the license is
subject to revocation and explain what is necessary to correct the
problems, and advise that the license shall be permanently revoked
at the end of five days following service of such notice, unless a
written petition for a hearing is delivered to the Health Authority
by the license holder or operator within such five day period. (RSA
143-A:7).
(2)
A license may be suspended for cause pending its revocation or a
hearing relative thereto.
(3)
G.
Reinstatement of revoked license.
Reinstatement of revoked licenses, in accordance with RSA
143-A:8, shall include:
A written application to the Health Authority for a reinspection
from the person whose license has been revoked;
(a)
A reinspection by the Health Authority of Health Agent within
10 days of receipt of the written request; and
(b)
The immediate reinstatement of the license if the reasons for
revocation have been corrected.
(c)
(1)
If a revoked license expires without having been reinstated, the
former license holder shall apply for a new license before again
(2)
H.
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 140-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-6
1:69
§ 140-7. Violations and penalties.49
The Health Officer shall impose administrative fines as outlined in BFSR
2306.02.
§ 140-8. Form of payment of fees and administrative fines.
Whenever an applicant or license holder makes a payment to the
Department in satisfaction of a fee or administrative fine, the following shall
apply:
operating a food-service establishment or retail food
establishment. (BFSR 2304.01)48
Hearing.
The Bedford Board of Health shall conduct the hearings provided
for in this section at the time and place designated by them.
(1)
Based upon the record of such hearing, the Bedford Board of
Health shall make a finding and shall sustain, modify, or rescind
any official notice or order considered in the hearing.
(2)
The Bedford Board of Health shall furnish a written report of the
hearing decision to the license holder and/or operator within five
business days of the hearing.
(3)
I.
Payment shall be made in the form of cash, check, or money order for
the exact amount due;
A.
Cash, money order, or certified check shall be required when an
applicant or license holder has issued payment to the Department by
check, and such check was returned for insufficient funds;
B.
A check or money order shall be made payable to the "Town of
Bedford"; and
C.
Any payment made to the Department by check which is returned for
insufficient funds, and which a license holder has not made good by
submitting cash, money order or certified check within two business
days of notification by the Department, including any penalty
assessment required by RSA 80:56, shall be grounds for revocation of
the license.50
D.
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 140-6 BEDFORD CODE § 140-8
1:70
Chapter 146
GARAGE AND YARD SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sunday sales — See Ch. 243. Signs — See Ch. 275, Art. IX.
§ 146-1. License required; fees.51
It shall be unlawful for any person or business entity to have more than two
garage or yard sales during the calendar year. Persons or business entities
desiring to hold sales in excess of two per annum must receive a license for
each additional sale from the Town Council. The fee for a person desiring to
hold an additional garage or yard sale, should the license be issued by the
Town Council, will be $25, and the fee for a business entity will be $50.
§ 146-2. Definitions.52
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE OR YARD SALE — The selling of personal property from a
residence. Each sale day shall be deemed one sale for the purposes of this
chapter.
§ 146-3. For-sale signs on motor vehicles. [Amended 3-13-1979 by
Art. 4]
Any resident of the Town who desires to exhibit for the purpose of sale not
more than one motor vehicle at one time may attach to said motor vehicle a
"for sale" sign affixed or displayed with reference to said vehicle, provided
that said motor vehicle shall have been registered to a resident member of
the premises where said exhibition for the sale occurs.
§ 146-4. Violations and penalties.
Violators of this chapter are subject to a fine, upon conviction, of $100 per
offense.
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 140-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-4
1:71
Chapter 170
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT AND MINIMUM ATTIRE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Standards for adult entertainment
businesses — See Ch. 275, § 275-72.
§ 146-4 BEDFORD CODE § 146-4
1:72
ARTICLE I
Clubs and Live Entertainment
[Adopted 4-12-2000; amended in its entirety 9-11-2002]
§ 170-1. Opening and closing times.
Private and/or public clubs serving alcoholic beverages, or providing
facilities for the consumption of alcoholic beverages, or admitting members
of the public for a membership fee or similar charge shall not open before
5:00 a.m. on any day and shall not remain open beyond 1:00 a.m. on the
following day.
§ 170-2. License required.
No person, corporation or other entity shall conduct live entertainment,
including but not limited to musical entertainment, open to the public,
unless an application for a live entertainment license shall first be filed
with and approved by the Town Council. The application for a live
entertainment license shall be filed in a form prescribed by the Town
Council, shall be accompanied by a fee of $120, or applicable pro rata
amount.
A.
The application shall contain certain information and documents,
including, but not limited to, the following:
The name and address of the person, corporation or other entity
applying for a live entertainment license. If the applicant is a
corporation or other entity, additional required information
includes the formation date of the corporation or other entity and
the address of each of its offices in this state; and
(1)
If the applicant is a person, that person's principal occupation(s)
for the last five years; and
(2)
If the applicant is a corporation or other entity, the name, address
and principal occupation for the last five years of every director,
president, vice president, treasurer, or clerk of the corporation or
other entity, or person occupying a similar status or performing
similar functions; and
(3)
If the applicant is a closely held corporation, partnership, jointstock
company, trust or sole proprietorship, or other entity, the
name, address and principal occupation of each trustee,
stockholder, partner, or person having any beneficial interests
therein; and
(4)
If the applicant is a publicly held corporation, the name, address
and principal occupation of each stockholder owning more than
10% of the outstanding shares; and
(5)
If the applicant is a subsidiary corporation, the name, address
and principal occupation of each stockholder or person having a
(6)
B.
§ 170-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2
1:73
beneficial interest therein, and the name, address and principal
occupation of each stockholder owning more than 10% of the
outstanding shares in the corporation or corporations to which it is
a subsidiary; and
If the applicant is a person, whether said person has been
convicted of a crime or otherwise been subject to a criminal or
administrative penalty involving the management or operation of
a live entertainment club or establishment, or any other felony in
this state, the United States, or any other state or foreign country
within the past five years; and
(7)
If the applicant is a corporation or other entity, whether it has been
cited or otherwise been subject to any criminal or administrative
penalty involving the management or operation of a live
entertainment club or establishment. Additionally, whether the
officers, directors and/or principals of such applicant corporation
or other entity have been convicted of a crime or otherwise been
subject to a criminal or administrative penalty involving the
management or operation of a live entertainment club or
establishment, or any other felony in this state, the United States,
or any other state or foreign country within the past five years.
(8)
The Town Council, upon receiving a completed application in proper
form and fee as set forth in Subsection A of this section, shall forthwith
initiate such examination as it shall deem necessary to determine:53
That there is a reasonable assurance that the applicant will operate
the live entertainment club or establishment in compliance with
this article; and
(1)
Whether the applicant has not, or if a corporation or entity its
officers, directors and/or principals have not, been convicted of
a crime involving the management or operation of a live
entertainment club or establishment, or whether the officers,
directors and/or principals of such applicant corporation or other
entity has not been convicted of a crime or otherwise been subject
to a criminal or administrative penalty involving the management
or operation of a live entertainment club or establishment, or any
other felony in this state, the United States, or any other state or
foreign country within the past five years and has not been subject
to any injunction or administrative order within the past five years
involving the management or operation of a live entertainment club
or establishment.
(2)
C.
Upon completion of the examination as set forth in Subsection C above,
the Town Council shall issue a live entertainment license, or renewal
thereof, unless the Town Council affirmatively determines that the
requirements of this article have not been met. Upon such
D.
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 170-2 BEDFORD CODE § 170-2
1:74
§ 170-3. Conduct.
determination, the Town Council shall notify the applicant in writing of
its decision and findings.
Each holder of a live entertainment license must renew said license
and pay annual fees as set forth in Subsection A of this section each
year prior to April 30. An applicant who has already provided the
information required in Subsection B above, is not required to annually
refile such information. However, such an applicant shall file with the
renewal application a completed form, prescribed by the Town Council,
indicating whether any of the applicant's required information
previously filed with the Town Council requires an update. If
information requires update, the applicant shall provide the Town
Council with the relevant updated information, and the Town Council
shall perform the examination described in Subsection C above. In
addition, in the event that the licensee is an entity and a change in
control of the entity occurs, then the entity must reapply for a license.54
E.
Upon passage, these licensing standards shall apply to all new live
entertainment license applications in addition to all renewal
applications.
F.
It shall be unlawful for any adult performer to appear in a state of
attire which is less than expressive nudity in a place requiring a live
entertainment license as provided for herein.
A.
Under Subsection A, an adult performer who engages in sexual contact
and/or sexual penetration; or appears in a state of attire which is
less than a state of expressive nudity in a place requiring a live
entertainment license as provided herein; or fondles the genitals of
himself, herself, another adult performer or person shall be guilty of
public indecency, a violation offense.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any nonperforming person to appear in a state
of nudity or expressive nudity in a place requiring a live entertainment
license as provided for herein, except in a place provided or set apart
for nudity.
C.
Under Subsection C, any nonperforming person in a live entertainment
establishment who engages in sexual contact and/or sexual
penetration; or appears in a state of expressive nudity; or appears in
a state of nudity, except in a place provided or set apart for nudity; or
fondles the genitals of himself, herself or another person shall be guilty
of public indecency, a violation offense.
D.
Under this § 170-3, a person or entity that permits any or all of the
acts in Subsections B through D above to occur in any place under the
person's control; or conducts, finances, manages, supervises, directs,
E.
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 170-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3
1:75
§ 170-4. Definitions.
The following are definitions of certain words as used in this article:
ADULT PERFORMER — Any person in a live entertainment establishment
who engages in a mode of expression which constitutes a part of a bona fide
live communication, demonstration or artistic performance by such person
in a state of expressive nudity wherein such expressive nudity is expressive
conduct incidental to and necessary for the conveyance or communication
of a genuine message or public expression, and as such, is protected by the
United States or New Hampshire Constitution, or because it is otherwise
protected by the United States or New Hampshire Constitution.
ENTITY — Any proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, association, business trust, joint venture, joint-stock company, or
other for-profit or not-for-profit organization.
EXPRESSIVE NUDITY —
or owns all or part of a business and such person or entity permits any
or all of the acts in Subsections B through D to occur on the premises
of the business shall be guilty of public indecency, a violation offense.
The public display of the body of an adult performer who wears at
a minimum any fully opaque non-flesh-colored covering devices, such
as costumes, covering, pasties or g-strings which do not give the
appearance of or simulate the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft,
perineum, anal region or pubic hair region, or the nipples or areola
of the female breast, which devices, costumes, covering, pasties or gstrings
cover the human male or female genitals, pubic hair, the pubic
areas and nipples and areola of the female breast. Liquid latex, whether
wet or dried, and similar substances which give the appearance of or
simulate the body part they are covering, body paint, body dyes and
tattoos shall not be considered opaque covering.
A.
Fully opaque non-flesh-colored covering devices, such as costumes,
covering, pasties and g-strings that do not simulate or give the realistic
appearance of the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum, anal
region, pubic hair region, or the nipples or areola of the female breast,
which devices, costumes, covering, pasties or g-strings cover the
human male or female genitals, pubic hair, the pubic areas and nipples
or areola of the female breast, shall be considered a minimum adequate
level of attire to comply with requirements of the definition of
expressive nudity for an adult performer as set forth in this article.
B.
Provided, however, the foregoing notwithstanding, for the current
license holders of a Town of Bedford clubs and live entertainment
license who have adult performers currently performing, such adult
performers shall be permitted to wear pasties of any opaque color and/
or pasties that are flesh-colored which simulate or give the realistic
appearance of the nipples or areola of the female breast. The provisions
in the foregoing sentence shall not apply in the event that i) the
C.
§ 170-3 BEDFORD CODE § 170-4
1:76
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT — Business and commercial
establishments (whether open to the public at large, or whether entrance
is limited by a cover charge or membership requirement), including but not
limited to hotels, motels, restaurants, nightclubs, country clubs, cabarets,
and indoor and outdoor meeting facilities where live entertainment is
provided.
NONPERFORMING PERSON — Any person of or within a live
entertainment establishment who is not an adult performer. Nonperforming
persons include, but are not limited to, waiters or waitresses, hosts or
hostesses, coat-check or door attendants, bartenders, cooks, chefs, janitors,
cleaning and maintenance personnel, customers, patrons and clientele.
NUDE or NUDITY —
business of said current license holders is sold, or ii) there is a
conveyance of any of the ownership interests of the license holder (i.e.,
stock, partnership interests, limited liability company interests, etc.), or
iii) there is a change in control of any the individuals who are operating
the license holder, or iv) the license of said current license holder is not
renewed and that decision, if appealed, is upheld upon final appeal by a
court of competent jurisdiction, or v) the building in which the business
of the license holder is currently located is expanded, which expansion
requires a site plan approval, or vi) the business of the current license
holder is moved from its current location. In addition, the provisions
of the first sentence of this subsection shall not apply to the adult
performers of such a current license holder in a place of business in
Bedford that is in addition to the current place of business. For the
purposes of this subsection, the words "current" or "currently" shall
mean July 18, 2002, the date of posting of this article by the Town of
Bedford.
The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic hair or pubic
area, or certain portions of the buttocks (see minimum level of attire
in the Subsection B below) with less than a fully opaque covering, or
the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the
top of the areola. This definition shall include the entire lower portion
of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the
cleavage of the breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard,
bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided that the areola is
not exposed in whole or in part. Nudity shall include the exposure of
any device, costume, or covering which gives the appearance of or
simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum, anal region,
pubic hair region, or the exposure of any device worn as a cover over
the nipples and/or areola of the female breast, which device simulates
and gives the realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola. Body paint,
body dyes, tattoos, liquid latex, whether wet or dried, and similar
substances shall not be considered opaque covering. Provided,
however, this definition shall not include "expressive nudity," as that
term is defined above, shall not be considered nudity as defined herein.
A.
§ 170-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-4
1:77
PERSON — Any live human being aged 10 years of age or older (it being
recognized that the protection of minors of certain ages, including human
beings under 10 years of age, with regard to activities governed by this
article, are covered statutes of the State of New Hampshire).
PLACE PROVIDED OR SET APART FOR NUDITY — Any place in which
nudity or exposure is necessarily and customarily expected outside of the
home and sphere of privacy constitutionally protected therein, including
but not limited to enclosed single-sex public rest rooms, enclosed singlesex
functional shower, locker and/or dressing room facilities, enclosed motel
and hotel rooms designed and intended for sleeping accommodations,
doctors' offices, portions of hospitals, art school nude modeling classes, and
similar places in which nudity or exposure is necessarily and customarily
expected outside of the home and sphere of privacy constitutionally
protected therein.
PLACE REQUIRING A LIVE ENTERTAINMENT LICENSE — Includes
business and commercial establishments (whether open to the public at
large, or whether entrance is limited by a cover charge or membership
requirement), including but not limited to hotels, motels, restaurants,
nightclubs, country clubs, cabarets, and indoor and outdoor meeting
facilities where live entertainment is provided.
SEXUAL CONTACT — The intentional touching, whether directly, through
clothing, or otherwise, of another person's sexual or intimate parts,
including breasts and buttocks.
SEXUAL PENETRATION —
§ 170-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity found guilty in a court of competent jurisdiction of any
provision of this article may be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 for
The following shall be considered a minimum adequate level of attire to
comply with requirements in this article: the wearing of at least a fully
opaque material which covers the genitals, natal cleft, perineum, anal
region, the anal cleft, pubic hair region, and the female breast below
a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point. An
example of this minimum adequate level of attire is a bathing suit with a
top covering the breast as stated above (for women) and a T-back (three
inches wide) bottom.
B.
A. Sexual intercourse; or
B. Cunnilingus; or
C. Fellatio; or
D. Anal intercourse; or
Any intrusion, however slight, of any part of the person's body or any
object manipulated by the person into the genital or anal openings of
another's body.
E.
§ 170-4 BEDFORD CODE § 170-5
1:78
each violation. Furthermore, any person or entity may be fined for each day
that a violation of this article continues, if found guilty of said violation.
§ 170-6. Enforcement.
The Town Council is hereby given authority to enforce the provisions of
this article pursuant to RSA 47:17. The Town Council shall be empowered
to revoke or not renew said license for violation of any Town of Bedford
ordinance or regulation, and to take action in any court of competent
jurisdiction in law or in equity to enjoin the violation of any Town of Bedford
ordinance or regulation, or for any other relief which may be appropriate.
§ 170-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-6
1:79

ARTICLE II
Minimum Attire in Public Places
[Adopted 11-6-2002
§ 170-7. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Town of Bedford Minimum Attire in a
Public Place Ordinance."
§ 170-8. Intent.
It is the intent of this article to protect and preserve the health, safety
welfare of the citizens of Bedford, by prohibiting a person from appearing
or being nude or causing another person to appear or be nude in a public
place, except:
§ 170-9. Types of violations; exceptions.
When such person appears nude in a place provided or set apart for
nudity, provided that:
Such person is nude for the sole purpose of performing the legal
function(s) that is customarily intended to be performed within
such place provided or set apart for nudity; and
(1)
Such person is not nude for the purpose of obtaining money or
other financial gain for such person or for another person or entity;
or
(2)
A.
When the conduct of being nude cannot legally be prohibited by this
article because it constitutes expressive nudity as that term is defined
in § 170-10 below.
B.
A person in a public place who appears in a state of nudity other
than for the sole purpose of performing the legal function(s) that is
customarily intended to be performed within a place provided or set
apart for nudity shall be guilty of violation of this article, a violation
offense.
A.
A person or entity, who permits the prohibited conduct set forth in
Subsection A above to occur in any place under the person's control;
or conducts, finances, manages, supervises, directs, or owns all or part
of a business and such person permits such prohibited conduct on the
premises of the business shall be guilty of violation of this article, a
violation offense.
B.
The prohibitions set forth in Subsections A and B above on minimum
attire in a public place shall not apply to:
(1) Any child under 10 years of age; or
C.
§ 170-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-9
1:81
§ 170-10. Definitions.
The following are definitions of certain words as used in this article and in
other articles of the ordinances of the Town of Bedford when specifically
referenced in such other ordinances:
ADULT PERFORMER — Any person in a live entertainment establishment
who engages in a mode of expression which constitutes a part of a bona
fide live communication, demonstration or artistic performance by such
person wherein such expressive nudity is expressive conduct incidental to
and necessary for the conveyance or communication of a genuine message
or public expression, and as such, is protected by the United States or New
Hampshire Constitution, or because it is otherwise protected by the United
States or New Hampshire Constitution.
ENTITY — Any proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, association, business trust, joint venture, joint-stock company, or
other for-profit or not-for-profit organization.
EXPRESSIVE NUDITY —
NUDE or NUDITY —
Any female exposing a breast in the process of breastfeeding an
infant; or
(2)
Any circumstances arising under the exceptions set forth in
§ 170-8A and B.
(3)
The public display of the body of an adult performer who wears at
a minimum any fully opaque non-flesh-colored covering devices, such
as costumes, covering, pasties or g-strings which do not give the
appearance of or simulate the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft,
perineum, anal region or pubic hair region, or the nipples or areola
of the female breast, which devices, costumes, covering, pasties or gstrings
cover the human male or female genitals, pubic hair, the pubic
areas and nipples and areola of the female breast. Liquid latex, whether
wet or dried, and similar substances which give the appearance of or
simulate the body part they are covering, body paint, body dyes and
tattoos shall not be considered opaque covering.
A.
Fully opaque non-flesh-colored covering devices, such as costumes,
covering, pasties and g-strings that do not simulate or give the realistic
appearance of the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum, anal
region, pubic hair region, or the nipples or areola of the female breast,
which devices, costumes, covering, pasties or g-strings cover the
human male or female genitals, pubic hair, the pubic areas and nipples
or areola of the female breast, shall be considered a minimum adequate
level of attire to comply with requirements of the definition of
"expressive nudity" for an adult performer.
B.
The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic hair or pubic
area, or certain portions of the buttocks with less than a fully opaque
A.
§ 170-9 BEDFORD CODE § 170-10
1:82
PERSON — Any live human being aged 10 years of age or older (it being
recognized that the protection of minors of certain ages, including human
beings under 10 years of age, with regard to activities governed by this
article are covered statutes of the State of New Hampshire).
PLACE PROVIDED OR SET APART FOR NUDITY — Any place in which
nudity or exposure is necessarily and customarily expected outside of the
home and sphere of privacy constitutionally protected therein, including
but not limited to enclosed single-sex public rest rooms, enclosed singlesex
functional shower, locker and/or dressing room facilities, enclosed motel
and hotel rooms designed and intended for sleeping accommodations,
doctors' offices, portions of hospitals, art school nude modeling classes, and
similar places in which nudity or exposure is necessarily and customarily
expected outside of the home and sphere of privacy constitutionally
protected therein.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any locations frequented by the public, or where the
public is present or likely to be present, including but not limited to:
covering, or the showing of the female breast below a horizonal line
across the top of the areola. (See minimum level of attire in Subsection
B below.) This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the
human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage
of the breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit,
or other wearing apparel, provided that the areola is not exposed in
whole or in part. Nudity shall include the exposure of any device,
costume, or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the
genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum, anal region, pubic hair
region, or the exposure of any device worn as a cover over the nipples
and/or areola of the female breast, which device simulates and gives the
realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola. Body paint, body dyes,
tattoos, liquid latex whether wet or dried, and similar substances shall
not be considered opaque covering. This definition shall not include
"expressive nudity," as that term is defined above, and "expressive
nudity" shall not be considered nudity as defined herein.55
The following shall be considered a minimum adequate level of attire to
comply with requirements in this article: the wearing of at least a fully
opaque material which covers the genitals, natal cleft, perineum, anal
region, the anal cleft, pubic hair region, and the female breast below
a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point. An
example of this minimum adequate level of attire is a bathing suit with a
top covering the breast as stated above (for women) and a T-back (three
inches wide) bottom.
B.
All outdoor places owned by or open to the general public, and all
buildings and enclosed places owned by or open to the general public,
including but not limited to streets, sidewalks, business and commercial
establishments; and
A.
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 170-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-10
1:83
§ 170-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity not exempt from this article under the provisions set
forth in § 170-8, 170-9C or 170-10, and found guilty in a court of competent
jurisdiction of any provision of this article may be subject to a fine not to
exceed $1,000 for each violation. Furthermore, any person, corporation or
entity may be fined for each day that a violation of this article continues, if
found guilty of said violation.
§ 170-12. Enforcement.
The Town Council is hereby given authority to enforce the provisions of
this article pursuant to RSA 47:17. The Town Council shall be empowered
to take action in any court of competent jurisdiction in law or in equity to
enjoin the violation of any Town of Bedford ordinance or regulation, or for
any other relief which may be appropriate.
All buildings and enclosed theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party
rooms or halls limited to specific members, restricted to adults or to
patrons invited to attend, whether or not an admission charge is levied;
and
B.
C. A restaurant, bar, or other establishment serving food or drink; and
An auditorium, convention center, lecture hall, or other place of public
gathering; and
D.
A bakery, grocery store, clothing store, shopping center, or other sales
or rental establishment; and
E.
A laundromat, bank, barbershop, beauty shop, office of an accountant
or lawyer, or other service establishment; and
F.
A terminal, depot, or other station used for specified public
transportation; and
G.
A golf course, park, playground, beach or other public place of
recreation; and
H.
A nursery, elementary, secondary, undergraduate or postgraduate
private school, or other place of education; and
I.
A day-care center, senior citizen center, homeless shelter, or other
social services center establishment; provided, however, that such
locations shall only be deemed to be public places during the time
periods that the public is present or likely to be present and shall
exclude those portions of any such locations in which the public is not
permitted.
J.
§ 170-10 BEDFORD CODE § 170-12
1:84
Chapter 185
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dog at large and dog fouling — See Ch. 74. Natural bathing places — See Ch. 80, Art. II.
§ 170-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-12
1:85

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 185-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure all citizens of Bedford that the parks
of the Town will be clean, safe, and enjoyable places for people to engage in
the recreation pursuits of their choice.
§ 185-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARKS — Includes all recreational facilities and lands regarding which the
Town of Bedford holds a legal interest for open space and recreation use,
whether such lands are developed or undeveloped. "Park" includes, but is
not limited to, playgrounds, open spaces, trails, beaches, pathways, forests,
as well as public parks.
§ 185-3. Authority for operation and maintenance.
Town parks will be operated, maintained, and supervised by the Bedford
Parks and Recreation Department and/or the Public Works Department, and
the Conservation Commission in the case of Pulpit Rock Conservation Area.
§ 185-4. User's responsibility.
Visitors use the Bedford parks at their own risk. The Town is not responsible
for theft, personal injury, property damage or any other loss. Such losses,
however, should be reported to the Parks and Recreation Department and
the Police Department.
§ 185-5. Effect of chapter.
This chapter controls all activities in Bedford parks unless specific
modifications are made through the enactment of ordinances relating to
individual parks.
§ 185-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-5
1:87

ARTICLE II
Conduct
§ 185-6. Unlawful conduct.
It shall be unlawful to post bills, cut, deface, write upon, remove or destroy,
modify or plant any tree, shrub, rock, signs, buildings, tables, benches,
fireplaces, grills, or other structures or equipment, facilities, or park
property, or any appurtenances whatsoever.
§ 185-7. Permits required.
§ 185-8. Personal conduct.
No person shall disturb the peace, endanger the public safety, use obscene
or profane language, or prevent the use of Town parks by others.
§ 185-9. Alcoholic beverages. [Amended 6-22-2005]
Drinking of alcoholic beverages in Town parks is strictly forbidden, unless
the individual is a member of a group that has been issued a permit by the
Police Department and Parks and Recreation Department, in accordance
with the requirements set forth by the Town to obtain such approval.
§ 185-10. Firearms, explosives and fireworks.
§ 185-11. Other activities.
No person shall engage or participate in, aid, form, or organize any
assembly or group, or make speeches, or conduct programs of
entertainment in any Town park unless a permit has been issued
pursuant to Article IX hereof, and said permit is carried by the person
directing or leading such activity.
A.
This section does not apply to educational activities of students under
school direction or to Town-sponsored activities within the scope of the
functions of such department.
B.
Firearms of any description, air rifles, gas weapons, slingshots, bows
and arrows, firecrackers, and explosives are prohibited and shall not be
displayed or discharged in Town parks.
A.
Fireworks displays may be permitted by permit through the Fire
Department.
B.
Archery programs are allowed in designated areas by Parks and
Recreation Director.
A.
B. No golfing is allowed in parks and/or on athletic fields.
The Heritage Trail between Moores Crossing Road and Map 24, Lot 3-2,
will be closed from all pedestrian traffic from December 1 to April 1.
C.
§ 185-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-11
1:89

ARTICLE III
Camping, Boating, Fishing, Hunting, and Trapping
§ 185-12. Camping.
§ 185-13. Boating and fishing.
Boating and fishing are permitted in any area designated for such intended
use.
§ 185-14. Hunting and trapping.
Hunting and trapping are not permitted in any Town park.
Overnight camping is prohibited unless such activity is confined to
areas specifically designated by the Town Council and approved by the
Parks and Recreation Director for that purpose.
A.
Overnight camping in Town is only allowed at Muller Park off North
Amherst Road and at Pulpit Rock Conservation area. Camping permits
are required by Bedford Police Department. Permits must be requested
by a Bedford resident 21 years of age or older.
B.
§ 185-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-14
1:91

ARTICLE IV
Fires
§ 185-15. Permitted locations.
Fires shall be built only in outdoor fireplaces provided by the Town or in
grills in designated picnic area. There will be no fires allowed in park areas
or trails unless a permit from the Fire Department is obtained.
§ 185-16. Stoves.
Portable stoves may be used only in designated picnic areas. Such stoves,
when in use, shall be placed on charcoal grills or outdoor fireplaces, and
not upon the ground, adjacent woods, refuse receptacles, picnic tables, or
benches.
§ 185-17. Unattended fires.
Fires shall not be left unattended.
§ 185-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-17
1:93

ARTICLE V
Refuse
§ 185-18. Use of receptacles.
Refuse, rubbish, garbage, or other trash of any nature shall not be left in
Town parks except in receptacles where provided.
§ 185-19. Pollution of Town waters.
No person shall pollute the waters of any Town park through the deposit of
any foreign material therein.
§ 185-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-19
1:95

ARTICLE VI
Traffic
§ 185-20. Pedestrians.
Pedestrians have the right-of-way on all park roads.
§ 185-21. Motorized vehicles.
All persons driving motorized vehicles shall obey all traffic signs and
directions of park employees and shall park only in areas designated for that
purpose.
§ 185-22. Speed limit.
The speed limit on all park roads is 10 miles per hour unless otherwise
designated.
§ 185-23. Trails and other areas.
§ 185-24. ATVs and snowmobiles.
All terrain vehicles (ATVs) and snowmobiles are not permitted within the
boundaries of Town parks, except within areas designated for such use by
the Town Council.
Motor vehicles, including motorcycles and motorbikes, are prohibited
on foot trails and other areas other than on roads maintained for public
vehicular traffic.
A.
B. Bicycles may be used only on designated trails at designated times.
§ 185-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-24
1:97

ARTICLE VII
Domesticated Animals, Plants, and Wildlife
§ 185-25. Domestic animals on athletic fields.
Owners of domestic animals are responsible for keeping their animals off
athletic fields.
§ 185-26. Dog fouling.
§ 185-27. Horseback riding.
Horseback riding is permitted in areas specifically designated for such
purpose by the Town Council.
§ 185-28. Plants and wildlife.
Within the boundaries of any park, trees, shrubs, flowers, ferns, or other
plants shall not be lifted or picked by park visitors. Stones, rocks, birds,
or animals shall not be removed. Removal of bark from trees is prohibited.
Cutting and removal of firewood is prohibited unless specifically authorized
in writing by the Parks and Recreation Director or Town Manager.
§ 185-29. Injuring animals or disturbing habitat.
No person shall maliciously disturb or injure any animal within the confines
of a Town park, nor disturb any animal habitat.
§ 185-30. Leashing of dogs. [Added 7-22-2009]
It is required that all dogs allowed in Town parks and on conservation land,
with the exception of a designated dog park, be under control at all times
by means of a leash.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper, or person having control
of any dog to fail to immediately remove and dispose of in a sanitary
manner any solid waste deposited by such dog upon any Town-owned
land or parks before the owner leaves the immediate area where the
solid waste was deposited.
A.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or person having control
of any dog to fail to have in his/her possession the equipment and/
or supplies necessary to remove his/her dog's solid waste when
accompanied by said dog.
B.
Exception. This section shall not apply to any dog accompanying a
person mentally or physically impaired and who because of such
impairment is unable to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
C.
D. For any violation of this section, the penalty shall be set at $100.
§ 185-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-30
1:99

ARTICLE VIII
Hours and Fees
§ 185-31. Hours of operation. [Amended 2-9-2011]
Town parks, including roads and parking areas, are open only from sunrise
to sunset unless otherwise designated by the Parks and Recreation
Department. Outdoor lighted facilities in Town Parks will be considered
closed once lights are no longer on. The Recreation and Parks Director may
allow special activities after hours in concurrence with the Police Chief.
§ 185-32. Towing of motor vehicles.
Cars and other types of motor vehicles left in Town parks after hours or in
unauthorized areas may be towed away at the owner's expense.
§ 185-33. Park fees.
Reasonable fees may be assessed by the Town Council for individuals and
group use of the parks.
§ 185-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-33
1:101

ARTICLE IX
Permit System
§ 185-34. Procedure.
A permit must be obtained through the system outlined in this article before
any person engages in the activity described in § 185-7, Permits required,
unless the activity is scheduled by the Town.
§ 185-35. Application deadline.
Application shall be made to the Parks and Recreation Department at least
48 hours prior to the proposed activity date.
§ 185-36. Application information.
Application shall be made on a form provided by the Parks and Recreation
Director specifying the name, address, and phone number of the sponsoring
organization, if any, the date and the type of proposed activity, the park
which has been requested, the estimated attendance, and the hours, during
which the activity is to be conducted.
§ 185-37. Considerations for issuance of permit.
The Parks and Recreation Director or his designee shall issue a permit if
the applicant's use will not materially interfere with the enjoyment and use
of Town parks by the general public based on consideration of whether the
applicant's activity:
§ 185-38. Additional conditions.
The Parks and Recreation Director may impose reasonable conditions
relating to the safety, health and welfare of the park users.
§ 185-39. Bond.
As a condition of the issuance of a permit, the Parks and Recreation
Director, may at his discretion, require the posting of a bond for damages
A. Will detract from residents' entitlement to recreation;
B. Will unreasonably infringe on public health, safety, or welfare;
C. Will conflict with facilities reserved for other uses;
D. Will interfere with traffic or burden police services;
Is likely to cause personal or property injury, incite violence, crime, or
disorderly conduct; or
E.
Is for the primary purpose of advertising products, goods or events, or
for private profit.
F.
§ 185-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-39
1:103
to any Town property and may require the individual or group to have in
attendance a law enforcement officer.
§ 185-40. Approval or denial of application; appeals.
The Parks and Recreation Director shall act on an application within five
business days of the receipt thereof. Denial of an application shall be
accompanied by a statement of reasons for such denial. An applicant may
appeal the action of the Parks and Recreation Director to the Town
Manager.
§ 185-41. Permit revocation.
Any permit is revocable for violation of this chapter or for breach of the
conditions attached to the permit.
§ 185-42. Right to review permits and denials.
Town Council retains the right to review permits and denials on an
individual basis.
§ 185-39 BEDFORD CODE § 185-42
1:104
ARTICLE X
Enforcement
§ 185-43. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter may be fined
not more than $100 for each violation. Each violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 185-44. Other relief.
The Town Council in behalf of the Town of Bedford may seek to enjoin
any violation of these regulations by instituting an appropriate action in
Superior Court, but the election of the Town Council to proceed under this
section shall not bar prosecutions under § 185-43 above, or any other relief
available under the laws of the State of New Hampshire.
§ 185-45. Ejection from park.
The Parks and Recreation Director, park employees, and police shall have
the authority to eject from the park any person acting in violation of any
provisions of this chapter or in violation of any permit issued pursuant to
this chapter.
§ 185-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-45
1:105
Chapter 188
PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
§ 188-1. Legislative authority; purpose.
By authority of New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated Chapters 322
and 398, all as amended, the Town of Bedford adopts the following provision
for the purpose of regulating the transaction of items which have commonly
been subject to theft and illicit transfer. The purpose of this chapter is to
discourage the transaction of stolen goods, assist in the investigation of any
illicit transfer and associated criminal activity, and the recovery of stolen
property to the rightful owner.
§ 188-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the
meanings set forth below unless expressly indicated.
PAWNBROKER — Any person, firm, partnership or corporation engaged
in the lending of money secured by taking possession of jewelry, apparel,
tools, electronics, household goods, or any other personal property, with
interest charged thereon, with the right to sell the personal property if it is
not redeemed. A person, firm, partnership, or corporation shall be deemed
a pawnbroker whether the transaction takes the form of a loan by the
pawnbroker secured by the property, or a sale to the pawnbroker with the
right to repurchase within a specified amount of time.
SECONDHAND DEALER — Any person, firm, partnership or corporation
whose business is in the retail buying, selling, buyback, exchanging, dealing
in or dealing with secondhand articles, including, but not limited to, jewelry,
watches, diamonds, precious stones, gems, gold, silver, platinum, precious
metals, coins, stamps, musical instruments and equipment, cameras, furs,
home and audio stereo equipment, televisions, VCRs, DVD players,
multimedia devices, digital equipment, video game systems, equipment and
accessories, tools, computers and computer equipment, firearms, electronic
navigation systems, automobile accessories and collectables, excepting
furniture and books. "Secondhand dealer" does not mean purchases made
from private residences by citizens not engaged in a secondhand-dealertype
business.
§ 188-3. Licensing authority.
The Town of Bedford may license such persons as it deems suitable to
be pawnbrokers or secondhand dealers within the Town. All licenses so
granted shall contain a clause that the person so licensed agrees to abide
by and be subject to all provisions of this chapter as it may be from time to
time amended.
§ 185-45 BEDFORD CODE § 188-4
1:106
§ 188-4. License required; application requirements.
No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall operate, conduct or
engage in business as a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer unless such
person, firm, partnership or corporation obtains a license from the Town of
Bedford, in accordance with New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated
Chapters 47, 322 and 398, respectively.
§ 188-5. Transaction records.
Every pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall keep and maintain a
complete written record of each such purchase. This record, which must
be kept on file for seven years, shall be in the English language and
include a full and accurate detailed description, including serial numbers
of the item or items purchased, pawned or pledged; or in the case of any
jewelry, watches, diamonds, precious stones, gems, gold, silver, platinum,
precious metals, coins, or stamps, a clear color photographic image must
be taken of the article to accompany the record; the date and time of such
transaction; the amount of money loaned, the rate of interest to be paid on
said loans; and the full name and address of the seller or the pledger. Every
secondhand dealer shall keep and maintain written records, including the
names and addresses of purchasers, for sales of items purchased by the
secondhand dealer less than 30 days before the date of sale.
§ 188-6. Identification of sellers required; age restriction.
Every pawnbroker and secondhand dealer shall require every seller or
pledger of items to produce a positive photographic identification, and the
type of identification used shall be noted on the transaction records. At
no time shall a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer accept another person's
photographic identification for any transaction. The pawnbroker or
Application for such licenses shall be made to the Town Clerk who may
submit them to the Chief of Police and who may cause an investigation
to be made into the fitness of the applicant to engage in the business
of a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, and report his findings to the
Town Clerk before such license is acted upon.
A.
The license shall be issued for a specific location and is not transferable
to any other person, firm, partnership or corporation.
B.
Upon approval by the Town Council, a fee of $50 shall be paid by the
applicant to the Town Clerk prior to the issuance of the license.
C.
Licensees shall display their current license in a conspicuous place
within the business where it may readily be viewed by the general
public.
D.
A numbered license shall be issued and continue in full force until April
1 of each year unless revoked prior to this date by the Town Council
at any time after notice to the licensee and hearing on the charges
preferred.
E.
§ 188-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-6
1:107
secondhand dealer shall attach a photocopy of the identification shown to
the transaction record. No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall transact
business with anyone under 18 years of age, except when said minor is
accompanied by a parent or legal guardian who shall sign the transaction
record with an accompanying copy of his or her positive photographic
identification.
§ 188-7. Reporting of transactions.
Pawnbrokers or secondhand dealers shall prepare and deliver photocopies
of all transaction records to the Chief of Police, or his designee, within 48
hours of the end of said dealer's business day on which the transaction
occurred. If during any week a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer has not
purchased any items, he or she shall make a report of such fact to the Chief
of Police, or his designee, on or before 10:00 a.m. of the first business day
of the following week.
§ 188-8. Inspection of records and premises.
Pawnbrokers or secondhand dealers shall retain the original transaction
records in their possession, which, together with any article which is kept
or stored in or upon such premises, may be inspected at any time by a duly
authorized police officer.
§ 188-9. Time restrictions.
Pawnbrokers or secondhand dealers will not sell, encumber by sales
contract, or otherwise dispose of or alter an article in its appearance
within 14 days of purchase, unless granted permission, in writing, from the
Chief of Police, but in any case not within 48 hours of time of purchase.
Pawnbrokers or secondhand dealers shall retain on premises all items
purchased or pawned during the waiting period and not place such items on
the sales floor until the waiting period has expired unless the item is clearly
marked as to the sales release date based on the time frames outlined
in this section. Pawnbrokers or secondhand dealers shall clearly mark the
transaction records of any pawn item repurchased by the original seller and
shall submit a copy of the record to the Chief of Police, or his designee,
within 48 hours of the transaction.
§ 188-10. Removal of articles by police officers.
If the Chief of Police, or his designee, determines that an article is needed
for evidence in a criminal investigation, the Police Department shall seize
the evidence pursuant to applicable criminal procedures. The pawnbroker
or secondhand dealer shall be issued a receipt for the article. Pursuant
to RSA 595-A:6, the Police Department shall keep seized articles under
the court's direction as long as necessary to permit the article to be used
as evidence. At the conclusion of all court proceedings or closure of the
police investigation, the Police Department shall notify the original owner,
the pawnbroker/secondhand dealer, and any person who may have a lawful
§ 188-6 BEDFORD CODE § 188-10
1:108
interest that the property will be released in 30 calendar days to the original
owner if no other claim is placed on the property.
§ 188-11. Violations and penalties; revocation or suspension of
license; notice; severability.
Chapter 190
PEDDLERS, HAWKERS AND ITINERANT VENDORS
§ 190-1. Statutory authority.
By authority of RSA 31:102-a, all as amended, the Town of Bedford adopts
the following chapter.
§ 190-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HAWKER and PEDDLER — Any person, either principal or agent, who
approaches individuals or households without prior invitation and goes from
town to town or from place to place in the same town selling or bartering,
or carrying for sale or barter, or exposing therefor, any goods, wares, or
merchandise.
ITINERANT VENDORS — All persons, both principals and agents, who
engage in a temporary or transient business in this state, either in one
Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$100 per day.
A.
The Town Council may, independently or upon recommendation from
the Chief of Police, suspend or revoke said license for any violation
of this chapter, or reasons it deems to be in the best interest of the
Town of Bedford, following a hearing. Offenses which may result in the
suspension or revocation of said license include, but are not limited to,
the following:
(1) Violation of any provision of this chapter; or
Violation of any statute of the State of New Hampshire or any
other state or territory of the United States relating to the licensed
business.
(2)
B.
Notice of the suspension or revocation will be made, in writing, to the
owner(s) of the business within five business days of said hearing.
C.
The provisions of this chapter shall be severable, and if any phrase,
clause, sentence or provision of these regulations shall, for any reason,
be held invalid or unconstitutional, the validity of the remainder of
these regulations shall not be affected thereby.
D.
§ 188-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-2
1:109
locality or traveling from place to place, selling goods, wares, and
merchandise from stock or by sample for future delivery, and who, for
the purpose of carrying on such business, hire or occupy any building or
structure for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares, and merchandise
or samples.
§ 190-3. Licensing.
§ 190-4. Restrictions.
§ 190-5. Exemptions.
No person shall engage in the business of a hawker, peddler, or
itinerant vendor within the Town of Bedford unless licensed to do so. A
State of New Hampshire hawker and peddler license must be furnished
to apply for a Town license.
A.
Licenses required under this section shall be issued subject to
procedures, regulations, and guidelines as established by the Town
Council, and filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
B.
Licenses shall be issued by the Town Manager and are revocable for
just cause upon the approval of the Town Council.
C.
License fees under this section shall be $20 for each day, $50 for each
week, $200 for each month, or $600 for one year, whichever is less.
License fees are calculated for each individual involved in the sales or
advertisement.
D.
The license fee for New Hampshire farmers selling produce in the Town
of Bedford shall be $50 per month.56
E.
No person shall place, or expose for sale or advertisement,
merchandise of any description or other article on any sidewalk, street,
right-of-way, or property of the Town except in conjunction with a
properly licensed street fair.
A.
No person shall place, or expose for sale or advertisement,
merchandise of any description or other article on private commercial
property without prior written consent of the property owner.
B.
C. Solicitations at private residences are limited to daylight hours.
Nonprofit organizations soliciting or selling for the purpose of fundraising
are exempt from licensing requirements at the discretion of the
Town Manager. Such organizations include but are not limited to Boy
Scouts, Girl Scouts, Little League, Soccer League, Town service clubs,
veterans organizations, and Bedford church affiliations.
A.
56.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 190-2 BEDFORD CODE § 190-5
1:110
§ 190-6. Violations and penalties.
Violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
Each day of operation or each transaction of sale shall constitute a separate
offense.
Chapter 208
SEPTIC SYSTEMS AND WELLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Septic system permits — See Ch. 92, § 92-8. Sewer use — See Ch. 212.
§ 208-1. Conformity with regulations required.
Sewage disposal system shall not be installed, altered, or maintained in the
Town of Bedford unless it is in conformity with these regulations as well as
the pertinent regulations of the State of New Hampshire, as may exist, be
established or amended.
§ 208-2. Statutory authority.
Under the authority of RSA 147:1, 147:10 and 485-A:32, the following
regulations for governing the installation, alteration, inspection and
maintenance of sewage disposal systems and wells for the health and safety
of the people of Bedford are hereby adopted.
§ 208-3. Purpose.58
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for:
A candidate for public office in the process of obtaining signatures on
nomination papers, who seeks to have the candidate's name placed
on the ballot for the state general election by submitting nomination
papers under RSA 655:40 is exempt from the licensing provisions of this
chapter pursuant to RSA 31:102-a.57
B.
Adequate and safe subsurface sewage disposal installations, hereafter
referred to as the "system(s)," which are to be located and constructed
so as to avoid contaminating any existing or future water source or
water supply and to provide for the efficient and effective
administration of those regulations.
A.
57.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 190-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-3
1:111
§ 208-4. Statutory provisions.
The rules and regulations established by the State of New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services, Subsurface Bureau and Water
Resource Management Bureau, form a part of this chapter to the extent that
said state regulations are accepted and added to by the provisions of this
entire chapter.
§ 208-5. Definitions.59
Adequate and safe well construction, which are to be located and
constructed so as to avoid contamination and to provide for the efficient
and effective administration of those regulations.
B.
Certain terms used in this chapter are defined under the section
entitled "CHAPTER DEFINITIONS" in the current adopted Code of
Administrative Rules Governing Subdivision and Individual Sewage
Disposal System Design Rules unless clarified or modified by this
chapter. Where a term is not defined under any adopted code, its
meaning shall be the ordinarily accepted meaning within the context
that the term is used.
A.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENT(S) — The individual(s) authorized by the Town Council to
perform all administrative and inspection responsibilities of this
chapter.
DESIGNER — A New Hampshire licensed designer of subsurface
disposal systems.
INSTALLER — A New Hampshire licensed installer of subsurface
disposal systems.
OWNER — The person in whose name the ownership of the property
is legally recorded and is his or her primary domicile. The authority to
perform any of the duties as herein described may not be transferred
to any other person with the exception of a New Hampshire licensed
designer and New Hampshire licensed installer of subsurface sewage
system(s).
SUBSURFACE BUREAU — The division of the New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services, which monitors and regulates
subsurface sewage disposal systems.
TOWN — The Bedford Board of Health per RSA 128:3, or its designated
agent(s). Appeals from administrative decisions shall be made directly
to the Board of Health.
B.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 208-3 BEDFORD CODE § 208-5
1:112
§ 208-6. Permits.
§ 208-7. Licensed designers and installers.
All designers and installers must maintain current State of New Hampshire
licensure unless as excepted under RSA 485-A:35 and 485-A:36 where they
meet the definition of "owner" as defined under these regulations.
§ 208-8. Inspections.
See the Bedford Building Department Handbook for inspection
requirements. Copies of the Building Department Handbook are available
for review at the Town offices.
§ 208-9. Capacity and construction requirements for sewage
disposal system design.
§ 208-10. Local design, construction and capacity requirements for
sewage disposal systems.
WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT BUREAU — The division of the
New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services, which
monitors and regulates wells.
WELL — Private subsurface water supply.
A permit for the installation and/or alteration of a sewage disposal
system must be obtained from the Building/Health Department prior to
the commencement of any work on a system.
A.
Information regarding permit fees is available in the Bedford Building
Department Handbook, which is available at the Town offices.
B.
The system shall be designed, constructed and installed so as to satisfy
all requirements set forth in pertinent State of New Hampshire DES
Subsurface Bureau Regulations as they exist, may be established or
may be amended. These regulations currently include but may not
in the future be limited and referred to as Chapter Env-Wq 1000,
Subdivision and Individual Sewage Disposal System Design Rules and
local design amendments.60
A.
All new septic designs must be reviewed and approved by the Bedford
Health Department prior to receiving state approval. This shall also
include requests for waivers to the individual sewage disposal system
design administrative rules.
B.
Filter fabric. An effective barrier of a minimum of five ounces per
square yard of nonwoven, polyester filter fabric shall be placed over
the top of the system to prevent infiltration of the backfill. The use of
building paper or hay in lieu of the filter fabric is not acceptable.
A.
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 208-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-10
1:113
In-kind replacements.
Where no previous state approval for construction and operation
exists for those septic systems being replaced under the subsurface
rules for in-kind replacement shall have the septic tank sized to
meet current septic tank sizing requirements. This shall also
include those systems where a garbage disposal has been installed
in the dwelling contrary to an existing septic design.
(1)
Where existing systems have been constructed to separate gray
water and septic waste to separate disposal systems, these two
waste systems must be combined into a single disposal system at
the time of the in-kind replacement.
(2)
B.
Septic system tank replacement.
The tank of an existing septic system may be replaced, when
necessary, when done in compliance with New Hampshire DES
Subdivision and Individual Sewage Disposal Systems
administrative rules.61
(1)
The property owner or a licensed New Hampshire installer and/or
designer shall submit a sketch of the property, including the house,
septic system tank replacement site and known property lines prior
to the issuing of a local permit.
(2)
C.
Percolation tests and test pits:
An agent of the Town of Bedford must witness test pits for septic
in-kind replacement.
(1)
A minimum notice of 48 hours shall be given prior to the request
for inspection.
(2)
D.
Failed septic systems.
A portable toilet shall not be used as a replacement for a failed
septic system.
(1)
Expedited approvals. Where an expedited approval for construction
has been issued by the New Hampshire DES Subsurface Bureau
the new system shall be replaced and receive approval for
operation within 90 days of said state approval for construction.
Where it has been stated the existing individual septic system is in
failure, the property owner shall pump the septic tank on a regular
basis to prevent untreated contaminants from being discharged to
the surface. Failure to correct the failed system, including pumping
of the tank, within the above time frame shall result in the Health
Department ordering the property vacated based upon RSA 147:8
and 147:16a until such time as the new system has received an
approval for operation from the DES.
(2)
E.
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 208-10 BEDFORD CODE § 208-11
1:114
§ 208-11. Individual subsurface water supplies.
All wells to be used as a water source shall be designed, constructed,
and satisfy all requirements set forth in pertinent State of New
Hampshire, Department of Environmental Services, Water Resource
Management Bureau regulations as they exist, may be established or
may be amended in the future.
A.
Permits.
A permit for the installation and/or alterations of wells must be
obtained from the Building/Health Department prior to the
commencement of any work on a well. A scaled diagram of the
location must accompany the permit application. The diagram must
show the existing or proposed subsurface disposal system on that
and adjacent lots.
(1)
Information regarding permit fees is available in the Bedford
Building Department Handbook, which is available at the Town
offices.
(2)
B.
Local well requirements.
Well location.
New building lots. On building lots proposed and created after
the date of this chapter, wells shall be located so as to preclude
the required protective well radius from crossing the proposed
property line. The Bedford Health Department must approve
all proposed well locations prior to state and local subdivision
approvals. The proposed wells shall be shown on a plan in
a location that is accessible to conventional well-drilling
equipment.
(a)
Existing building lots. For new or replacement wells being
installed on legal lots of record existing prior to the date of
this chapter, the well shall be located so as to preclude the
required protective well radius from crossing property lines.
When this not possible due to lot shape, location of existing
septic systems, topographic conditions or other mitigating
circumstances, a request for relief shall be made to the Health
Department, and a well release shall be recorded for the
noncompliant well.
(b)
(1)
Water test requirements.
All new and replacement wells constructed/installed after the
effective date of this chapter; a State of New Hampshire
certified testing lab shall do a well water analysis of the
following parameters:
(a)
(2)
C.
§ 208-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-11
1:115
§ 208-12. Violations and penalties.
A penalty not to exceed the amount permitted by statute shall be imposed
on the applicant for failure to comply with these regulations. Each day of
continuing failure to comply, after written notice of the violation(s), shall
constitute a new offense. Repeated violations of regulations may be cause
for the agent(s) to refuse to issue further permits for a period of one year.
Chapter 212
SEWER USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Septic systems and wells — See Ch. 208.
Bacteria. The test results for this item must meet the
minimum requirement of "absent" prior to the well being
placed in service.62
[1]
[2] Chloride.
[3] Sodium.
[4] Iron.
[5] Manganese.
[6] pH.
[7] Hardness.
[8] Fluoride.
[9] Nitrate/Nitrite.
[10]Lead.
[11]Arsenic.
[12]Volatile organic compound screen (VOC).
If the VOC screen is positive, further testing shall be done to
determine the type of contaminant and concentration.
(b)
An original test result shall be submitted to the Building/
Health Department prior to the well being placed in service.
(c)
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 208-11 BEDFORD CODE § 208-12
1:116
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 212-1. Purpose and objectives; applicability.
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth uniform requirements for
the use of public and private sewers and drains, private wastewater
disposal, the installation and connection of building sewers and the
use of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) for the Town of
Bedford, County of Hillsborough, State of New Hampshire and will
enable the Town to comply with all applicable state and federal laws,
including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and the general
pretreatment regulations (40 CFR Part 403). The Town of Bedford,
New Hampshire, discharges wastewater to the City of Manchester's
publicly owned treatment works for treatment and disposal, and these
regulations shall be at least as stringent as the City of Manchester's
Sewer Rules and Regulations.
A.
Recognizing that significant opportunities exist to reduce or prevent
pollution at its source through cost effective practices, and that such
practices can offer savings through reduced purchases of materials
and resources, a decreased need for pollution control technologies, and
lower liability costs, as well as assisting to protect the environment,
the Town of Bedford establishes the following objectives of this chapter.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will interfere with its operation;
(1)
Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will pass-through the publicly owned
treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or
otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment
works;
(2)
Protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may
be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their
employment and the general public;
(3)
Promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge
from the publicly owned treatment works;
(4)
Provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned
treatment works; and
(5)
B.
This chapter shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment
works. The chapter authorizes the issuance of individual wastewater
discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and
enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures;
requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the
C.
§ 212-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-1
1:117
§ 212-2. Statutory authority.
In order to ensure proper removal and disposal of sewage wastes and
wastewaters within the region, to ensure the proper operation and
maintenance of public sewers, drains, treatment plants, and other drainage
or sewerage works within the region, and to provide for keeping adequate
records of sewers, drains and appurtenances, and connections thereto, the
following chapter regulating the user charge and cost recovery program,
the construction, use, repair, alteration, and discontinuance or
abandonment of sewers, drains, and appurtenances, the connections
thereto, including drains and pipes discharging directly or indirectly into
said sewers or drains, and the substances to be discharged directly or
indirectly into and through sewers, drains, and appurtenances of the public
sewerage system and storm drainage system of the region is hereby enacted
by the Town Council, as provided by RSA 149-I:6, including special acts
approved by the State Legislature and by the laws of the State of New
Hampshire.
§ 212-3. Powers and authority of Town Council.
equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established
herein.
The Town Council shall make all rules and regulations for the use of
the Bedford wastewater collection system facilities within the Town of
Bedford and shall see to the enforcement of contracts or agreements
between the Town and the City of Manchester, regional communities,
industries, and commercial establishments pertaining to wastewater
treatment and municipal sewer facilities.
A.
The Director shall have supervision and management of the wastewater
collection system.
B.
The Town Council shall set the rates in accordance with Article IX, to be
charged by the users of the wastewater collection system, which rates
may be varied from time to time when the Town Council shall deem
such to be necessary for the wastewater collection system to remain
self-supporting.
C.
The Town Council shall have the authority to set up a separate and
distinct account for the wastewater collection system.
D.
The Town Council shall have the power to submit to the Collector of
Taxes with a warrant, under the hands and Seal of the Town, requiring
the collection of all delinquent sewer use charges, and the Collector
shall have the same rights and remedies and be subject to the same
liabilities in relation thereto as in the collection of taxes.
E.
The Town Council shall employ such engineering, administration,
clerical, and other personnel as it may require for the proper discharge
of its powers and duties.
F.
§ 212-1 BEDFORD CODE § 212-3
1:118
The Town Council shall have the power to exact a penalty charge as
a means of recovering both interest and additional cost of billing and
collecting on delinquent sewer use accounts, said penalty to become
progressively heavier in proportion to the period of delinquency.
G.
The Town Council shall have the power to issue and enforce rules
and regulations relating to the wastewater collection system, related
pumping stations and interceptors, and/or other appurtenant
structures, as are required for proper maintenance and operation. Any
person willfully violating such ordinances or bylaws shall be guilty of a
violation for each day of violation after written notice to desist has been
given.
H.
The Town Council reserves the authority to review all requests and to
accept or deny any applications for sewer connections outside of the
established sewer district. The presumption shall be that no properties
outside of the established sewer district shall be connected. Criteria for
review for such requests shall include but not necessarily be limited to
the following:
The applicant must prove acute septic system failure (the inability
of the land to support a septic system for existing commercial
or residential property) as a condition of review. Substandard
performance of existing septic system(s) when system upgrading or
replacement would cure the problem does not meet the standard of
proving acute failure;
(1)
The applicant has no alternative, including acquiring rights in
additional land;
(2)
The applicant shall agree to bear the cost of sewer extension,
although Town Council reserves the right to share or advance funds
to cover all or a portion of the cost, with reimbursement through
user-charge assessments;
(3)
(4) The best interests of the Town are served;
Existing capacity of the sewer system, existing commitments for
sewer connection, and estimated future demand.
(5)
I.
The Town Council may grant a waiver to those properties with adequate
alternative sewage disposal systems which comply with applicable state
regulations in accordance with RSA 147:8 and Administrative Rule Env-
Wq 1003.10 designed by a designer licensed in New Hampshire and
approved for construction by the DES (New Hampshire Department
of Environmental Services) after January 1, 1985. Upon the need for
repair and/or replacement of the disposal system, the property must
then connect to the public sewer system (REF. RSA 147:8 and subject
to all applicable fees).
Incorporated within this chapter is a Sewer District Map (See
§ 212-14 and included in Appendix B63), indicating the boundaries
(1)
J.
§ 212-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-3
1:119
§ 212-4. Abbreviations, definitions and word usage.
of the Sewer District. Sewer treatment capacity limitations
imposed by the intermunicipal agreement between the Town of
Bedford and the City of Manchester for wastewater service apply
to all sewer connections within the District and to any extensions
to property outside of the sewer district which may be authorized
by the Bedford Town Council pursuant to criteria outlined in
Subsection K below.
Any request(s) for proposed sewer connection(s) from public or private
sewer systems outside of the Town of Bedford to facilities within the
Town shall be reviewed by Town Council, which reserves the right to
accept or reject such request(s). No connections shall be made from
the Bedford sewer system to facilities outside of Bedford without the
express approval of Town Council.
K.
The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:
ASTM American Society for Testing Materials
BOD biochemical oxygen demand
BMP best management practice
BMR baseline monitoring report
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
CIU Categorical industrial user
CMOM capacity management operation maintenance
COD chemical oxygen demand
CWA Clean Water Act
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
gpd gallons per day
HWDP hauled wastewater discharge permit
IDP industrial discharge permit
I/I infiltration and inflow
IU industrial user
mg/L milligrams per liter
NHDES the State of New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NSCIU nonsignificant categorical industrial user
POTW publicly owned treatment works
A.
63.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 212-3 BEDFORD CODE § 212-4
1:120
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
RSA New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated
SIU significant industrial user
SNC significant noncompliance
SUO Sewer Use Ordinance
TBD to be determined
TSS total suspended solids
U.S.C. United States Code
µg/L micrograms per liter
WWTF wastewater treatment facility
Definitions.
The following terms, whenever used or referred to in this chapter,
shall have the following respective meanings, unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context.
(1)
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms
and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
hereinafter designated.
ABANDONED SEWER SERVICE — A sewer that is no longer in use.
ACCESSIBILITY/DEVELOPMENT FEE — A fee charged in
accordance with RSA 149-I:7.
ACT or THE ACT — The federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251
et seq., as well as any guidelines, limitations and standards
promulgated by the USEPA pursuant to the Act.
APPLICANT — The owner as hereinafter defined who makes out
a building sewer permit application with the intention of sewering
improved property.
APPROVAL — Written approval.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — United States Environmental Protection
Agency Region I Coordinator.
ASTM — The American Society for Testing Materials.
AUTHORITY — The Town Council or its authorized agent or
representative.
AUTHORIZED OR DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF
THE USER —
If the user is a corporation:
The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of
the corporation in charge of a principal business function,
[1]
(a)
(2)
B.
§ 212-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-4
1:121
AVERAGE — The arithmetic mean of values taken at the frequency
required for each parameter over the specified period. For total
fecal coliforms, the average shall be the geometric mean.
AVERAGE MONTHLY DISCHARGE — The highest allowable
average of daily discharges over a calendar month, calculated as
the sum of all daily discharges measured during a calendar month,
divided by the number of daily discharges measured during that
month.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs — Schedules of
activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and
other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed
in § 212-42 [40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)]. BMPs include treatment
requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage
from raw materials storage.
or any other person who performs similar policy or
decisionmaking functions for the corporation; or
The manager of one or more manufacturing, production,
or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized
to make management decisions that govern the operation
of the regulated facility including having the explicit or
implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other
comprehensive measures to assure long-term
environmental compliance with environmental laws and
regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are
established or actions taken to gather complete and
accurate information for individual wastewater discharge
permit requirements; and where authority to sign
documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager
in accordance with corporate procedures.
[2]
If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general
partner or proprietor, respectively.
(b)
If the user is a federal state, or local governmental facility, a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee
the operation and performance of the activities of the
government facility or its designee.
(c)
The individuals described in Subsection B(2)(a),(b) and (c)
above may designate a duly authorized representative if the
authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the
individual or position responsible for the overall operation of
the facility from which the discharge originates or having
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the
company, and the written authorization is submitted to the
Town Council.
(d)
§ 212-4 BEDFORD CODE § 212-4
1:122
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of
oxygen in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedures in five days at 20° C. expressed
in parts per million (ppm) by weight as determined by Standard
Methods.
BUILDING DRAIN — The lowest piping that collects the discharge
from all other drainage piping inside the building and extends
10 feet in developed length of pipe beyond the exterior wall and
conveys the drainage to the building sewer.
BUILDING SEWER OR SERVICE CONNECTION/SERVICE
LATERAL — The extension from the end of the building drain
(10 feet from inner face of building wall), up to and including
the connection to the public sewer at the property line or other
approved place of connection, the installation, operation,
maintenance, repair and replacement of which shall be the
responsibility of the property owner.
BUSINESS/COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — The primary use
of the property is not defined as residential or industrial.
BYPASS — The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any
portion of a user's pretreatment facility or any portion of a POTW.
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER — An industrial user subject to
a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL
STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c)
of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) that apply to a specific category of
users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts
405 through 471.
CFR — Code of Federal Regulations.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or COD — A measure of the oxygen
required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in
water.
CITY — The City of Manchester, New Hampshire.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C.
§§ 1251 to 1387, as amended.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer intended to receive both
wastewater and stormwater or surface water.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any building or portion
thereof where people go and where commerce is transacted.
COMMERCIAL USE — Premises used for financial gain, including,
but not limited to, businesses, restaurants, shops, bed-andbreakfasts,
motels, hotels, retail shopping malls, professional
offices, hospitals, and any other business of similar use.
§ 212-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-4
1:123
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A sample that is collected over time,
formed either by continuous sampling, or by mixing discrete
samples. The sample may be composited either as a time composite
sample composed of discrete sample aliquots collected in one
container at constant time intervals providing representative
samples irrespective of stream flow, or as a flow proportional
composite sample: collected either as a constant sample volume
at time intervals proportional to stream flow, or collected by
increasing the volume of each aliquot as the flow increases while
maintaining a constant time interval between the aliquots.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The Town Council of the Town of
Bedford, New Hampshire.
COOLING WATER — The clean wastewater from air-conditioning,
industrial cooling, condensing and similar apparatus, and from
hydraulically powered equipment which is sufficiently clean,
uncontaminated, and unpolluted that it can be discharged without
treatment or purification to a natural open stream or watercourse,
subject to the conditions of a National Pollution Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit.
CUSTOMER — The person or entity that owns the real property
which receives benefit of the availability of public sewer service, or
the person or entity that receives benefit of the use of the public
sewer.
DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT — The maximum allowable discharge
limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum
limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the
total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where daily
maximum limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the
daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the
pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that
day. In the case of pH, the daily discharge measurement shall be
instantaneous.
DENTAL PRACTICE — A business established for the purpose of
practicing dentistry, as defined by RSA 317-A:20.
DILUTE — To reduce in concentration, thin down, or weaken by
mixing with water or other liquids.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Works of the Town of Bedford,
New Hampshire, or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER — Normal water-carried household and
toilet wastes discharged into the public sewer, excluding
groundwater, surface water, or stormwater.
DRAINAGE FIELD — A system of perforated drains laid in trenches
and backfilled with broken stone or screened gravel, into which the
discharge from a septic tank or tanks flow.
§ 212-4 BEDFORD CODE § 212-4
1:124
DWELLING — One or more living or sleeping rooms arranged for
the use of one or more individuals living as a single housekeeping
unit, with cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specific use of land
owned by others duly recorded at the Hillsborough County Registry
of Deeds.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the
Regional Water Management Division Director, the Regional
Administrator, or other duly authorized official of said agency.
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge that is not a new
source.
FACILITIES — Structures and conduits for the purpose of
collecting, treating, neutralizing or disposing of domestic
wastewater and/or industrial or other wastewaters as are disposed
of by means of structures and conduits including treatment and
disposal works, necessary intercepting, outfall and outlet sewers
and pumping stains integral to such facilities with sewers,
equipment, furnishings thereof and other appurtenances
connected therewith.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat, wax, or grease in a physical state such
that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in
an approved pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered
free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater
does not interfere with the collection system.
FLOW EQUALIZATION FACILITIES — Facilities in which variations
in flow and composition of a liquid are averaged.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any fixed or mobile restaurant,
temporary or permanent food service establishment, coffee shop,
cafeteria, bed-and-breakfast, short order cafe, luncheonette, grill,
roadside stand, industrial feeding establishment, food vending
operation, whether attended or unattended, private, public or
nonprofit organization, or institution routinely serving food,
catering kitchen, commissary or similar place in which food or
drink is prepared for sale or for service on the premises or
elsewhere, and any other eating or drinking establishment or
operation where food is served or provided for the public with or
without charge.
FORCE MAIN — A rising main from where sewage is discharged
into a gravity manhole.
FUME TOXICITY — Screening level/shall mean the concentration
of a pollutant in water that, under equilibrium or other conditions,
a confined environment, or interaction with pollutants contained in
permitted discharges, would cause the concentration of a pollutant
in the air over the water to exceed an exposure limit.
§ 212-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-4
1:125
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and serving of food and from the
handling, storage and sale of produce. It is composed largely of
putrescible organic matter and its natural moisture content.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample that is taken from a wastestream
without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period
of time not to exceed 15 minutes. Grab samples will be required
where parameters being evaluated are those which may not be held
for any extended period because of biological, chemical or physical
interactions which take place after sample collection and affect the
results.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR — The volatile and nonvolatile residual
fats, oils, fatty acids, soaps, waxes, mineral oils, and other similar
materials.
GREASE TRAP — A device designed and installed to separate and
retain for removal by automatic or manual means grease from
normal wastes, while permitting normal sewage or wastes to
discharge into the sewer system by gravity.
GRIT — Sand, gravel, cinders, or other heavy solid materials that
have subsiding velocities or specific gravities substantially greater
than those of the organic particles solids in wastewater. Grit also
includes eggshells, bone chips, seeds, coffee grounds, and large
organic particles, such as food or wastes.
HAULED WASTEWATER — Any wastewater that is trucked to the
WWTF and discharged at the WWTF.
HAULER — Those persons, firms, or corporations, who pump, haul,
transport, or dispose of septage and who are licensed by the New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services pursuant to RSA
485-A:4, XVI-a and rules adopted to implement said section.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Any substance designated under 40
CFR Part 116 pursuant to Section 311 of CWA.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property located within the Town
upon which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or
periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals
and from which structure domestic wastewater and/or industrial
wastes shall be or may be discharged.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Any pollutant, other than
biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH, coliform
bacteria, or additional pollutants identified in the permit, which the
POTW was not designed to treat and does not adequately remove.
INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE — "Industrial waste" as defined in RSA
485-A:2, VI "namely any liquid, gaseous, or solid waste substance
resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing trade or
business, or from the development of any natural resources." For
§ 212-4 BEDFORD CODE § 212-4
1:126
purposes of these rules, industrial discharges do not include
sewage.
INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE PERMIT (IPD) — The official document
issued by the Town Council to an industrial sewer system and
treatment works that outlines the general and specific conditions
under which the user may discharge wastewaters into the
collection system or POTW.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any room, group of rooms,
building or other enclosure used or intended for use in the
operation of one business enterprise for manufacturing,
processing, cleaning, laundering, assembling or preparing any
product, commodity or article or from which any process waste, as
distinct from domestic wastewater, may be discharged.
INSPECTOR — The person or persons duly authorized by the Town
Council to inspect and approve the installation of building sewers
and their connection to the public sewerage system.
INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT — The maximum concentration of a
pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from
the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected,
independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the
sampling event.
INTERCEPTOR — A channel or sewer that serves to collect the flow
from the public sewage collection system.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with
a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts
the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge
processes, use or disposal, and therefore is a cause of a violation
of the City's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge
use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/
regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more
stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the
Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II, commonly referred to
as "RCRA"; any state regulations contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid
Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control
Act; the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act; 40 CFR
Part 503, standards for sewage sludge use and disposal; and RSA
485-A:4, XVI-a.
INVERT — The lowest inside point of the pipe.
LOCAL LIMIT — Specific discharge limits developed and enforced
by the Town Council upon discharge facilities to implement the
general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR
403.5(a)(1) and (b).
LOW PRESSURE FORCE MAIN — A public sewer system designed
to transport sewage by means of pressure derived from individual
§ 212-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-4
1:127
pumping units located on each parcel of land being served by the
sewer.
MAY — Permissive (see "shall").
MEDICAL/INFECTIOUS WASTE — As defined by RSA 125-N:2,
VIII.
MONITORING MANHOLE — Manhole which is installed along a
sewer and which provides access for the observation, sampling,
and measurements of the wastes.
MONTHLY AVERAGE — The sum of all daily discharges measured
during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges
measured during that month.
MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT — The highest allowable average of
"daily discharges" over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of
all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided
by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month.
MULTIPLE-DWELLING UNIT — A building containing two or more
separate dwelling units.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by
the USEPA.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(NPDES) PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the
Act.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch,
or other body of surface or groundwater.
NEW SOURCE —
Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which
there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction
of which commenced after the publication of proposed
pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act that
will be applicable to such source if such standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section,
provided that:
The building, structure, facility, or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located;
or
[1]
The building, structure, facility, or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes
the discharge of pollutants at an existing source.
[2]
The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially
independent of an Existing Source at the same site. In
[3]
(a)
§ 212-4 BEDFORD CODE § 212-4
1:128
NHDES DES — The New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling that
does not come into direct contact with any raw material,
intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable,
sole or partial, or of any real property.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters
of the United States in quantities or concentrations which alone or
in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources,
is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES
permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation).
determining whether these are substantially independent,
factors such as the extent to which the new facility is
integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which
the new facility is engaged in the same general type of
activity as the existing source, should be considered.
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility,
or installation meeting the criteria of Subsection B(2)(a)[2] or
[3] above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing
process or production equipment.
(b)
Construction of a new source, as defined under this subsection,
has commenced if the owner or operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
[a]
Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings,
structures, or facilities which is necessary for the
placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or
[b]
[1]
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the
purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to
be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options
to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss and contracts for
feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not
constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection.
[2]
(c)
§ 212-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-4
1:129
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust,
estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their
legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes
all federal, state, and local governmental entities.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen-ions, in
grams, per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH
value of seven and hydrogen-ion concentration of 10-7.
PHARMACEUTICAL WASTE — A prescription drug, as defined by
RSA 318:1, XVII, or a nonprescription or proprietary medicine, as
defined by RSA 318:1, XVIII, which is no longer suitable for its
intended purpose or is otherwise being discharged.
PHOSPHORUS (denoting total phosphorus) — The total of organic
phosphorus and inorganic phosphorus.
PIPE LAYER — Any person in the business of and approved by
the Town Council for laying building connections from existing
public sewer of residential, commercial or industrial buildings, and
similar structures and properties.
POLLUTANT — Any material or substance that may cause an
alteration of the chemical, physical, biological or radiological
integrity of the POTW or its receiving waters. Dredged spoil, solid
waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage,
sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or
discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal,
agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of
wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD,
toxic, or odor).
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such
pollutants into the wastewater collection system. This reduction
or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological
processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by
diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an
applicable pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or
procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user,
other than a pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS — Prohibited
discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local
limits.
§ 212-4 BEDFORD CODE § 212-4
1:130
PRIVATE SANITARY SEWER — A sewer or sewer system privately
owned and used by one or more properties that has not been
accepted by the Town Council as a public sewer.
PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM — The structure,
equipment and processes required to treat wastewater generated
on the owner's property. The system may be comprised of a septic
tank and leaching field, or any other method approved by the
NHDES.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED
DISCHARGES — Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of
certain substances; these prohibitions appear in § 212-29 of this
chapter.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the
preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that has been
shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely
under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers,
with no particle greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
PROPERTY — An area of land and/or structure as marked on the
assessment drawings in the office of the Town Assessor, Town of
Bedford, New Hampshire.
PROPERTY OWNER — Includes both the owner of fee in any real
estate and all tenants, lessees, or others in control or possession
and use of the property in question, or having any interest therein,
and his, her, its, or their agents or representatives, as the interest,
duties, powers, or liabilities of each may be.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS OR POTW — A treatment
works, as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292),
which is owned by the City of Manchester or the Town. This
definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection,
storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or
industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances, which
convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
PUBLIC SEWER — The main line of pipe or conduit, owned,
controlled, and maintained by the Town for the conveyance of
waste or sewage from several properties and does not include
sewers maintained by the owners of the properties using them or
as enforcement by other agreements.
RADIOLOGICAL WASTE — A radioactive waste as regulated by
RSA 125-F.
RECEIVING WATERS — Any watercourse, river, pond, ditch, lake,
aquifer, or other body of surface water or groundwater receiving.
SANITARY SEWAGE or SANITARY WASTEWATER — The common
wastewater and water-carried wastes from residences, and from
toilet and lavatory fixtures, noncommercial kitchens and laundries,
§ 212-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-4
1:131
and similar sanitary facilities of business and industrial buildings,
excluding groundwater, surface water, and drainage water.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer intended to convey only sanitary
sewage or, if so stipulated with respect to the particular sewer,
sanitary sewage plus industrial or other wastes, but excluding
stormwater, surface water, and groundwater.
SCREENING LEVEL — That concentration of a pollutant that under
baseline conditions would cause a threat to personnel exposed to
the pollutant, or would adversely impact structures of the POTW. To
be administered as local limits applicable to a particular discharge,
the screening levels must be adjusted to account for conditions at
the point of discharge that differ from baseline conditions.
SEEPAGE or SUBSOIL DRAINAGE — The water from soil
percolating into subsoil drains and through foundation walls,
basement floors, or underground pipes, or underground pipes, or
from similar sources.
SEPTAGE — The wastes primarily of sewage origin from a cesspool,
septic tank holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets,
campers, trailers, and septic tanks, or similar receptacle.
SEPTAGE or SEPTIC TANK CLEANINGS — The contents of a
settling tank in which settled sludge is in immediate contact with
the wastewater flowing through the tank and the organic solids are
decomposed by anaerobic bacterial action.
SEPTIC TANK — An approved type of watertight compartment
made of concrete or other approved material into which the
outflowing sewage from dwellings or other buildings may be
discharged.
SERVICE CHARGE — A basic charge for the convenience of sewage
disposal services.
SEWAGE — Human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dishwashing operations).
SEWER — The main pipe or conduit, manholes, other structures,
and equipment appurtenant thereto, provided to carry sewage,
industrial wastes, stormwater, cooling water, or similar wastes,
subject in each particular case to the purposes and limitations
imposed upon the particular pipe or conduit.
SEWER DISTRICT — An area designated by Town Council where
sewer connection to public lines may be required.
SEWER FEE/RENTAL — RSA Definition 149-1:7 shall mean a
charge for defraying the cost of the sewer system, said charge to
be based on the user charge formula.
SEWER SERVICE AREA — All dwellings/structures located within
100 feet of the public sewer in the sewer district.
§ 212-4 BEDFORD CODE § 212-4
1:132
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU) — Except as provided in
Subsections (b) and (c) of this definition a significant industrial
user is:
An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment
standards; or
(a)
An industrial user that:
Discharges an average of 10,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater to the wastewater collection system
(excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blow
down wastewater);
[1]
Discharges a process wastewater that contributes 5% or
more of the hydraulic or organic loading to the wastewater
treatment plant;
[2]
Discharges medical/infectious waste, pharmaceutical
waste, or radiological waste if such a discharge has been
designated by the municipality as having a reasonable
potential for adversely affecting the wastewater collection
system's operation or performance or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement; or
[3]
Is designated as such by the municipality as having a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
wastewater collection system's operation or performance
or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
[4]
(b)
The Town Council may determine that an industrial user
subject to categorical pretreatment standards is a
nonsignificant categorical industrial user rather than a
significant industrial user on a finding that the industrial user
never discharges more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of total
categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling
and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included
in the pretreatment standard) and the following conditions are
met:
The industrial user, prior to Town Council's finding, has
consistently complied with all applicable categorical
pretreatment standards and requirements;
[1]
The industrial user annually submits the certification
statement required in Section 6.14B [see 40 CFR
403.12(q)] to the Director, together with any additional
information necessary to support the certification
statement; and
[2]
The industrial user never discharges any untreated
concentrated wastewater.
[3]
(c)
§ 212-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-4
1:133
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE (SNC) — Any violation of
pretreatment requirements (limits, sampling, analysis, reporting
and meeting compliance schedules and regulatory deadlines) is an
instance of noncompliance for which the industrial user is liable for
enforcement, including penalties. Instances of SNC are industrial
user violations which meet one or more of the following criteria:
Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in Subsection
(2) of this part has no reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the wastewater collection system's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or Requirement, may at
any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition
received from an industrial user, and in accordance with
procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user
should not be considered a significant industrial user.
(d)
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as
those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken
in a six-month period, exceed (by any magnitude) the daily
maximum limit, or the average limit for the same pollutant
parameter.
(a)
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as:
Those in which 33% or more of all of the measurements
taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month
period equal or exceed the product of the numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(I)
multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS,
fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except
pH);
[1]
Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or
requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(I) (daily
maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or
narrative standard) that the POTW determines has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference or pass-through (including endangering the
health of POTW personnel or the general public);
[2]
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the
environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its
emergency authority under Paragraph (f)(1)(vi)(B) of this
section64 to halt or prevent such a discharge;
[3]
Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control
mechanism or enforcement order for starting
[4]
(b)
64.Editor's Note: See 40 CFR 403.8.
§ 212-4 BEDFORD CODE § 212-4
1:134
SLUG — Any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including
but not limited to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch
discharge.
SPILL — The release, accidental or otherwise, of any material not
normally released to the facilities, which by virtue of its volume
concentration or physical or chemical characteristics creates a
hazard to the facilities, their operation or their personnel. Such
characteristics shall include, but are not limited to, volatile,
explosive, toxic or otherwise unacceptable materials.
STANDARD METHODS — The latest edition of Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, as published by the
American Public Health Association.
STORM DRAIN — A piping system which carries storm and surface
waters and drainage, but excluded sewage and industrial wastes
other than unpolluted cooling water.
STORM WATER — The runoff or discharge of rain and melted
snow or other clean water from roofs, surfaces or public or private
lands, or elsewhere, and only such water which is sufficiently clean,
uncontaminated, and unpolluted to admit of being discharged,
without treatment or purification, into any natural open stream or
natural brook, rivulet, or stream.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS or SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total
suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended
in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by
laboratory filtering.
TOTAL KJELDAHL NITROGEN — The total of ammonia and organic
nitrogen but does not include nitrate and nitrite nitrogen.
TOWN — The Town of Bedford, New Hampshire.
TOWN COUNCIL — Elected Town Council for the Town of Bedford,
New Hampshire.
construction, completing construction, or attaining final
compliance;
Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date,
required reports such as baseline monitoring reports,
ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
[5]
[6] Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
Any other violation or group of violations, which may
include a violation of best management practices, which
the POTW determines will adversely affect the operation
or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
[7]
§ 212-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-4
1:135
TOXIC — Any material lethal to humans or to aerobic and anaerobic
bacteria required for biological treatment processes.
TOXIC POLLUTANTS — Any pollutant listed as toxic in Appendix
D of 40 CFR Part 122, under Section 306(a) (I) of the Clean Water
Act, such as biocides, pesticides, and other toxic materials.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water not containing any pollutants
limited or prohibited by the effluent standards in effect, or water
whose discharge will not cause any violation of receiving water
quality standards.
USER — A source of wastewater discharge into the sewer system.
USER CHARGE — A charge based on the volume and strength of
wastewater discharge.
C = The user charge for the billing period.
Vc = The unit cost for the treatment per 1,000 gallons of
wastewater volume at the rate specified in Article IX.
Vu = The volume in gallons of wastewater discharged during
the billing period.
Bc = The unit cost for the treatment per 100 pounds of BOD
at the rate specified in Article IX.
Bu = The BOD in pounds of wastewater discharged during
the billing period.
Sc = The unit cost for the treatment per 100 pounds of SS at
the rate specified in Article IX.
Su = The SS content in pounds of wastewater discharged
during the billing period.
WASTES — Substances in liquid, solid, or gaseous form which can
be carried in water.
WASTEWATER — Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and
sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings,
industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether
treated or untreated, which are contributed to the wastewater
collection system.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT —
That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment
of municipal sewage and industrial waste.
WATERCOURSE — A channel into which a flow of water occurs
either continuously or intermittently.
(3) "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 212-4 BEDFORD CODE § 212-4
1:136
ARTICLE II
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 212-5. Prohibited acts.
§ 212-6. Building sewer permits.
§ 212-7. Application for permits; fees.
No person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into,
use, alter, or disturb any public sewer, or appurtenances thereof, unless
a proper permit therefor shall have been issued by the Town Council,
as hereinafter provided.
A.
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance,
or equipment which is part of the public sewerage system.
B.
Class A permits. Class A permits shall authorize the connection of
residential establishments. A Class A.2 shall authorize the connection
of multiple dwelling units.
A.
Class B permits. Class B permits shall authorize the connection of
commercial and/or industrial establishments producing sanitary
sewage.
B.
Application for a building sewer permit shall be made by an approved
pipe layer for the building to be connected and shall be made on an
application form provided by the Town. Final connection of building to
building sewer shall be made by an approved pipe layer.
A.
Each application shall be supplemented with plans and specifications
for the sewer connection and such other information relating to the
building and the wastes to be discharged as may be considered
pertinent by the Town.
B.
At the discretion of the Director, all plans, specifications, and data
so submitted shall be required to bear the seal and signature of a
professional engineer registered as a sanitary engineer in the State of
New Hampshire.
C.
A permit and inspection fee as presented in Appendix A65 shall be paid
to the Town at the time the application is filed.
D.
Review of plans and specifications. A charge shall be assessed to each
applicant for the cost of reviewing plans and specifications (project
documents) by the Town. Said charge shall be due and payable to the
Town by the applicant at the time the application is filed. All other
fees shall be paid in accordance with Appendix A, Accessibility Fee
Schedule.
E.
65.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 212-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-7
1:137
§ 212-8. Installation and connection costs; indemnification.
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of a
building sewer shall be borne by the owner, and the issuance of a building
sewer permit shall be contingent upon the owner indemnifying the Town
against any loss or damage that may be caused directly or indirectly by the
installation of the building sewer.
§ 212-9. Separate and independent building sewer.
§ 212-10. Prohibited connections.
No person shall make a connection of roof downspouts, exterior or interior
foundation drains, areaway drains, cooling water drains, stormwater drains,
or any other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer
or building which in turn is connected, or intended to be connected, directly
or indirectly, to a public sanitary sewer.
§ 212-11. Sanitary facilities in new construction and remodeling.
Separate wastewater and stormwater systems. In all new construction and
in all reconstruction and remodeling involving building sanitary facilities,
separate piping systems shall be provided for wastewater and for
stormwater and shall be extended from the building as separate systems to
the public sewer and each, in turn, connected to the appropriate sanitary
sewer or storm sewer.
§ 212-12. New discharges or changes in discharges.
The Town reserves the right to hire an independent consultant
engineering firm to review proposed plans and specs, all costs to be
borne by the applicant and paid with the submission of the application.
F.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except when two or more buildings are so situated that a
separate and independent building sewer for each building is not
practical or unless otherwise approved by the Town.
A.
The Town may authorize the connection of such buildings to the public
sewer through a single building sewer, subject to such terms and
conditions of easement, design, and construction as the Town Council
may require.
B.
Within one year of the adoption of the effective date of this chapter, any
person, firm, or corporation having a discharge referenced in § 212-10
now connected and/or discharging into the sanitary sewer system shall
disconnect and/or remove same. Any disconnects or openings in the
sanitary sewer shall be closed in an effective, workmanlike manner, as
approved by the Director.
A.
§ 212-7 BEDFORD CODE § 212-12
1:138
§ 212-13. Conditions of approval.
The DES approves plans for new systems, extensions, or replacement
sewers only when designed upon the separate plan, in which rainwater from
roofs, streets, and other areas, and groundwater from foundation drains are
excluded.
§ 212-14. Sewer District Map.
The current adopted Sewer District Map is on file in the office of the
Department of Public Works.
Notification to the Director. Any person proposing a new discharge into
the system or a change in the volume or character of pollutants that
are discharged into the system shall notify the Director at least 45 days
prior to the proposed change or connection.
A.
DES sewage connection permit. Any person proposing to construct or
modify any of the following or any combination of the following shall
submit an application for a sewer connection permit to the DES in
accordance with DES Env-Wq 700, and the Town Council:
Any extension of a collector or interceptor, whether public or
private, regardless of flow;
(1)
Any wastewater connection or other discharge in excess of 5,000
gpd;
(2)
Any wastewater connection or other discharge to a WWTP
operating in excess of 80% design flow capacity or design loading
capacity based on actual average flow or loadings for three
consecutive months;
(3)
Any industrial wastewater connection or change in existing
discharge of industrial wastewater, regardless of quality or
quantity;
(4)
Any sewage pumping station greater than 50 gpm or serving more
than one building; or
(5)
Any proposed sewer that serves more than one building or that
requires a manhole at the connection.
(6)
B.
§ 212-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-14
1:139

ARTICLE III
Construction and Repair of Sewers by Authorized Persons
§ 212-15. Performance of work by authorized persons required.
To ensure compliance with the foregoing articles and sections of this
chapter and to facilitate the supervision of the construction, operation,
and repair of sewers and drains and the keeping of records thereof, no
person, other than those described in this article, shall construct, repair,
alter, or remove any sewer, building sewer or drain connected to or with,
or discharging directly or indirectly to or into any public sewer or drain of
the Town, or intended to discharge thus, at some future time, regardless of
whether said work is located in a public street or in public or private land.
§ 212-16. Permit required.
No person shall make any excavation for or construct, install, lay, repair,
alter, or remove any sewer, drain, sewer connection, or appurtenances
thereof, within the Town, which is in any way connected to, or discharges
directly or indirectly to or into any public sewer or drain of the Town, or is
intended at some future time to be so connected or to so discharge, until
said person shall have applied for and secured from the Town a permit for
doing such work. Such permits may be issued only to those qualified to
perform such work as provided in § 212-17.
§ 212-17. Extent of authorized activities.
The following may, as indicated, construct, repair, alter, or remove
public sewers and drains, except building sewers, subject to
supervision and approval by the Town:
Regular forces of a contractor employed by the Town operating
under orders of the Town Council and in the performance of work
for the Town;
(1)
Regular forces of the Town or the City of Manchester, New
Hampshire, operating under and subject to permit for the
particular job to be issued by the Town;
(2)
Regular forces of any public utility corporation authorized by state
law to construct, maintain, and operate pipes or ducts within public
highways within the Town, while engaged in work incidental to the
regular structures of said utility company and operating under and
subject to the conditions of the permit for the particular job issued
by the Town;
(3)
Any contractor or person who shall not have been suspended under
§ 212-20 below by the Town to perform work of the type in question
during the period provided in such approval and when operating
under and subject to the conditions of a permit for the particular
job issued therefor, by the Town; and
(4)
A.
§ 212-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-17
1:141
§ 212-18. Limitations.
The limitations as to persons who may construct, alter, or repair public
sewers and drains, as provided in § 212-17, shall not restrict the usual work
of plumbers or others when operating in accordance with the Plumbing
and Building Codes of the Town, provided that no plumber or other person
shall make any connection to a public sewer or drain of the Town without a
permit therefor, even if said sewer or drain is located under or immediately
adjacent to any building or similar structure, and provided that all drains
and fixtures within said building or structure and all use made of them shall
conform to the requirements of this chapter as to what may and may not be
permitted to be discharged into public sewers and drains.
§ 212-19. Performance of work.
Each contractor or person shall be responsible for the faithful performance
of all work performed under the license or permits issued and for the
conduct of all work and all materials furnished on work by his employees or
agents. No work shall be sublet by a contractor or person under any permit
issued under such license in any manner to divest said contractor or person
of full control and responsibility for all parts of said work. Only competent
persons shall be employed on work performed under such license, and
only suitable material conforming to the standards established by the Town
Council shall be furnished or used on such work.
§ 212-20. Suspension, cancellation, or termination of permits.
Regular forces of the Town operating under orders of the Board
and in the performance of work for the Town.
(5)
Building sewers to within 10 feet of the structure must be constructed
by an approved pipe layer in accordance with this Sewer Use
Ordinance. The building connection and the inside pipes must be
constructed by a licensed plumber and inspected by the building
inspector.
B.
Failure to comply with chapter. Should the Town Council find that
any contractor or person has failed to conform to the requirements
of this chapter and to the conditions of any permit issued thereunder,
or that such contractor has not been faithful in the performance of
work or furnishing of materials under his license, the Town Council
may suspend, cancel, or revoke such license and/or permit, and may
extend the suspension of such license and/or permit for such period,
or limit the activities of such contractor or person in such manner as
may appear to be to the public interest after a duly conducted hearing
before the Town Council and upon its direction.
A.
Compensation or reimbursement for losses. Suspension, cancellation,
or termination of a permit shall not entitle the permittee to any
compensation or reimbursement from the Town or its agents for any
B.
§ 212-17 BEDFORD CODE § 212-20
1:142
§ 212-21. Conditions for application for building sewer permits.
§ 212-22. Conditions of permit.
alleged loss or expense incurred thereby, and licenses and permits shall
be issued only on this condition.
Every application for a building sewer permit shall be made in writing
on forms to be provided by the Town for that purpose.
A.
The application shall:
State the location and ownership of the property to be served by
the sewer or drain in question;
(1)
(2) Include the post office address of said property owner;
(3) Briefly describe the work to be done;
Contain an agreement that the permittee will do the work in
accordance with the local laws, ordinances, regulations, and
permits of the Town as those local laws may apply to the particular
location or work; and
(4)
Save the Town and others harmless from damages, loss, or damage
claims of every name and nature.
(5)
B.
The Town Council, in its discretion, may require, as a prerequisite to
the issuance of any permit, that it be furnished evidence that:
Any and all permissions and necessary permits to open public
streets, public or private grounds or property have been or will be
secured;
(1)
The agent of the applicant is properly authorized to sign the
application in question;
(2)
The devices or provisions to prevent the entry into public sewers or
drains of any substances forbidden by this chapter will be provided,
maintained, and operated as required by this chapter; and
(3)
Any other information or proof pertinent to the particular job in
question.
(4)
C.
Each permit to construct, alter, or repair any sewer, building sewer,
or drain under this section shall be issued only after an application as
hereinbefore provided has been made.
A.
It shall state the limit of time within which the work must be performed
and at the expiration of which the privileges for construction under the
permit shall terminate, unless such time shall have been extended in
writing by the Town.
B.
C. Permits shall not be transferable or assignable by the permittee.
§ 212-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-22
1:143
There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: (A) residential and
(B) commercial (A.1) for residential and (A.2) for multiple dwelling unit
residential and (B.1) for commercial service producing only domestic
wastewater, and for service to establishments producing industrial
wastes. For residential and commercial services, the owner(s) or his
agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the Town
at least 30 days prior to said service connection. For an establishment
discharging industrial wastes, the application shall be made at least
60 days prior to said service connection. The permit application shall
be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information
(including pollution prevention studies) considered pertinent in the
judgement of the Director. A permit and inspection fee in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter shall be paid to the Town at the time
the application is filed.
D.
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection
of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s)
shall indemnify the Town from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
E.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway.
In such cases, the front building sewer may be extended to the rear
building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the
Town does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for
damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection.
F.
Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings
only when they are found on examination and tested by the Director to
meet all requirements of this chapter.
G.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable
rules and regulations of the Town and DES rules Env-Wq 700. In the
absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials
and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American
Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and the latest edition of the
Water Environment Federation (WEF) Manual of Practice shall apply.
H.
During construction of a new sanitary sewer, the Town may construct
the service connections for existing buildings to the curb or the
property line or the edge of a right-of-way. Construction of the building
sewer, including connection to the structures served, shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the improved property to be connected,
and such owner shall indemnify and save harmless the Town, its
officers, and agents from all loss or damage that may result, directly or
indirectly, due to the construction of a building sewer on his premises
I.
§ 212-22 BEDFORD CODE § 212-22
1:144
or its connection to the service connection. The owner shall thereafter
be obligated to pay all costs and expenses of operation, repair and
maintenance, and of reconstruction, if needed, of the building sewer
from the building to the property line.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sewage conveyed by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer at the owner's expense.
J.
No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, interior or
exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface
runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain that in turn
is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
K.
No person shall obstruct the free flow of air through any drain or soil
pipe.
L.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or
other applicable rules and regulations of the Town, or the procedures
set forth in appropriate specifications of the latest edition ASTM and
the latest edition WEF Manual of Practice. All such connections shall
be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be
approved by the Director before installation.
M.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Director
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer. Such notice shall be provided not less than 48 hours in
advance of the time any connection is to be made to any public sewer.
The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of
the Director or his representative. This requirement shall also apply to
repairs or alterations to building connections, drains or pipes thereto.
N.
Suitable provisions shall be made at the point of connection for testing,
which responsibility shall rest with the holder of the sewer connection
permit.
O.
No building sewer shall be covered until it has been inspected and
approved by the Superintendent. If any part of building sewer is
covered before being inspected and approved, it shall be uncovered
for inspection at the cost and expense of the owner of the improved
property to be connected to the public sewer.
P.
The Director shall maintain a record of all connections made to public
sewers and drains under this chapter and all repairs and alterations
made to building connections or drains connected to or discharging into
public sewers and drains of the Town or intended to so discharge. All
persons concerned shall assist the Director in securing the data needed
for such records.
Q.
§ 212-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-22
1:145
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the Town at the expense of the owner.
R.
Any person proposing to construct or modify any of the following or
any combination of the following shall submit an application for a sewer
connection permit to the DES in accordance with DES Env-Wq 700:
Any extension of a collector or interceptor, whether public or
private, regardless of flow;
(1)
Any wastewater connection or other discharge in excess of 5,000
gpd;
(2)
Any wastewater connection or other discharge to a WWTP
operating in excess of 80% design flow capacity or design loading
capacity based on actual average flow or loadings for three
consecutive months;
(3)
Any industrial wastewater connection or change in existing
discharge of industrial wastewater, regardless of quality or
quantity;
(4)
Any sewage pumping station greater than 50 gpm or serving more
than one building; or
(5)
Any proposed sewer that serves more than one building or that
requires a manhole at the connection.
(6)
S.
§ 212-22 BEDFORD CODE § 212-22
1:146
ARTICLE IV
Use of Public Sewers
§ 212-23. Treatment of sewage required.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town or
in any area under the jurisdiction of the Town Council any sanitary sewage,
industrial sewage, or other contaminated or polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent
provisions of this chapter. Approval by the DES is required.
§ 212-24. Connection required.
Ninety-day compliance. The owner of any house, building, or property
used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purpose
situated within a sewer district in the Town and abutting on any street,
alley, or right-of-way in which there is located or in the future may be
located a public sanitary sewer of the Town is hereby required at his
expense to install suitable sanitary facilities therein, and to connect
such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter within 90 days after the date of official
notice to do so by the Director, provided that said public sewer is
determined to be accessible and available by the Town and located
within 100 feet of the dwellings/structure. The Town Council reserves
the right to grant a waiver to the requirement of connection to the
public sewer for properties with adequate alternative sewage disposal
systems which comply with applicable state and local regulations, and
where the best interests of the Town are served.
A.
Extensions greater than 90 days. Extensions greater than 90 days
may be granted by the Town Council to individual property owners
upon appeal. Said extension shall be granted only when it can be
demonstrated that the connection to the public sewer system would be
unpractical to construct and that an agreement between the owner and
the Town Council be enacted. Said agreement shall be conditioned on
the following:
The wastewater from the subject property not be discharged
directly to any natural outlet;
(1)
The property is served by an acceptable subsurface disposal
system, as determined by the DES;
(2)
The agreement is nontransferable; that is, a new owner must
connect up to the sewer system within 90 days of the passing of
papers; and
(3)
(4) The owner agrees to pay the annual sewer use charge.
B.
§ 212-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-25
1:147
§ 212-25. Prohibited discharge.
No person shall discharge into or put into any public sewer or drain of the
Town, or into any sewer, drain, or fixture which thereafter discharges into
any public sewer, drain, or appurtenance thereof, any waste or substance
other than such kinds or types of waters or water-carried waste for the
conveyance of which the particular sewer, drain, or appurtenance is
intended, designed, and provided.
§ 212-26. Sanitary sewers.
§ 212-27. Undesignated sewer or drain plans.
If the original proceedings for the layout and construction of any particular
sewer or for its acquisition by the Town did not indicate what kind of sewer
or drain it was intended to be, or what wastewaters could or could not be
discharged therein, the Town Council shall consider the pertinent facts and
shall determine the kind of sewer or drain said sewer is for the purposes
of this chapter and what waste or wastewaters shall be permitted to be
discharged thereinto or be excluded therefrom.
§ 212-28. Discharge of waste other than originally intended.
Discharge of wastewater other than those originally intended for a
particular sewer, at any time prior to or subsequent to the adoption of this
chapter, shall not constitute any amendment of the originally and formally
expressed intended use for the sewer, unless the original designation shall
have been amended by the Town Council.
§ 212-29. Prohibited water or wastewater.
Permitted. Except as specifically provided with reference to some
particular sewer, sanitary sewers shall be used only for the conveyance
and disposal of sanitary sewage as defined in § 212-4, Definitions, under
"sanitary sewage or sanitary wastewater" of this chapter, and for watercarried
industrial sewage which is not objectionable as hereinafter
provided.
A.
Prohibited. No sanitary sewer shall be used to receive and convey
or dispose of any storm- or surface water, as defined in § 212-4,
Definitions, under "stormwater," subsoil drainage from soils or other
underground sources, flows of natural springs or groundwaters, surplus
from flowing wells, the discharges from roofs, roof conductors, yard
drains, street or highway drains, or of cooling water, as defined in
§ 212-4, Definitions, under "cooling water."
B.
Groundwater seepage. Groundwater seepage must not be admitted to a
sewer.
C.
§ 212-25 BEDFORD CODE § 212-29
1:148
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall
not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be
accidentally discharged to the POTW.
A.
General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater that causes pass-through
or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the
POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment
standards or any other federal, state, or local pretreatment standards
or requirements.
B.
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged any of the following described waters or wastewaters to
any public sewer:
Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150° F. (65° C.), or
which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting
in interference, but in no case wastewater that causes the
temperature at the introduction into the POTW treatment plant to
exceed 104° F. (40° C.).
(1)
Any water or wastewater which may contain more than 350 parts
per million by weight of fat, oil, or grease, or any substances which
may, in the opinion of the Town Council, solidify or become viscous
and thereby interfere with the proper operation of the sewage
works.
(2)
Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
(3)
Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, gas, or solid, or any substance which may, in
the opinion of the Town Council generate or form any flammable,
explosive or combustible substance, fluid, gas, vapor, or mixture
when combined with air, water, or other substances commonly
found in sewers including, but not limited to, wastestreams with
a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140° F. (60° C.) using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(4)
Any garbage that has not been properly shredded by an approved
garbage disposal unit. The installation and operation of any
garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4 horsepower or 0.76
horsepower metric or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Town.
(5)
Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plaster, plastics, woods, paunch manure, or any other
solid or viscous substance which is, in the opinion of the Town
Council, capable of obstructing the flow in sewers or causing other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works.
(6)
C.
§ 212-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-29
1:149
Any waters or wastewaters having a pH lower than six or higher
than nine or having any other corrosive property which may be,
in the opinion of the Town Council, capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of the sewage works,
as measured at the point of connection to the sanitary sewer or
other available monitoring location, or otherwise causing corrosive
structural damage or hazard to the POTW equipment, or personnel,
or with alkalinity in such quantities that the pH of the influent to
the POTW is caused to exceed 8.0.
(7)
Any waters or wastewaters containing toxic, poisonous, or
radioactive solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either
independently or by interaction with other wastewaters, which
may, in the opinion of the Town Council, injure or interfere with
any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage
treatment plant.
Such toxic or poisonous substances shall include, but not be
limited to, the following: copper, zinc, lead, cadmium, boron,
chromium, tin, nickel, cyanides, sulfates, sulfides, chlorides,
silver, iron, mercury, and phenol, or salts thereof.
(a)
These substances shall not be present in any quantities of
industrial or commercial process discharges in excess of the
limits in parts per million (ppm) by weight as determined
by the current intermunicipal agreement and amendments
thereof between the Town of Bedford and the City of
Manchester for wastewater service as available in Department
of Public Works. The Town Council reserves the option to
further limit any or all agreement restrictions.
(b)
(8)
Any waters or wastewaters containing suspended solids of such
character or quantity that more than normal attention or expense
is required, in the opinion of the Town Council, to handle such
materials in any portion of the sewage works.
(9)
Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, COD,
etc.), or chlorine demand requirements released in a discharge at
a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration that, either singly or by
interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the
POTW, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance, exceed any national categorical pretreatment standard
or cause pass-through.
(10)
Any waters or wastewaters at a flow rate which is excessive, as
determined by the Town Council, relative to the capacity of the
publicly owned treatment works and which would cause a
treatment process upset and subsequent loss of treatment
efficiency.
(11)
§ 212-29 BEDFORD CODE § 212-29
1:150
Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance which is, in the
opinion of the Town Council, capable of creating a public nuisance.
Pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.
(12)
Any waters or wastewaters containing substances which are, in
the opinion of the Town Council, not amenable to treatment or
reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of state and
federal agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving
waters.
(13)
Any waters or wastewaters containing phenols or other taste- or
odor-producing substances in such concentrations which may, in
the opinion of the Town Council, after treatment of the composite
sewage, fail to meet the requirements of the state and federal
agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
(14)
Any waters or wastewaters with color in such concentration which
may, in the opinion of the Town Council, after treatment of the
composite sewage, fail to meet the requirements of the state and
federal agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the waters,
or which may, in the opinion of the Town Council, require more
than normal attention or expense to handle in any portions of the
sewage works.
(15)
Any waters or wastewaters with COD in such concentration which
may, in the opinion of the Town Council, impose deleterious effects
on the oxygen balance of, or impose more than normal attention
and expense in, any portion of the sewage works.
(16)
Any waters or wastewaters containing strong-acid iron-pickling
wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or
not.
(17)
Any waters or wastewaters which, in the opinion of the Town
Council, contains unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids
(such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime
residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium
chloride and sodium sulfate).
(18)
Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Director in accordance with this chapter.
(19)
Any medical/infectious wastes, pharmaceutical waste, or
radiological waste except as specifically authorized in a discharge
permit.
(20)
Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant's effluent or sludge to fail a toxicity test.
(21)
§ 212-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-29
1:151
§ 212-30. Discharges under jurisdiction of chapter.
Household hazardous wastes, including but not limited to paints,
stains, thinners, pesticides, herbicides, antifreeze, transmission
and brake fluids, motor oil and battery acid.
(22)
Any hazardous waste listed or designated by DES under Env-Wm
400.
(23)
Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
(24)
Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, noncontact cooling water, or otherwise unpolluted
wastewater.
(25)
Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes unless specifically authorized by the Director in a
wastewater discharge permit.
(26)
Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances that may
cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
(27)
Wastewater causing a reading on an explosion hazard meter at the
point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of
more than 10% of the lower explosive limit of the meter.
(28)
Any quantities of flow, concentrations, or both that constitute a
slug, as defined in Section 212-4 of this chapter.
(29)
Waters or wastes that, by interaction with other water or wastes
in the POTW, release dangerous or noxious gases, form suspended
solids that affect the operation of the collection system, or create a
condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
(30)
Any materials that exert or cause unusual concentrations of inert
suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime,
slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not
limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
(31)
The admission into the public sewers of any waters or waters having
any of the following characteristics shall be subject to review and
approval by the Town Council.
A five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts per
million by weight;
(1)
Containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended
solids;
(2)
Containing any quantity of substance having the characteristics
described in § 212-29;
(3)
A.
§ 212-29 BEDFORD CODE § 212-30
1:152
§ 212-31. Determination of prohibited discharges.
§ 212-32. Federal categorical pretreatment standards.
(4) A chlorine demand greater than 15 parts per million by weight; or
An average daily flow greater than 2% of the average daily flow of
the sewer system or a slug flow.
(5)
Where necessary, in the opinion of the Director, the owner shall, at his
expense, provide such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to
reduce such objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the
maximum limits provided for in this article, or control the quantities
and rates of discharge of such waters or wastewaters.
B.
Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted to the
Director and to the DES for review and approval, and no construction
of such facilities shall be commenced until said approval is obtained in
writing.
C.
In determining whether any waste discharged or proposed to be
discharged into any public sewer or drain or is not to be excluded
under Article IV of this chapter, consideration shall be given to the
quantity, time or times of discharge, rate, and manner of discharge, and
the biological, chemical, and physical composition of the wastewater
in question, the size of the sewer or drain into which it is or is to be
discharged, the probable quantity of other sewage in said sewer or
drain at the time of discharge, the quantities of other objectionable
wastes likely in said sewer or drain, and other pertinent facts.
A.
Minute quantities of a waste which would be objectionable in larger
quantity may be permitted upon specific permission of the Town
Council, but any permission to discharge minute quantities of an
otherwise excluded waste shall be revocable at any time by the Town
Council.
B.
The categorical pretreatment standards are found at 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.
A.
The EPA shall be the Control Authority for users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards. As the Control Authority, users are responsible
to the EPA for compliance with categorical pretreatment standards and
the requirements of 40 CFR Part 403. Categorical users shall provide
the Town with copies of any reports to, or correspondence with EPA
relative to compliance with the categorical pretreatment standards.
B.
The user is responsible for determining the applicability of categorical
pretreatment standards. The user may request that EPA provide written
certification on whether the user is subject to the requirements of a
particular category and a copy shall be submitted to the Town.
C.
§ 212-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-32
1:153
§ 212-33. Local discharge restrictions.
Upon promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards
for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more
stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in
that subcategory, shall, on the compliance date of the categorical
pretreatment standards, immediately supersede the limitations
imposed under this chapter.
D.
All persons discharging industrial process wastes into public or private
sewers connected to the Town's wastewater collection system shall
comply with applicable federal requirements and state standards for
pretreatment of wastes as they may be amended from time to time in
addition to the requirements of this chapter.
A.
Local numerical discharge limitations established by the Town Council
as set forth herein, or may be added in the future (referred to as
"local limits"), all state pretreatment standards and federal categorical
pretreatment standards shall apply, whichever is most stringent.
B.
In developing the list of pollutants of concern for which local limits
are established, the Council has considered the allowable headworks
loading at the wastewater treatment facility. Pollutants that exceed
50% of their allowable headworks loading at the wastewater treatment
facility are considered to be of concern and have resulted in
development of local limits.
C.
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the wastewater collection system that exceed the
standards or restrictions established in sections of this chapter, which
in the judgment of the Director may have a deleterious effect upon the
POTW, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or that otherwise
create a hazard to worker safety or health, or constitute a public
nuisance, the Director may:
Reject or prevent any discharge to the POTW after notice has been
served to the discharger and the discharger has had reasonable
opportunity to respond;
(1)
(2) Require pretreatment prior to discharge to the POTW;
Require control (e.g., equalization) over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and/or
(3)
Require payment to cover additional cost of handling and treating
the wastes.
(4)
D.
Maximum allowable POTW headworks loadings limitations. The
numerical pollutant loading limitations in compliance with the City of
Manchester's local limits are presented in Appendix C.66
E.
66.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 212-32 BEDFORD CODE § 212-33
1:154
§ 212-34. Screening levels.
The Director shall calculate and administer daily concentration limits
(i.e., local limits) when required as described below to ensure that
the combined industrial pollutant discharge loadings do not cause or
contribute to exceedences of these limitations. For industrial discharge
applications, the local limits shall apply at the end of the process train
prior to dilution with nonindustrial wastewaters.
F.
Daily concentrations are the concentration of a pollutant discharged,
determined from the analysis of a flow-composited sample (or other
sampling procedure approved by the Director) representative of the
discharge over the duration of twenty-four-hour day or industrial
operating schedule of less than 24 hours.
G.
All concentration limits for metals represent total metal unless
indicated otherwise. The Director may impose mass limitations in
addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations.
H.
Local limits are developed based on the identification of users known to
be discharging each pollutant (industrial contributory flow procedure).
Unless specifically identified in an industrial discharge permit, a user
shall not discharge the locally limited pollutants at concentrations 20%
greater than the background concentrations used for local limits
development.
I.
The following pollutants shall not be discharged to the wastewater
collection system exceeding concentrations listed below without
approval of the Director:
The municipality may develop and include a list or include in
specific discharge permits.
(1)
A.
Screening levels are numerical values above which actions are initiated
to evaluate, prevent or reduce adverse impacts due to flammability,
chemical reactivity, organic/solids loadings, or worker health and
safety.
B.
If any of the screening levels are exceeded, repeat analysis must be
performed to verify compliance or noncompliance with that screening
level. If noncompliance is confirmed, then the user may be required, at
the discretion of the Director, to conduct an appropriate engineering
evaluation to determine the potential impact of the discharge of this
pollutant to the Town's wastewater collection system or alternatively,
to develop a pollution prevention plan specifically addressing the
pollutant that exceeds the screening level. This study or plan must
be conducted under the supervision and approval of the Town. Should
the evaluation indicate the impact to be unsatisfactory, the user shall
reduce the pollutant concentration to a satisfactory level. If the
evaluation supports development of an alternate site-specific limitation,
C.
§ 212-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-34
1:155
§ 212-35. Monitoring of prohibited discharges.
In all premises where wastes or substances specified to be excluded from
sewers or drains by this chapter are customarily present and liable to be
discharged directly or indirectly into any public sewer or drain, suitable and
sufficient piping layouts, oil or grease interceptors, or separators, screens,
sedimentation chambers, storage, regulating, treatment equipment, and
similar devices or equipment shall be provided, maintained, and operated,
as required by the Town Council, to ensure that no waste, substance, or
water required to be excluded from said sewer or drain shall be discharged
there into in violation of the requirements of this chapter.
§ 212-36. Sampling and treatment requirements.
Required sampling and treatment of prohibited discharges. At premises
where any of the substances or wastes prescribed as being or to be
excluded from any sewer or drain are present and liable to be discharged
contrary to the limitations of this chapter, the Town Council may require
that the owner, at the owner's expense, of said premises provide, operate,
and maintain a sampling well or wells, a flow-measuring device, manholes,
catch basins, or other suitable devices or treatment facilities on any or all
building sewers or drains from said premises near the point or points where
said drains connect to any public sewer or drain.
§ 212-37. Pretreatment facilities.
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with
this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all limits, prohibitions, and
requirements set out in this chapter within the time limitations specified
by the EPA, the state, or the Director, whichever is more stringent. All
facilities required to achieve and maintain compliance shall be provided,
operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing
then the screening level shall be adjusted and administered as a limit
for the specific discharge.
Special agreements. No statement contained in this section shall be
construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement
between the Town and any user whereby an industrial waste of unusual
strength or character may be accepted by the Town for treatment
provided that said agreements do not contravene any requirements
of existing federal or state laws, and/or regulations promulgated
thereunder, are compatible with any user charge system in effect, and
do not waive applicable federal categorical pretreatment standards.
Special agreement requests shall require submittal of a pollution
prevention plan that specifically addresses the discharge for which a
special agreement is requested. For pollutants with numerical local
limits, the Town has allocated a percentage of its allowable industrial
loadings for such special agreements. Requests for special agreements
that exceed this allocation will not be approved.
D.
§ 212-34 BEDFORD CODE § 212-37
1:156
such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the Director
for review, and shall be acceptable to the Director and the DES before
such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating
procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of
modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to
the Town under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 212-38. Additional pretreatment measures.
Whenever deemed necessary to protect the wastewater collection
system and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of
this chapter, the Director may require users to restrict their discharge
during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be
discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points
of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial
wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary.
A.
The Director may require any person discharging into the wastewater
collection system to install and maintain, on their property and at
their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure
equalization of flow. An industrial discharge permit may be issued solely
for flow equalization.
B.
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided at the owner's
expense when, in the judgement of the Director, these devices are
necessary for the preliminary treatment of wastewater containing
excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception
units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Director and
shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly,
as required by local and state codes. The owner shall be responsible for
the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured
materials and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal,
which shall be subject to review by the Director. Any removal and
hauling of the collected materials shall be performed by currently
licensed waste disposal firms.
C.
Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter and alarm.
D.
Where pretreatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided or
required for any waters or wastes, these devices shall be maintained
continuously to ensure satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at his expense.
E.
Sampling. By means of said sampling well or wells or other devices, the
owner, owners, and occupants of said premises and the Town Council,
or any public officer charged with any duty involving the supervision
of the disposal of wastewaters, may secure samples of or examine the
F.
§ 212-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-38
1:157
§ 212-39. Maintenance of preliminary treatment facilities.
Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any water or
wastewater, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at no expense to the Town.
§ 212-40. Inspection of preliminary treatment facilities.
The Town or its authorized representative shall have the right to enter and
inspect any part of any premises served by the public sewers and drains
of the Town upon which there may be reason to believe that violations of
the requirements of this chapter have occurred or are likely to occur, for
the purpose of ascertaining facts as to such violation or suspected violation,
or of obtaining samples of wastes, substances, or waters being discharged
into sewers or drains, or of inspecting devices provided to exclude such
prohibited discharges.
§ 212-41. Accidental discharge/slug control plans.
At least once every two years, the Director shall evaluate whether each
significant indirect discharger needs an accidental discharge/slug control
plan. The Director may require any user to develop, submit for approval,
and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the Director may develop such a
plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address,
at a minimum, the following:
wastes and wastewaters discharged into said public sewer or drain
and measure the quantities thereof for the purpose of ascertaining the
compliance or noncompliance with the requirements of this chapter.
Installation and operating expenses. All such devices and facilities shall
be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him
so as to be safe and accessible at all times. The Town may require that
the owner perform and keep records of all monitoring and/or sampling
data and submit said records upon request to local, state, or federal
officials.
G.
Sampling methodology. Sampling shall be carried out following 40 CFR
Part 136 to reflect the effect of constituents upon the wastewater works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property.
H.
A dental practice which applies, alters, maintains or removes mercurycontaining
dental amalgam shall install, operate and maintain an
amalgam separator(s) in accordance with DES Env-Wq 306.
I.
Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
A.
B. Description of stored chemicals;
Procedures for immediately notifying the Director of any accidental or
slug discharge; and
C.
§ 212-38 BEDFORD CODE § 212-41
1:158
§ 212-42. Pollution prevention plans.
The Director may require any person discharging wastes into the
wastewater collection system to develop and implement, at that person's
own expense, a pollution prevention plan. The Director may require users
to submit as part of the pollution prevention plan information that
demonstrates adherence to the following elements:
Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection
and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials,
loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker
training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or
measures and equipment for emergency response.
D.
Management support. For changes to be effective, the visible support
of top management is required. Management's support should be
explicitly stated and include designation of a pollution prevention
coordinator, goals, and time frames for reductions in volume and
toxicity of wastestreams, and procedures for employee training and
involvement.
A.
Process characterization. A detailed process waste diagram shall be
developed that identifies and characterizes the input of raw materials,
the outflow of products, and the generation of wastes.
B.
Waste assessment. Estimates shall be developed for the amount of
wastes generated by each process. This may include establishing and
maintaining waste accounting systems to track sources, the rates and
dates of generation, and the presence of hazardous constituents.
C.
Analysis of waste management Economics. Waste management
economic returns shall be determined based on the consideration of:
(1) Reduced raw material purchases;
(2) Avoidance of waste treatment, monitoring and disposal costs;
(3) Reductions in operations and maintenance expenses;
(4) Elimination of permitting fees and compliance costs; and
Reduced liabilities for employee/public exposure to hazardous
chemicals and cleanup of waste disposal sites.
(5)
D.
Development of pollution prevention Alternatives. Current and past
pollution prevention activities should be assessed, including estimates
of the reduction in the amount and toxicity of waste achieved by the
identified actions. Opportunities for pollution prevention must then
be assessed for identified processes where raw materials become or
generate wastes. Technical information on pollution prevention should
be solicited and exchanged, both from inside the organization and out.
E.
§ 212-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-42
1:159
§ 212-43. Industrial discharge permit application.
The following §§ 212-44 to 212-71 were all added pursuant to industrial
discharge pretreatment regulatory requirements.
§ 212-44. Wastewater characterization.
When requested by the Director, a user must submit information on the
nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 60 days of the request.
The Director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may
periodically require users to update this information.
§ 212-45. Industrial discharge permit requirement.
§ 212-46. DES industrial wastewater indirect discharge request
requirement.
All significant industrial users must receive DES approval for any new
industrial discharge, or any alteration in either flow or waste
characteristics. Such approvals shall be obtained in accordance with DES
Env-Wq 305 and this chapter.
Evaluation and implementation. Technically and economically feasible
pollution prevention opportunities shall be identified and an
implementation timetable with interim and final milestones shall be
developed. The recommendations that are implemented shall be
periodically reviewed for effectiveness.
F.
The review and approval of such pollution prevention plans by the Town
shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibilities of modifying
facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the Town in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
G.
No significant indirect discharger shall discharge wastewater into the
wastewater collection system without first obtaining an industrial
discharge permit from the Director, except that a significant indirect
discharger that has filed a timely and complete application pursuant
to this chapter may continue to discharge for the time period specified
therein.
A.
The Director may require other users to obtain industrial discharge
permits, or submit an application for an industrial discharge permit, as
necessary to execute the purposes of this chapter.
B.
Any violation of the terms and conditions of an industrial discharge
permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and shall subject
the industrial discharge permittee to the enforcement actions set out in
this chapter. Obtaining an industrial discharge permit does not relieve
a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state
pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other
requirements of federal state, and local law.
C.
§ 212-42 BEDFORD CODE § 212-47
1:160
§ 212-47. Industrial discharge permitting: existing connections.
Any user required to obtain an industrial discharge permit who was
discharging wastewater into the wastewater collection system prior to the
effective date of this chapter, and is not currently covered by a valid
industrial discharge permit, and who wishes to continue such discharges in
the future, shall, within 60 days after said date, apply to the Director for an
industrial discharge permit in accordance with this chapter, and shall not
cause or allow discharges to the wastewater collection system to continue
after 120 days of the effective date of this chapter except in accordance with
an industrial discharge permit issued by the Director.
§ 212-48. Industrial discharge permitting: new connections.
Any user required to obtain an industrial discharge permit who proposes
to begin or recommence discharging into the wastewater collection system
shall obtain an industrial discharge permit prior to the beginning or
recommencing of such discharge. An application for this industrial
discharge permit, in accordance with this chapter, shall be filed at least 90
days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.
§ 212-49. Industrial discharge permitting: categorical standards.
Within 120 days subsequent to the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, a user subject to such standards shall submit an
application for an industrial discharge permit amendment.
§ 212-50. Industrial discharge permit application contents.
All users required to obtain an industrial discharge permit, and other
users subject to these rules, as required by the Director, shall submit
a permit application. The Director shall require all users to submit as
part of an application the following information where applicable, as a
minimum:
The name, street address, and mailing address of the indirect
discharger;
(1)
The name, position, and daytime telephone number of a responsible
individual at the indirect discharger, such as a plant manager,
plant engineer, president, or vice president of the company, who
has certified the permit application in accordance with Env-Ws
904.13(b), below;
(2)
The "SIC" code and the North American Industry Classification
System ("NAICS") code of the indirect discharger, if available;
(3)
Whether the indirect discharger is subject to national categorical
standards, and if so, which standards;
(4)
A.
§ 212-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-50
1:161
The estimated average, minimum, maximum and total daily flow for
domestic discharges and each process discharge and the time and
duration of those discharges;
(5)
(6) A schematic of the proposed treatment process;
If applicable, plans, specifications, and operation and maintenance
procedures for new or modified treatment facilities at the indirect
discharger, stamped by a chemical, civil, sanitary, or environmental
engineer registered in New Hampshire;
(7)
A schematic diagram showing the production process, including
the origin of each waste stream;
(8)
A list of pollutants expected to be present in the discharge and the
anticipated quantity of each, based on:
Analyses of the waste stream(s) to be discharged, in which
case test results shall be submitted with the discharge permit
request; or
(a)
(b) Knowledge of the process which produces the wastewater;
(9)
Information on the toxicity and treatability of the pollutants
proposed to be discharged, as available from manufacturer's
testing, safety, and data publications;
(10)
A map showing the location within the municipality of the indirect
discharger with respect to the wastewater collection system;
(11)
A listing of all chemicals used at the indirect discharger that will be
or could be discharged, such as production chemicals, degreasers,
and cleaning solvents;
(12)
A description and location diagram of all sampling locations at the
indirect discharger;
(13)
A brief narrative describing those measures taken or planned to
reduce water usage and implement pollution prevention
techniques, if any, such as:
(a) Flow restricters;
(b) Countercurrent rinses;
(c) Recycling of noncontact cooling water;
(d) Chemical substitutions; and
(e) Pollutant source reduction; and
(14)
A list of all environmental permits held by or for the indirect
discharger.
(15)
§ 212-50 BEDFORD CODE § 212-50
1:162
§ 212-51. Signatories and certification.
All industrial discharge permit applications and user reports shall be signed
by an authorized representative of the user and shall contain the following
certification statement:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a
system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person
or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible
for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of
my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that
there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including
the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations."
§ 212-52. Industrial discharge permit decisions.
The Director will evaluate the data provided by the user and may require
additional information. Upon approval of the application by the Director,
if required, an industrial wastewater indirect discharge request will be
submitted by the Town to DES on behalf of the user. All applicable DES
review fees shall be provided by the user. Within 30 days of receipt of a
complete industrial discharge permit application (or 90 days in the case
of an application for a new or modified discharge requiring review and
approval by DES), the Director will determine whether or not to issue an
industrial discharge permit. The Director may deny any application for an
industrial discharge permit with just cause. An industrial discharge permit
approval shall be based on and apply only to the subject application and all
associated plans and supporting information as submitted.
§ 212-53. Industrial discharge permit duration.
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the user for revision.
B.
An industrial discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five years (or three years in the case of a
significant indirect discharger) from the effective date of the permit. An
industrial discharge permit may be issued for a period less than these
intervals at the discretion of the Director. Each industrial discharge
permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
A.
Industrial discharge permits shall be terminated upon cessation of
operations or transfer of business ownership, unless notification of such
transfer is provided in accordance this chapter. All industrial discharge
permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new
industrial discharge permit to that user. An industrial discharge permit
is void if the discharge approved does not begin within one year from
date of approval.
B.
§ 212-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-54
1:163
§ 212-54. Industrial discharge permit contents.
An industrial discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed
reasonably necessary by the Director to prevent pass-through or
interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment
facility's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal, and protect against damage to the wastewater
collection system.
Industrial discharge permits for significant industrial dischargers shall
contain:
Indirect discharger name, street address, mailing address, and
daytime telephone number;
(1)
(2) Dates of issuance and expiration;
The general and specific prohibitions from the sewer use ordinance
which apply to the discharge;
(3)
(4) A list of pollutants, allowable parameters, and discharge limits;
(5) Identification of applicable EPA categorical standards;
A list of pollutant to be monitored and the monitoring requirements
applicable thereto;
(6)
(7) Sampling frequency, techniques, and locations;
(8) Reporting requirements;
(9) Inspection requirements;
Notification requirements, including for:
(a) Slug loading;
(b) Spills, bypasses, and upsets;
Changes in volume or characteristics of the discharge for
which a permit revision is not required; and
(c)
(d) Permit violations.
(10)
(11)Recordkeeping requirements;
Applicable definitions and special conditions from the Sewer Use
Ordinance;
(12)
(13)Applicable civil and criminal penalties for violations;
(14)Notification requirements prior to any new or modified discharge;
A requirement to submit a complete new application at a specified
frequency, which shall be not less than once every five years; and
(15)
A.
§ 212-54 BEDFORD CODE § 212-54
1:164
a statement that indicates industrial discharge permit duration,
which in no event shall exceed five years;
A statement that the industrial discharge permit is nontransferable
without prior notification to the Town in accordance with this
chapter, and provisions for providing the new owner or operator
with a copy of the existing industrial discharge permit;
(16)
For users with reporting requirements, such reports at a minimum
shall require:
Periodic monitoring results indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the discharge from the regulated
processes governed by pretreatment requirements and the
average and maximum daily flow for these process units;
(a)
A statement as to whether the applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements are being met on a consistent
basis and, if not, than what additional operation and
maintenance practices and/or pretreatment systems are
necessary; and
(b)
Submittal of any monitoring results performed in addition to
the requirements of the industrial discharge permit using
procedures prescribed in the permit.
(c)
(17)
A description of identified pollution prevention opportunities at the
facility;
(18)
A statement that compliance with the industrial discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with
all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including
those that become effective during the term of the industrial
discharge permit.
(19)
Industrial discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to,
the following conditions:
Limitations on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge,
time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and
equalization;
(1)
Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment
devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction
of pollutants into the wastewater collection system;
(2)
Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions including management
practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental,
unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges;
(3)
B.
§ 212-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-54
1:165
§ 212-55. Industrial discharge permit appeals.
Any person, including the user, may petition the Director to reconsider the
terms of an industrial discharge permit within 30 days of its issuance.
§ 212-56. Industrial discharge permit modification.
The Director may modify an industrial discharge permit for good cause,
including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
Development and implementation of pollution prevention plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the wastewater
collection system;
(4)
The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the wastewater
collection system;
(5)
Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment; and
(6)
Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Director to ensure
compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
(7)
Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
A.
In its petition, the appellant user must indicate the industrial discharge
permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the
alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the industrial discharge
permit.
B.
The effectiveness of the industrial discharge permit shall not be stayed
pending the appeal.
C.
If the Director fails to act within 30 days, a request for reconsideration
shall be deemed to be denied.
D.
Aggrieved parties may appeal the conditions of the industrial discharge
permit in accordance with this chapter.
E.
To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment
standards or requirements;
A.
To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation,
processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of
industrial discharge permit issuance;
B.
A change in the wastewater collection system that requires either a
temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized
discharge;
C.
§ 212-54 BEDFORD CODE § 212-56
1:166
§ 212-57. Industrial discharge permit transfer.
§ 212-58. Industrial discharge permit reissuance.
A user with an expiring industrial discharge permit shall apply for
reissuance of the industrial discharge permit by submitting a complete
permit application, in accordance with this chapter, a minimum of 90 days
prior to the expiration of the user's existing industrial discharge permit.
Under no circumstances shall the permittee continue to discharge without
an effective permit. An expired permit will continue to be effective and
enforceable until the permit is reissued if:
§ 212-59. Periodic compliance reports.
Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to
the Town's wastewater collection system, Town personnel, or the water
quality in the receiving waters;
D.
E. Violation of any terms or conditions of the industrial discharge permit;
Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the
industrial discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
F.
To correct typographical or other errors in the industrial discharge
permit; or
G.
To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator.
H.
Industrial discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or
operator only if the permittee provides at least 60 days' advance notice
to the Director, and the Director approves the industrial discharge
permit transfer. The notice to the Director shall include a written
certification by the new owner or operator that:
States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent
to change the facility's operations and processes that generate
wastewater to be discharged to the wastewater collection system;
(1)
(2) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
industrial discharge permit.
(3)
A.
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer shall render the
industrial discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.
B.
The user has submitted a complete permit application at least 60 days
prior to the expiration date of the user's existing permit; and
A.
The failure to reissue the permit prior to expiration of the previous
permit is not due to any act or failure to act on the part of the user.
B.
§ 212-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-59
1:167
§ 212-60. Reports of changed conditions.
Each user shall notify the Director of any planned change to the user's
operations or system that might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its
wastewater at least 90 days before the change.
§ 212-61. Reports of slug/potentially adverse discharges.
All significant indirect dischargers shall, at a frequency determined
by the Director but in no case less than twice per year (in June and
December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the discharge that are limited by pretreatment standards
and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for
the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports shall be signed
and certified in accordance with this chapter.
A.
All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at
all times. The failure of a user to maintain its monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample
results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
B.
If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors
any pollutant more frequently than required by the Director, using the
procedures prescribed in Sections 6.11 and 6.12 of this chapter, the
results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
C.
The Director may require the user to submit such information as may
be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including
the submittal of an industrial discharge permit application under this
chapter.
A.
Upon approval of the request by the Director, an industrial wastewater
indirect discharge request may be submitted by the Town to DES on
behalf of the user. All applicable DES review fees shall be provided by
the user.
B.
Upon approval of the discharge request by DES, the Director may
issue an industrial discharge permit or modify an existing industrial
discharge permit under this chapter in response to changed conditions
or anticipated changed conditions.
C.
A DES sewer connection permit, in accordance with § 212-22 of this
chapter, may be required.
D.
In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental
discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause adverse
impacts to the wastewater collection system, the user shall immediately
telephone and notify the Director of the incident. This notification
shall include identifying the location of the discharge, type of waste,
A.
§ 212-59 BEDFORD CODE § 212-61
1:168
§ 212-62. Reports from unpermitted users.
All users not required to obtain an industrial discharge permit shall provide
appropriate reports to the Director as the Director may require.
§ 212-63. Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting.
If the results of sampling performed by a user indicate a violation, the
user shall notify the Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit
the results of the repeat analysis to the Director within 30 days subsequent
to becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample
if the Director monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if
the Director samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user
receives the results of this sampling.
§ 212-64. Analytical requirements.
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as
part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part
136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be
performed in accordance with procedures approved by the Town.
§ 212-65. Sample collection.
concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions conducted
by the user.
Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived
by the Director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s)
of the discharge and the measures to be conducted by the user to
prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve
the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability that may be
incurred as a result of damage to the wastewater collection system,
natural resources, or any other damage to person or property, nor
shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other
liability that may be imposed pursuant to this chapter.
B.
A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's employee bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the
event of a discharge described in Subsection A above. Employers shall
ensure that all employees who may cause such a discharge to occur
or who may be present when a discharge occurs are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
C.
Except as indicated in Subsection B below, the user shall collect
wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection
techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is not practical,
A.
§ 212-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-65
1:169
§ 212-66. Timing.
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports that are not mailed, the date of receipt of the
report be the person designated in the industrial discharge permit shall
govern.
§ 212-67. Recordkeeping.
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain,
and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter
and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring
activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements.
Records shall include the date, exact location, method, and time of
sampling, and the name of the person(s) obtaining the samples; the dates
analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical
techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records
shall remain available for a period of at least five years. This period shall
be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the
user or the Town, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer
retention period by the Director. Before destroying the records, the user
shall request and receive permission from the Town.
the Director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a
minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this
will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged.
In addition, grab samples may be required to demonstrate compliance
with instantaneous discharge limitations (e.g., screening levels
established to protect worker health and safety). A single grab sample
may also be used in place of a composite sample with approval of the
Director when:
The effluent is not discharged on a continuous basis (i.e., batch
discharges of short duration), and only when the batch exhibits
homogeneous characteristics (i.e., completely mixed) and the
pollutant can be safely assumed to be uniformly dispersed;
(1)
Sampling a facility where a statistical relationship can be
established between previous grab samples and composite data;
and
(2)
The waste conditions are relatively constant (i.e., are completely
mixed and homogeneous) over the period of the discharge.
(3)
Samples for temperature, pH, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic
compounds shall be obtained using grab collection techniques.
B.
§ 212-65 BEDFORD CODE § 212-68
1:170
§ 212-68. Pollution prevention reports.
Permitted users discharging pollutants on the local limits or pollution
prevention action lists of this chapter, at concentrations greater than
background levels, shall report annually on pollution prevention activities
undertaken to reduce or minimize the generation of wastes containing these
pollutants. The Town may publicize these efforts in the annual notification.
§ 212-69. Special agreements permitted.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the City and Town and
any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength
or character may be accepted by the Town for collection and City for
treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern, provided
that such agreements do no contravene any requirements of existing federal
or state laws, and/or regulations promulgated thereunder, and are
compatible with the user charge system.
§ 212-70. Septage discharge prohibited.
No septage shall be discharged to the Town wastewater system.
§ 212-71. Dilution of wastes.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way
attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation
unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard
or requirement. The Director may impose mass limitations on users
who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations
is appropriate.
A.
Users implementing process changes may request that compliance
be determined based on mass limitations in lieu of concentration
limitations. Such mass-based limitations will be calculated from the
permitted concentration-based limitations and flows, and shall be
equivalent to or less than the mass discharge in effect at the time of
the request. The intent of a mass-based limit is to encourage and allow
pollution prevention and/or water conservation measures that might
cause a facility to increase pollutant concentrations in its discharge
even though the total mass of the pollutant discharged does not
increase, and may in fact decrease. Decisions on granting requests
for mass-based compliance limitations will be based on user-specific
information and current operating conditions of the wastewater
collection system, and will be at the discretion of the Director.
Implementation of mass-based limitations may not contravene any
requirements of federal or state laws and/or regulations implemented
thereunder and may not waive applicable categorical pretreatment
standards.
B.
§ 212-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-71
1:171

ARTICLE V
Garbage Disposal Units
§ 212-72. Permit required.
No garbage disposal unit shall be installed in any building used for
commercial, industrial, or manufacturing purposes without first having
obtained a permit from the Town.
§ 212-73. Application requirements.
Any person desiring to install a garbage disposal unit shall first make
application in writing to the Town upon a form provided by it for that
purpose, which application shall state the name and address of the
applicant, the address of the premises in which such installation is desired,
and a general description of the premises and the existing sewerage system
within the premises affected.
§ 212-74. Review of application.
Upon filing of such application, the Town shall, within a reasonable
time, cause the premises and the available sewer system to be
inspected and surveyed and, from the findings so obtained, determine
upon such change or alteration in such system as, in its opinion, shall
be necessary before issuing an approval of the application.
A.
No such approval shall be issued in any instance where the capacity
of the public sewerage system within the particular sewer district shall
be insufficient, or where the additional demand and service caused
by the use of such garbage disposal unit shall be likely to impair the
efficiency of such sewerage system. A reasonable time in this case
shall be considered to mean no more than two weeks from the date of
application.
B.
§ 212-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-74
1:173

ARTICLE VI
Inspections and Easements
§ 212-75. Right of entry for inspections and testing.
All users discharging to the Town's wastewater collection system shall
allow unrestricted access by Town, State and EPA personnel ["Inspector(s)"]
for the purpose of determining whether the user is complying with all
requirements of this chapter, and any industrial discharge permit or order
issued hereunder. Users shall allow the Inspector(s) ready access to all
parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
If a user has security measures in force that require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that,
upon presentation of suitable identification, the Inspector(s) will be
permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities.
A.
The Inspector(s) shall have the right to set up on the user's property,
or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.
B.
The Inspector(s) may require the user to install monitoring equipment
as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the
user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow
and quality shall be calibrated at least annually to ensure accuracy.
C.
Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by
the user at the written or verbal request of the Inspector(s) and shall
not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
user.
D.
Unreasonable delays in allowing the Inspector(s) access to the user's
premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
E.
The Inspector(s) is authorized to obtain information concerning
industrial processes that have a bearing on the kind or source of
discharge to the public sewer. The user may request that the
information in question not be disclosed to the public. The information
in question shall be made available upon written request to
governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the NPDES
permit, or the pretreatment program. The burden of proof that
information should be held confidential rests with the user. However,
information regarding wastewater discharge by the user (flow,
constituents, concentrations, and characteristics) shall be available to
the public without restriction.
F.
§ 212-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-75
1:175
§ 212-76. Search warrants.
If the Director has been refused access to a building, structure, or property,
or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe
that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to
inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
of the Town designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit
or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and
welfare of the community, then the Director may seek issuance of a search
warrant from the Manchester District Court.
§ 212-77. Right of entry through easements.
Duly authorized employees of the Town, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through
which the Town holds an easement for the purposes of, but not limited to,
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance
of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and
subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance
with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private
property involved.
§ 212-78. Confidential Information.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, industrial
discharge permit applications, industrial discharge permits, and monitoring
programs, and from the Director's inspection and sampling activities, shall
be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically
requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director,
that the release of such information would divulge information, processes,
or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under
applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of
submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated
by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held
confidential, the portions of a report that might disclose trade secrets or
secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public,
but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental
agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program,
and in enforcement proceedings involving the person providing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in this section, the Inspector(s) shall observe all safety rules applicable
to the premises established by the user. The user shall be held harmless
for injury or death to the Inspector(s), and the Town shall indemnify
the user against loss or damage to its property by Town employees
and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property
damage asserted against the user and growing out of the monitoring
activities, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the
user to maintain safe conditions.
G.
§ 212-75 BEDFORD CODE § 212-78
1:176
defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information
and will be available to the public without restriction.
§ 212-79. Public participation.
The Town shall comply with the public participation requirements of 40
CFR Part 25 in the enforcement of industrial pretreatment standards and
requirements.
§ 212-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-79
1:177

ARTICLE VII
Penalties
§ 212-80. Notice of violation.
§ 212-81. Violations and penalties.
The Town shall investigate instances of noncompliance with the
industrial pretreatment standards and requirements.
A.
The Town shall, as necessary, sample and analyze the wastewater
discharges of contributing users and conduct surveillance and
inspection activities to identify, independently of information supplied
by such users, occasional and continuing noncompliance with industrial
pretreatment standards. Each user will be billed directly for costs
incurred for analysis of its wastewater.
B.
C. (Reserved)
Whenever the Director finds that any person, firm, corporation,
municipal subdivision, institution, or user has violated or is violating
this chapter, or a wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, the
Director or his agent may serve upon said offender written notice of
the violation. Within a time period specified in the violation notice, an
explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction
and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be
submitted to the Director. The offender shall permanently cease all
violations and take such action as is recommended or necessary to
insure that there will be no recurrence of such violation.
D.
All such work in connection therewith shall be performed by the
offender without delay and without expense to the Town. Compliance
with this section in no way relieves the offender of liability for any
violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
E.
Any person or user who has violated or continues to violate this chapter
or any order or permit issued hereunder shall be liable to the Town,
under the authority given at § 212-3, for a civil penalty of not more
than $10,000 plus actual damages incurred by the POTW per violation
per day for as long as the violation continues. In addition to the above
described penalty and damages, the Director may recover reasonable
attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with the
enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
A.
The Director shall petition the Court to impose, assess, and recover
such sums. In determining the amount of liability, consideration shall
be given to all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any
economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions
by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factors as
justice requires.
B.
§ 212-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-81
1:179
§ 212-82. Compliance schedule development.
The Director may require any user that has violated or continues to violate
any provision of this chapter, an industrial discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to develop a
compliance schedule. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section shall
comply with the following conditions:
§ 212-83. Pollution prevention plan development.
The Director may require any user that has violated or continues to violate
any provision of this chapter, an industrial discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to develop
a pollution prevention plan. The pollution prevention plan must specifically
address violation(s) for which this action was undertaken. The pollution
prevention plan shall be developed using good engineering judgment and
shall be submitted to the Director no later than 60 days after the user was
notified of this requirement.
Any person or user who willfully or negligently violates any provision
of this chapter or any orders or permits issued hereunder shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine not to exceed
$1,000 for each violation. Every separate provision violated shall
constitute a separate violation. Every day that a violation occurs shall
be deemed a separate violation.
C.
The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards, including, but
not limited to, retaining an engineer, completing preliminary and final
design plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing
and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine
operation;
A.
B. No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
The user shall submit a progress report to the Director no later than
14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of
compliance which identifies, as a minimum, whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if
appropriate, the action being taken by the user to return to the
established schedule; and
C.
In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress
reports to the Director.
D.
In addition, the Town may direct the person, at the person's cost, to
disconnect or otherwise act to prevent the building sewer, from the
premises in which said violation of the requirements of this chapter
shall have occurred, from discharging to the public sewerage system.
E.
§ 212-81 BEDFORD CODE § 212-84
1:180
§ 212-84. Publication of users in significant noncompliance.
The Director shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper
circulated in the Town where the wastewater collection system is located,
a list of the users that, during the previous 12 months, were in significant
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
§ 212-85. Show cause orders.
The Director may order any person or user which causes or contributes to
violation of this chapter or wastewater permit or order issued hereunder,
to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
Notice shall be served on the offender specifying the time and place for
the meeting, the proposed enforcement action and the reasons for such
action, and a request that the offender show cause why this proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall
be served personally or by certified mail (return receipt requested) at least
10 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any person,
principle executive, general partner, or corporate officer. Whether or not
a duly notified offender appears as noticed, immediate enforcement action
may be pursued.
§ 212-86. Cease and desist orders.
§ 212-87. Consent orders.
The Director is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances
of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an
agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such orders shall
include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance
within a time period also specified by the order. Orders may also contain
such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate
to address the noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment
systems, additional self-monitoring, and management practices. Such
When the Director determines that a user has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this chapter, an industrial discharge permit
or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the
Director may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist
all such violations and directing the user to:
(1) Immediately comply with all requirements; and
Implement such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may
be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
(2)
A.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
B.
§ 212-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-87
1:181
orders shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders as per
this chapter and shall be judicially enforceable.
§ 212-88. Industrial discharge permit termination.
§ 212-89. Termination of discharge.
§ 212-90. Emergency suspensions.
Any user who violates the following conditions of this chapter or a
wastewater discharge permit or order, or any applicable state or federal
law, is subject to permit termination:
(1) Violation of permit conditions;
Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
(2)
Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
constituents and characteristics; or
(3)
Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring, or sampling.
(4)
A.
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge
and be offered an opportunity to show cause why the proposed action
should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the Director shall not be
a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
B.
In addition to the provisions of this chapter, any user who violates the
following conditions is subject to discharge termination:
(1) Violation of industrial discharge permit conditions;
Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
(2)
Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
(3)
Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
(4)
(5) Violation of the pretreatment standards.
A.
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge
and be offered an opportunity to show cause why the proposed action
should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the Director shall not be
a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
B.
The Director may immediately suspend a user's discharge, subsequent
to informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary
to terminate an actual or threatened discharge that reasonably appears
A.
§ 212-87 BEDFORD CODE § 212-90
1:182
§ 212-91. Recovery of expenses.
Any person or user violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be liable to the Town for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the
Town by reason of such violation. If the Director shall have caused the
disconnection of a drain from a public sewer, the Town may collect the
expenses associated with completing the disconnection from any person
or user responsible for, or willfully concerned in, or who profited by such
violation. The Town may thereafter refuse to permit the restoration of the
former connection or of any new connection to the property concerned in
the violation until the claim of the Town for the cost of completing such
disconnection shall have been paid in full plus interest and the reasonable
cost of any legal expenses incurred by the Town in connection therewith.
§ 212-92. Private treatment facilities.
to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the
health or welfare of wastewater collection system personnel or the
public. The Director may also immediately suspend a user's discharge,
after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with
the operation of the wastewater collection system or that presents, or
may present, an endangerment to the environment.
Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
terminate or eliminate its wastewater discharge. In the event of a
user's failure to immediately comply with the suspension order, the
Director may implement such steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or
minimize damage to the wastewater collection system, its receiving
stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The Director may
allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Director that the period of
endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings of
this chapter are initiated against the user.
(1)
A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and
the measures implemented to prevent any future occurrence, to the
Director prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing
of this chapter.
(2)
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior
to any emergency suspension under this section.
B.
Nothing herein contained shall be interpreted to prevent any individual
industry or group of industries from erecting, maintaining, and
operating a private sewer treatment facility, such facility to be
designed, constructed, and operated in accordance with the applicable
local, state, and federal statutes, ordinances, and regulations.
A.
§ 212-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-92
1:183
§ 212-93. Harm to Town property.
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment
that is part of the public sewerage system. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct pursuant to the local ordinances, and shall also be subject to
penalties under state and federal statutes.
§ 212-94. Injunctive relief.
When the Town determines that a user has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this chapter, an industrial discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
Town may petition the Court through the Town's Attorney for the issuance
of an ex parte temporary judicial relief, as appropriate, that restrains or
compels the specific performance of the industrial discharge permit, order,
or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user.
The Town may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal
and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct
environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, implementing any other action against a user.
§ 212-95. Civil penalties.
All private treatment facilities shall be operated by a person licensed by
the State of New Hampshire for the class of facility to be operated and
shall employ a full-time treatment plant operator.
B.
A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
chapter, an industrial discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the
Town for a maximum civil penalty of $10,000 per violation, per day, plus
actual damages incurred by the wastewater collection system. In the
case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties
shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
A.
The Director may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and
other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including
sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages
incurred by the Town. The Director shall petition the Court to impose,
assess, and recover such sums.
B.
In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall consider all
relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm
caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation,
any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective
actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other
factor as justice requires.
C.
§ 212-92 BEDFORD CODE § 212-95
1:184
§ 212-96. Criminal prosecution.
Any person or user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this
chapter or any orders or permits issued hereunder shall, upon conviction,
be guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine not to exceed $10,000 for
each violation. Every separate provision violated shall constitute a separate
violation. Every day that a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate
violation. (Ref. RSA 47:17, I, RSA 149-I:6, RSA 31:39, III.)
§ 212-97. Nonexclusive remedies.
The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The Town may
take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant
user. However, the Town may pursue other action against any user without
limitation, including ex parte temporary judicial relief to prevent a violation
of this chapter. Further, the Town is empowered to pursue more than one
enforcement action against any noncompliant user.
§ 212-98. Upset.
Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, implementing any other action against a user.
D.
For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with
pretreatment standards due to factors beyond the reasonable control
of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent
caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or
careless or improper operation.
A.
An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with pretreatment standards if the requirements of
Subsection C, below, are met.
B.
A user who intends to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs, or other relevant evidence, that:
An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
(1)
At the time being of the upset, the facility was operated in a
prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with
applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and
(2)
The user has submitted the following information to the Director
within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (If this information
is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five days.):
(a) A description of the discharge and cause of noncompliance;
(3)
C.
§ 212-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-98
1:185
§ 212-99. Prohibited discharge standards.
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions of this chapter or
the specific prohibitions of this chapter if it can prove that it did not know,
or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, would cause pass-through or interference
and that either:
§ 212-100. Bypass.
The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the amount of time the noncompliance is
expected to continue; and
(b)
Action being implemented and/or planned to reduce, eliminate,
and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
(c)
In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
D.
Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance
with pretreatment standards.
E.
Users shall control all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain
compliance with pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or
failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an
alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies
in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
F.
A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was
in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the passthrough
or interference; or
A.
No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in
nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the Town
was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of
interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.
B.
For the purposes of this section:
"Bypass" means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any
portion of a user's treatment facility.
(1)
"Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities that causes them to
become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural
resources that can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence
(2)
A.
§ 212-98 BEDFORD CODE § 212-100
1:186
of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss
caused by delays in production.
A user may allow any bypass to occur that does not cause pretreatment
standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for
essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are
not subject to the provisions of Subsections C and D of this section.
B.
Notice.
If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit
prior notice to the Director, at least 10 days before the date of the
bypass, if possible.
(1)
A user shall submit oral notice to the Director of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24
hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written
submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the
user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall
contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of
the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has
not been corrected, the amount of time it is expected to continue;
and steps implemented or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The Director may waive the
written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been
received within 24 hours.
(2)
C.
Enforcement and approval by Director.
Bypass is prohibited, and the Director may initiate enforcement
action against a user for a bypass, unless:
Bypass was required to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or
severe property damage;
(a)
There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as
the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment
downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup
equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgement to prevent a bypass that
occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and
(b)
The user submitted notices as required under Subsection C of
this section.
(c)
(1)
The Director may approve an anticipated bypass, subsequent to
considering its adverse effects, if the Director determines that it
will meet the three conditions listed in Subsection (D)(1) of this
section.
(2)
D.
§ 212-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-100
1:187

ARTICLE VIII
Interpretation of Requirements; Appeals
§ 212-101. Interpretation and administration.
The provisions of this chapter with respect to the meaning of technical
terms and phrases, the classification of different kinds of types of sewers,
the regulations with respect to making connections to sewers, and other
technical matters shall be interpreted and administered by the Town.
§ 212-102. Right of appeal.
§ 212-103. Town's right of revision.
Any party aggrieved by any decision, regulation, or provision under this
chapter, as amended from time to time, shall have the right of appeal
within 20 days of said decision to the Town Council who shall issue a
decision within 20 days.
A.
If said appeal is denied by the Town Council, then said aggrieved party
shall have the right to appeal to the Superior Court of Hillsborough
County for equitable relief, provided that said appeal is entered within
30 days from the issuance of the decision of the Town Council.
B.
The discharge standards and requirements set forth for the purpose of
preventing discharges to the wastewater collection system that would
harm the sewers, wastewater treatment process, or equipment; would
have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or would otherwise
endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance.
A.
To meet these objectives, the Director may, from time to time, review
and set more stringent standards or requirements if, in the Director's
opinion, such more stringent standards or requirements are necessary.
At a minimum, this review will be performed at least once every five
years. In forming this opinion, the Director may give consideration to
such factors as the quantity of waste in relation to flows and velocities
in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater
treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment
facility, degree of treatability at the wastewater treatment facility,
pollution prevention activities, and other pertinent factors. The
limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or
wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer shall not be exceeded
without the approval of the Director.
B.
The Director shall allow affected users reasonable time to comply with
any changes to the local limits. The conditions and schedule for
compliance shall accompany the written notification of amended local
limits.
C.
§ 212-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-103
1:189

ARTICLE IX
Sewer Rental Charges
§ 212-104. Statement of purpose.
§ 212-105. System of charges established.
Pursuant to RSA 149-1 and the current intermunicipal agreement, and
amendment thereof, between the Town of Bedford and the City of
Manchester for wastewater service, a system of sewer rental charges is
hereby established, under the authority given at § 212-3, and assessed
for paying the cost of construction, payment of interest on debt incurred,
management, maintenance, replacement, operation, and repair of the
Town's sewer system and appurtenant structures, as well as the Town's
share of the City's wastewater treatment facilities. Said sewer rental
charges shall consist of a service charge and a sewer user charge.
§ 212-106. Responsibility of owners for payment of charges.
Sewer rental charges for residential premises, commercial establishments,
and industrial establishments shall be paid by the owner of any such
structure containing one or more dwelling units, commercial
establishments, or industrial establishments from which structure sewage
discharges into the Town sewer system.
§ 212-107. Occupied or unoccupied premises; multiple dwelling
units.
The Town of Bedford has developed and is implementing a program
for the construction and operation of wastewater treatment facilities.
A regional treatment plant and pumping station have been constructed
by the City of Manchester and a system of interceptor sewers has been
partially completed by the Town of Bedford. Under the requirements
of the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit issued
to the Town of Bedford by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency, the treatment and disposal works became partially operational
on April 1, 1984. Under the requirements of said permit, the Town is
proceeding with the completion of said program.
A.
The purpose of this article is to ensure that all persons whose mains
enter main drains, common sewers, and treatment facilities and all
persons whose lands receive or will receive a special benefit from said
wastewater treatment facilities shall pay their just share of the costs of
said facilities as hereinafter provided.
B.
An additional purpose of this article is to comply with the user charge
requirements of the Federal Water Pollution Act Amendments of 1972
(PL 92-500), the Clean Water Act of 1977 (PL 95-217), and amendments
thereto.
C.
§ 212-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-107
1:191
§ 212-108. User charges.
User charges for residential and commercial premises shall be based on the
consumption of water on premises connected with the Town sewer system.
§ 212-109. Classes of building permit; application for sewer permit.
Payable by owner. Service charges shall be payable by the owner of
the real estate, whether or not the premises are occupied. All service
charges shall be at rates provided herein.
A.
Multiple-dwellings units. In the case of structures containing multipledwelling
units, or any combination of dwelling units, commercial
establishments, or industrial establishments, a separate service charge
shall be payable for each dwelling unit, commercial, and industrial
establishment.
B.
Computation of charges. In computing charges under the user charge
formula for residential and commercial users, biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD) and suspended solids (SS) content are fixed at 250 mg/
l.
A.
Basis of charges. User charges are based on the volume and strength
of wastewater discharged by users.
B.
Measurements of BOD and SS content. Strength shall be determined
from the BOD and SS content of the wastewater as determined by
periodic composite sampling by the Town.
C.
Samplings. Said periodic composite sampling shall be conducted by or
under the supervision of the Chief Sanitary Engineer of the City of
Manchester, as an authorized representative to the Town, to an extent
that will permit a reasonable determination of BOD and SS.
D.
Building permits: Class A and Class B. There shall be two classes of
building permits:
(1) Class A.1 for residential service and A.2 for multiple-dwelling units.
Class B service to establishments producing commercial and
industrial wastes.
(2)
A.
Application for sewer permit. In either case, the owner or his agent
shall make application on a special form furnished by the Town. The
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other
information considered pertinent in the judgement of the Town.
B.
Charges due at application. A permit and appropriate connection
charge, as determined by the Town Council, for any building sewer
connection permit shall be paid to the Town of Bedford at the time the
application is filed.
C.
D. Proposed building sewers.
§ 212-107 BEDFORD CODE § 212-109
1:192
§ 212-110. Charges and costs.
Charges on metered and nonmetered residential and commercial users and
sewer connection charges are adopted by resolution of the Town Council
from time to time and are on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 212-111. Sewer Fund.
The funds received from the collection of sewer rental charges shall be
kept as a separate and distinct fund which shall be known as the "Sewer
Fund." Any surplus in such fund may, as determined by the Town Council,
be used for the enlargement or replacement of the wastewater treatment
facilities. Such sewer rental charges may be used to pay previous expansion
or improvements of wastewater treatment facilities.
§ 212-112. Billing period.
Billing periods for sewer rental charges shall correspond with billing
periods of the Manchester Water Works for the same customers. Bills shall
be itemized and shall specify a due date which shall be no less than 25 days
from the date when bills are mailed.
§ 212-113. Late payment charge.
All bills shall be payable on or before the due date specified in the bill.
Interest shall be charged at 12% per annum on all bills not paid by the
due date. The Town Council shall review and adjust the requirements and
charges of the sewer rental charge system on an as-needed basis.
Building sewers proposed in new building areas, such as in
subdivisions and in commercial and industrial areas, shall conform
to these requirements.
(1)
All costs associated with the design, design review by the Town,
and construction shall be borne by the builder, developer, and/or
owner.
(2)
The Town may take over ownership and operation of the sewer
system in an accepted street once the system is in operation.
(3)
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection
of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the Town from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
(4)
§ 212-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-113
1:193

ARTICLE X
Sewer Assessment
§ 212-114. Authority.
This chapter is enacted by the Town of Bedford Town Council pursuant to
the authority vested in it by RSA Chapter 149-1 and §§ C5-13 and C3-8 of
the Town of Bedford Charter.
§ 212-115. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for a reasonable and proportionate
methodology for assessing individual properties for the benefits conferred
as a result of the extension of a sewer line within the service area as shown
in Appendix B.67
§ 212-116. Special assessment.
The total cost of a proposed extension of the sewer line shall be paid by a
special assessment upon all those properties benefited. The Town Council
shall be responsible for determining the total cost of the project and the full
amount to be assessed on each property.
§ 212-117. Lien created.
The assessment established by this article shall create a lien upon the land
on account of which it is made.
§ 212-118. Abatement of assessments.
For good cause shown, the Town Council may abate any such assessment
or portion thereof made by it. Applications for abatements shall be made in
writing.
67.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 212-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-118
1:195

ARTICLE XI
Chapter in Force
§ 212-119. Recommendation by Water and Sewer Advisory
Committee.
This chapter was recommended by the Bedford Water and Sewer Advisory
Committee on _____________.
§ 212-120. Adoption by Town Council.
The Town Council public hearing was on September 12, 1990, adopted by
Bedford Town Council vote on September 19, 1990.
§ 212-121. Adoption of amendments.
The Town Council public hearing was on May 13, 2015, adopted by Bedford
Town Council vote on May 13, 2015.
§ 212-122. Validity.
§ 212-123. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter, with respect to the meaning of technical
terms and phrases, the classification of different types of sewers, the
regulations with respect to making connections to sewers or drains, and
other technical matters, shall be interpreted and administered by the
Director acting in and for the Town of Bedford, New Hampshire through the
Town Council.
§ 212-124. When effective.
This chapter shall be in full force and effect immediately following its
passage, approval, and publication, as provided by law.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.
A.
The validity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this chapter
shall not affect the validity of any other part of this chapter that can be
given effect without such invalid part or parts.
B.
§ 212-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-124
1:197
Chapter 216
SIGNS AND BANNERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Signs — See Ch. 275, Art. IX.
§ 216-1. Permit required. [Amended 3-25-2012]
Signs or banners for the purpose of announcing special events shall be
allowed by a special event sign permit issued by the Town Council or
its designee. Special events shall include, but are not limited to, grand
openings; fund-raisers; concerts; performances; blood drives;
announcement of awards or special recognition; and merchant special sales
or displays.
§ 216-2. Nonapplicability.
This chapter does not apply to those classes of signs regulated by Chapter
275, Zoning, or any other local regulation or state law.
§ 216-3. Permit type and display days. [Amended 3-25-2012]
§ 216-4. Location restrictions.
Special event sign. Each special event sign permit allows for a
maximum of three off-site signs or banners and one on-site sign or
banner per special event. Such signs or banners may be displayed for a
maximum of 120 days a year in total for all events. No more than four
special event sign permits shall be issued to any business, nonprofit
organization, or individual in any calendar year except within its first
year of operation where no more than six shall be issued. [Amended
1-14-2015]
A.
Sandwich board sign. Each sandwich board permit allows for one sign
to be displayed daily for up to one year. All sandwich board signs shall
be removed at the end of the business day for the respective business
or entity.
B.
No special event signs or banners shall be located within public streets
or rights-of-way, and no special event signs shall be affixed to utility
poles or traffic sign installations. Special event signs or banners may be
located on public property only if the event or activity is being held on
that particular property.
A.
Special event signs or banners shall be located on the property of
the applicant or on other private property with a letter of written
permission from that property owner submitted with the application.
B.
§ 212-124 BEDFORD CODE § 216-4
1:198
§ 216-5. Maintenance. [Amended 3-25-2012]
Special event signs and banners and sandwich board signs shall be
maintained in a safe, neat and legible condition.
§ 216-6. Prohibited components.
§ 216-7. Waivers.
The Town Council may waive any provisions of this chapter by a majority
vote of the Council at a regular meeting for good cause shown or where,
in the opinion of the Town Council, the chapter does not reasonably
accommodate the special circumstances of a particular event.
§ 216-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-25-2012]
If a special event sign or banner or sandwich board sign is not removed by
the applicant after the specified number of days allowed by the permit, or
is found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter, the applicant may
be assessed a civil penalty not to exceed $275 per day for each day that the
sign remains displayed. If a special event sign or banner or sandwich board
sign is maintained in violation of any provision of this chapter, the sign or
banner may be removed by the Town of Bedford.
§ 216-9. Fees. [Added 3-25-2012]
The proposed location of the signs or banners must be specifically
indicated in the application and shall only be erected in those locations.
Sandwich board signs shall be located within seven feet of a building
entrance and shall not impact more than 24 inches of a sidewalk
area and must not be located in a manner which interferes with ADA
accessibility, an emergency way, or overly restricts pedestrian
movement. [Added 3-25-2012]
C.
No special event sign or banner shall be illuminated or have moving or
flashing components or exceed 32 square feet in area. No balloons or
other inflatable sign structures shall be permitted.
A.
No sandwich board sign shall be illuminated or have moving or flashing
components or exceed 42 inches in height or 24 inches in width.
[Added 3-25-2012]
B.
Structures, posts, framework, and alike erected for the express purpose
of displaying special event signs shall be removed when the sign is not
displayed. [Added 1-14-2015]
C.
Any request for a waiver to the number of signs permitted under
§ 216-3 shall require an application fee of $100. [Amended
1-14-2015]
A.
§ 216-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-9
1:199
Chapter 222
SKATEBOARDS
§ 222-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SKATEBOARD — Any wheeled vehicle intended and designed to be
propelled by one foot with one foot on the vehicle at the moment of initial
propulsion.
§ 222-2. Skateboarding on public highways and places prohibited.
§ 222-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of violation of this chapter shall be liable for a penalty
of $100 and may suffer, in the sound discretion of the court, forfeiture of his
interest in the skateboard in question to the Town of Bedford, for disposition
in such manner as the court may direct.
Chapter 232
SOLID WASTE
An application for a sandwich board permit shall require an application
fee of $100.
B.
No person shall operate, attempt to operate, or suffer to be operated by
a person for whose conduct he is legally liable a skateboard upon the
following highways or sidewalks of the Town of Bedford: all highways
delineated on the map on display in the Town of Bedford Police
Department. [Amended 8-9-198968]
A.
No person shall operate, attempt to operate, or suffer to be operated
by a person for whose conduct he is legally liable a skateboard upon
any public or private parking lot which is maintained primarily for the
benefit of paying customers and which is properly posted prohibiting
the use of skateboards.
B.
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 216-9 BEDFORD CODE § 222-3
1:200
ARTICLE I
Use of Transfer Station
[Adopted 3-9-1971 by Art. 10]
§ 232-1. Permit required.69
No person shall make any use of any facility maintained by the Town for the
collection or disposal of garbage, refuse, or other waste materials unless he
shall first have obtained from the Department of Public Works a permit for
such use. Such permit shall be in the form prescribed by the Department.
§ 232-2. Persons authorized to obtain permits.70
The Department of Public Works shall issue the permit in § 232-1 only to the
following persons:
§ 232-3. No fee for persons authorized to obtain permit.71
The Department of Public Works shall issue the permit described in § 232-1
upon application of any person enumerated in § 232-2 without payment of
any fee.
§ 232-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to a
penalty not exceeding $50 for each offense.
A. Residents of the Town;
Any nonresident person owning or leasing real property within the
Town, provided that any such permit shall be limited to the disposal of
waste materials generated by activities carried on within the Town.
B.
Any person engaging in the business of collecting waste material from
residents of the Town or from activities carried on within the Town,
provided that such permit is limited to the disposal only of waste
materials so collected.
C.
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 232-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-4
1:201

ARTICLE II
Refuse Disposal at Transfer Station
[Adopted 3-8-1977 by Art. 4]
§ 232-5. Rules for deposit of refuse.72
It shall be unlawful for any persons to make deposits of refuse, whether
boxed, bagged, or otherwise, at the entrance to the Town transfer station at
any time. People utilizing the facilities of the transfer station must deposit
their refuse where instructed by the station operator.
§ 232-6. Violations and penalties.
Violators of this article shall be subject to a minimum of a $50 fine on the
first offense and $100 for the second offense.
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 232-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-6
1:203
Chapter 239
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 232-6 BEDFORD CODE § 232-6
1:204
ARTICLE I
Driveways and Other Access to Public Ways
[Adopted 3-8-1983 by Art. 2]
§ 239-1. Permit required.
§ 239-2. Access to proposed commercial or industrial enterprises.
For access to a proposed commercial or industrial enterprise or to a
subdivision, all of which for the purposes of this section shall be considered
a single parcel of land, even though acquired by more than one conveyance
or held nominally by more than one owner:
It shall be unlawful to construct or alter in any way that substantially
affects the size or grade of any driveway, entrance, exit, or approach
within the limits of the right-of-way of any Town road that does not
conform to the terms and specifications of a written permit issued by
the Director of Public Works and Highways.
A.
Pursuant to this section, a written construction permit application must
be obtained from and filed with the Department of Public Works and
Highways by any abutter affected by the provisions of this § 239-5.
Before any construction or alteration work is commenced, said permit
application shall have been reviewed and a construction permit issued
by said department. Said permit shall:
Describe the location of the driveway, entrance, exit, or approach.
The location shall be selected to most adequately protect the safety
of the traveling public.
(1)
Describe any drainage structures, traffic control devices, and
channelization islands to be installed by the abutter.
(2)
Establish grades that adequately protect and promote highway
drainage and permit a safe and controlled approach to the highway
in all seasons of the year.
(3)
Include any other terms and specifications necessary for the safety
of the traveling public.
(4)
B.
Said permit application shall be accompanied by engineering drawings
showing information as set forth in § 239-1B.
A.
Unless all-season safe sight distance in both directions along the
highway can be obtained, the Director shall not permit more than one
access to a single parcel of land, and this access shall be at that location
which the Director determines to be safest. The Director shall not give
final approval for use of any additional access until it has been proven
to him that the all-season safe sight distance has been provided.
B.
For the purposes of this section, the all-season safe sight distance is
described as a line which encounters no visual obstruction between two
C.
§ 239-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-2
1:205
§ 239-3. Prohibitions.
No construction permit shall allow:
§ 239-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article or rules and
regulations made under authority thereof shall be guilty of a violation if
a natural person, or guilty of a misdemeanor if any other person, and,
in addition, shall be liable for the cost of restoration of the highway to
a condition satisfactory to the person empowered to give such written
permission.
points, each at a height of three feet nine inches above the pavement,
and so located as to represent the critical line of sight between the
operator of a vehicle using the access and the operator of a vehicle
approaching from either direction.
A driveway, entrance, exit, or approach to be constructed more than 50
feet in width, except that a driveway, entrance, exit, or approach may
be flared beyond a width of 50 feet at its junction with the highway
to accommodate the turning radius of vehicles expected to use the
particular driveway, entrance, exit, or approach.
A.
More than two driveways, entrances, exits, or approaches from any
one highway to any one parcel of land unless the frontage along that
highway exceeds 500 feet.
B.
See latest Road Construction Standards on file in the office of the
Department of Public Works for information regarding circular
driveways.73
C.
73.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 239-2 BEDFORD CODE § 239-4
1:206
ARTICLE II
Street Openings
[Adopted 3-8-1983 by Art. 3]
§ 239-5. Application and permit procedure.74
Street opening permits shall be issued by the Public Works Director of the
Town of Bedford. Anyone wishing to open or excavate in any street must
make an application for a permit on a form provided by the Public Works
Director. Each application for a permit must be accompanied by a fee in
accordance with the fee schedule on file in the office of the Department of
Public Works.
§ 239-6. Hours of work.75
Work authorized by a permit shall be performed between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m. weekdays, unless the permittee obtains written consent
from the Public Works Director to do the work during another time. Such
permission shall be granted only in case of an emergency or in the event the
work authorized by the permit is to be performed in traffic congested areas.
In case of an emergency, the emergency provisions of Article IV shall apply.
§ 239-7. No openings beyond center line.
No opening or excavation in any street shall extend beyond the center line
of the street before being backfilled and the surface of the street made
passable to traffic.
§ 239-8. Maximum size of opening; barricades and lights.
No more than 300 feet measured longitudinally shall be opened in any
street at one time, except by special permission of the Public Works
Director.
§ 239-9. Applicability of national standards for protective devices.
All barricades, warning signs, lights, temporary signals, and other
protective devices shall conform with the edition of the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, current on the date
Every permittee will be required to place around openings, excavations,
encumbrances, or obstructions such barriers, barricades, lights,
warning flags, and danger signs as may be required by the Public Works
Director to protect the safety of the general public.
A.
During the hours of darkness, adequate artificial lighting devices are
required to call attention to and indicate the actual location of
obstructions and hazards.
B.
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 239-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-9
1:207
of application for the permit; which Manual is approved by the Federal
Highway Administrator as the national standard for all highways open to
public travel.
§ 239-10. Traffic control devices.
Traffic control devices shall be set up prior to the start of construction or
maintenance operations and shall remain in place only as long as needed,
as required by the Public Works Director.
§ 239-11. Advertisements, notices, and signs on barricades
prohibited.
Advertisements, notices, and signs other than for traffic control shall not be
displayed on or attached to any barricade or fence in any highway.
§ 239-12. Minimum of one lane of traffic; access to properties
required.
A minimum of one lane of traffic shall be provided on all streets at all times.
The minimum width for temporary traffic lanes is 11 feet. Access shall be
provided to all property at night and on weekends and shall be provided to
all places of business at all times.
§ 239-13. Complete street closure.
§ 239-14. Sidewalks, walkways, or crosswalk areas.
When the work area encroaches upon a sidewalk, walkway, or crosswalk
area, protective barriers, together with appropriate warning and guidance
devices and signs, must be utilized so that the passageway for pedestrians
is safe and well defined.
§ 239-15. Utility facilities.
The location of all utility facilities shall be determined sufficiently ahead of
trench excavation work to avoid damage to those facilities and permit their
relocation, if necessary.
If a complete street closure is necessary, at least seven working days'
advance notice is required with confirmation of the proposed closure
three working days in advance of the actual street closure.
A.
The Public Works Director will review and approve any detours
required. If an emergency necessitates the complete closing of a street,
the closing will be governed by Article IV, Emergency Highway
Closings.76
B.
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 239-9 BEDFORD CODE § 239-16
1:208
§ 239-16. Line monuments, reference points, and permanent survey
bench marks.
Property or street line monuments, survey reference points, and permanent
survey bench marks shall not be removed or disturbed, unless specifically
permitted in writing by the Public Works Director.
§ 239-17. Drainage during construction.
Provisions shall be made to provide for proper drainage during
construction, and the permittee shall be responsible for all claims for
damage or injury whatsoever that may arise from the obstruction or use of
any public sewer or drain in connection with the work contemplated under
the permit.
§ 239-18. Shade trees.
Shade trees shall not be cut down, trimmed, or otherwise injured. Where
it is necessary to cut and remove pavement, curb, sidewalk, and/or other
surface improvement, the material shall be cut and removed by means of
equipment suitable to the type of material to be removed and in a manner
which results in a minimum amount of damage to adjacent improvements.
§ 239-19. Excavated material.
§ 239-20. Excavated material unsuitable for backfill.
§ 239-21. Minimum depth to substructure.
The minimum depth to any substructure, except manholes, vault entrance
tubes, valve casings, and catch basins, shall be 24 inches below the surface
of the nearest edge of the traveled portion of the street, and no excavation
shall be less than 20 inches in length or width.
Excavated material shall be replaced or backfilled in layers or courses
not to exceed 12 inches in compacted thicknesses and shall be
compacted at or near optimum moisture content using pneumatic
tampers, vibratory compactors, or other approved means.
A.
The material shall be compacted to not less than 98% maximum dry
density as determined by the Standard Proctor Method in accordance
with Standard Specifications.
B.
If unsuitable for backfill, excavated material shall be replaced with
granular backfill as specified in the Standard Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction, State of New Hampshire Department of
Public Works and Highways, hereinafter referred to as the "New
Hampshire Standard Specifications."
A.
Water shall be uniformly applied during compaction in the amount
necessary for proper consolidation, but puddling will not be allowed.
B.
§ 239-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-22
1:209
§ 239-22. Surface type in asphalt paved areas.
Within the asphalt paved areas, crushed gravel (as described in New
Hampshire Standard Specifications) equal to the existing gravel course
shall be placed in layers not exceeding six inches loose depth and
thoroughly compacted. In no case shall the compacted depth of crushed
gravel be less than 12 inches.
§ 239-23. Surface type in nonasphalt paved areas.
In other areas, the present surface type shall be restored by placing similar
material on top of the trench to a depth equal to that existing before
excavation. Any existing grassland, additionally, shall be fertilized and
reseeded. Any asphalt or concrete sidewalk shall have surfaces of equal
depth, kind, and quality placed.
§ 239-24. Removal of debris.
As the work progresses, all streets shall be thoroughly cleaned of all
rubbish, excess earth, rock, and other debris resulting from such work.
§ 239-25. Completion of work.
After an excavation is commenced, the work shall be prosecuted with
diligence and expedition and shall be completed and the street restored to
its original condition, or as near as may be, so as not to obstruct the public
places or travel thereon more than is reasonably necessary. In any event,
the surface of the street shall be permanently restored within a period of
time not to exceed five days from the date of completion of the project.
§ 239-26. Town completion of work.
The Public Works Director, as a condition of the permit, reserves the right to
restore the highway or cause the same to be restored under his directions,
and the permittee shall reimburse the Town for any or all liability and
expense suffered by reason of such work.
§ 239-27. Indemnification of Town.
The permittee further agrees to indemnity and save harmless the Town of
Bedford, New Hampshire, from all claims for damage or injury whatsoever
that may arise from the encumbrance, obstruction, occupation, or use
of said highway, and the applicant shall be accountable for all damage
that may occur on account of said encumbrance, obstruction, or use of
the aforesaid highway, the Town of Bedford, in no case, assuming any
responsibility or liability by reason of granting the permit.
§ 239-28. Thirty-month responsibility for work completed.
The person, partnership, firm, corporation, etc., who obtains the permit to
excavate a Town highway, shall be responsible for said excavation for 30
§ 239-22 BEDFORD CODE § 239-28
1:210
months after all work contemplated under the permit has been completed
and the Highway Department so notified, and may be ordered by the Public
Works Director at any time during the thirty-month period to improve or
replace the work.
§ 239-29. Detailed plan of project.
Each applicant for a permit shall be accompanied by a plan drawn to an
approved scale, sufficient in detail to provide for easy field location of
the work. Upon completion of the pavement restoration, the Department
of Highways shall be immediately notified as to the location and time of
completion.
§ 239-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-29
1:211

ARTICLE III
Patching Guidelines
[Adopted 3-8-1983 by Art. 3]
§ 239-30. Cuts.
§ 239-31. Multiple excavations.
In cases where multiple excavations are made in a street which would result
in the edge of patches being closer than 20 feet, the Public Works Director
may require a continuous patch.
§ 239-32. Surety bond; display of permit.
Cuts shall be parallel or perpendicular to the line of the trench. In the
case of transverse or diagonal trenching, the pavement shall be sawn to
provide a flat diamond-shaped patch with a two-foot minimum overlap
on undisturbed material that will permit only one wheel of a vehicle at
a time to strike the patch area.
A.
Within the sawn limits of the final patch, the existing pavement and any
temporary patch material shall be removed and replaced with an equal
depth of Type 1-1 asphaltic concrete laid and compacted to meet the
existing pavement edge exactly.
B.
The face of all joints shall be painted with asphalt cement before the
asphaltic concrete is placed.
C.
On surface-treated gravel highways, feathering the edges of patches
shall be allowed.
A.
Within areas of cement concrete or stone base overlayed with asphalt,
the Department will require the replacement of the cement concrete
or stone base with Class A portland cement concrete, reinforced or
nonreinforced, as specified in the New Hampshire Standard
Specifications, to a depth equal to that removed and then overlay with
Type 1-1 asphaltic concrete as specified above.
B.
The permittee agrees to furnish a continuing surety bond in an amount
determined by the Director of the Department of Public Works,
guaranteeing the fulfillment of the provisions, instructions, and
regulations prescribed above and later instructions issued by the
Department during the performance of the work and satisfactory
maintenance of the disturbed areas for a period as determined by the
Director following the completion of the work.77
A.
The permit shall be kept with the foreman (of the applicant having the
work) in charge at the place where the work is being performed and
shall be produced for examination upon request.
B.
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 239-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-33
1:213
§ 239-33. Indemnification of Town.
The permittee, as a condition of the permit, shall agree to indemnify and
protect the Town of Bedford against all liability, claims, or demands for
injuries or damage, including claims for loss or interruption of business in
cases where the encumbrance or construction impedes the flow of traffic, to
any person or property arising out of activities of the permittee, its servants,
employees, agents representatives, or subcontractors.
§ 239-34. Insurance requirements.
The permittee, as a condition of the permit, shall agree to carry the
following insurance:
Comprehensive general liability insurance.
Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than
$1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and $500,000 per
occurrence for property damage and automobile liability insurance
with limits not less than $500,000 per person and $1,000,000
per occurrence for bodily injury and $500,000 per occurrence for
property damage covering all activities of the permittee for the
full period of the permit. Such insurance shall include the Town of
Bedford and the Highway Department, including all officials and
employees thereof.
(1)
Such insurance shall include:
(a) All activities including use of all vehicles.
(b) Contractual liability covering this permit.
Coverage for the so-called "x.c.u." hazard, i.e., collapse of
buildings, blastings, and damage to underground property.
(c)
Completed operations hazard for a period of at least two years
following the acceptance by the Highway Department of the
completed permit.
(d)
(e) Personal injury coverage (in addition to bodily injury).
(2)
A.
Workmen's compensation insurance. The permittee shall carry
workmen's compensation insurance including employer's liability
insurance with limits of $100,000, whether or not required by the
New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, 1955, as amended, for all
activities of the permittee during the period of the permit.
B.
Insurance on independent contractors. Insurance similar to that
required of the permittee shall be provided by or on behalf of all
independent contractors used by the permittee during the period of this
permit. The permittee shall be held responsible for any modifications
in these insurance requirements as they apply to independent
contractors.
C.
§ 239-33 BEDFORD CODE § 239-34
1:214
Proof of coverage. Insurance certificates evidencing the above
coverage are to be furnished the Highway Department prior to issuance
of the permit and shall provide for not less than 30 days' prior notice
to the Highway Department of any cancellation or major change in the
policies.
D.
Revocation of permits. The purchase of the insurance required or the
furnishing of the aforesaid certificates shall not be a satisfaction of the
permittee's liability hereunder or in any way modify the permittee's
indemnification responsibilities to the Town of Bedford. The Public
Works Director may revoke any permit issued under this regulation at
any time.
E.
§ 239-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-34
1:215

ARTICLE IV
Emergency Highway Closings
[Adopted 3-8-1983 by Art. 3]
§ 239-35. Permit required.
Emergency requirements to excavate in or close Town highways shall be
done by emergency permit issued by the Public Works Director or his
representative.
§ 239-36. Notification of authorities.
If such an emergency exists, the Police Department, Fire Department,
and Highway Department, as a minimum, shall be notified immediately
by telephone. At the earliest opportunity available, a representative of the
permittee shall obtain an emergency permit form. During the next business
day, a regular permit form shall be applied for at the office of the Public
Works Director.
§ 239-37. Waivers.
The Public Works Director reserves the right to waive any of the provisions
of this regulation in case of emergency, and to impose such conditions as he
may require as part of an emergency permit.
§ 239-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-37
1:217

ARTICLE V
Winter Parking and Snow Removal
[Adopted 10-24-1990]
§ 239-38. Parking during snow storm; violations and penalties.
§ 239-39. Placing snow upon certain roads and streets.
From November 1 to April 1 of each year, no person shall park any
motor vehicle on any public highway between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 8:00 a.m. or at any other time in such a manner as to
impede snow removal operations.
A.
Any vehicle parked in violation of Subsection A hereof may be
authorized to be towed by the Director of Public Works, or his or her
agents, or by independent contractors engaged by the said Director of
Public Works or Chief of Police; any vehicles so towed shall be stored
and released to the owner only upon payment of the cost of towing as
established from time to time by the Town Council.
B.
Any person violating Subsection A hereof shall be subject to a penalty
not to exceed $50 for each offense.
C.
No person shall put or place or cause to be put or placed any snow
or ice upon the surface of the traveled portion of any Class V or Class
IV highway or Town-maintained portion of a Class II highway except
with Town approval by the Director of Public Works or his designated
representative.
A.
Any person violating Subsection A shall be subject to a penalty not
exceeding the following:78
(1) First offense: written warning.
(2) Second offense: penalty of $50.
(3) Third offense: penalty of $100.
B.
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 239-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-39
1:219
Chapter 243
SUNDAY SALES
§ 243-1. Statutory authority.
The following provisions on Sunday sales are hereby enacted in pursuance
of authority conferred by RSA 332-D:4, and for the purpose of promoting
the health, safety, morals, prosperity, convenience, and general welfare of
all persons governed by this chapter.
§ 243-2. Sports, games, auctions or exhibitions.
§ 243-3. Meals and automotive services.
It shall be lawful to serve meals and furnish supplies, service, and repairs
required by automotive apparatus on Sunday within the Town.
§ 243-4. General merchandise establishments.
Chapter 251
TAXATION
It shall be lawful to conduct sports, games, auctions, or exhibitions in
connection with which admission is charged or donations are made or
accepted on Sunday, within the Town of Bedford.
A.
It shall be lawful to conduct sports and games in connection with which
no admission is charged and no donations are made or accepted within
the Town of Bedford on Sunday.
B.
It shall be lawful to operate any general merchandise establishments,
including but not limited to grocery stores, drugstores, and real estate
sales, on Sunday within the Town.
A.
§ 239-39 BEDFORD CODE § 243-4
1:220
ARTICLE I
Solar Energy Heating or Cooling System Exemption
[Adopted 3-11-1980 by Art. 4]
§ 251-1. Exemption granted.79
The provisions of RSA 72:62 for a property tax exemption on real property
equipped with a solar energy heating or cooling system as defined by RSA
72:61 are hereby adopted, which exemption shall be in an amount of 100%
of the cost of said solar system.
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 251-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-1
1:221

ARTICLE II
Wind-Powered Energy Exemption
[Adopted 3-11-1980 by Art. 2]
§ 251-2. Exemption granted.80
The provision of RSA 72:66 for a property tax exemption on real property
equipped with a wind-powered energy system as defined by RSA 72:65 is
hereby adopted, which exemption shall be in an amount of 100% of the cost
of the system.
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 251-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-2
1:223

ARTICLE III
Wood Heating Energy System Exemption
[Adopted 3-11-1980 by Art. 3]
§ 251-3. Exemption granted.81
The provision of RSA 72:70 for a property tax exemption on real property
equipped with a wood heating energy system as defined by RSA 72:69 is
hereby adopted, which exemption shall be in an amount of 100% of the cost
of said system.
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 251-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-3
1:225

ARTICLE IV
Elderly Exemption
[Adopted 3-9-1982 by Art. 2]
§ 251-4. Exemption granted.82 [Amended 12-5-2001]
The provisions of RSA 72:39-a for the adjusted elderly exemptions from
property tax are hereby adopted. These statutes provide for the following
exemptions, based on assessed value for qualified taxpayers:
§ 251-5. Requirements for qualification.83
For a person 65 years of age up to 74 years of age: $76,350. [Amended
8-15-2007]
A.
For a person 75 years of age up to 79 years of age: $81,350. [Amended
8-15-2007]
B.
C. For a person 80+ years of age 120,000. [Amended 9-13-2006]
The person must have been a New Hampshire resident for at least three
years, own the real estate individually or jointly, or if the real estate
is owned by his spouse, they must have been married for at least five
years.
A.
Income levels will be tied to the Federal Poverty Level (FPL) and
are established at four times the FPL. Additionally, the taxpayer must
own assets of $150,000 or less, excluding the value of the person's
residence. The income levels as established by four times the FPL will
be reviewed annually by the Town Council. [Amended 9-10-2014]
B.
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 251-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-5
1:227

ARTICLE V
Fee Exemption for Former Prisoners of War
[Adopted 3-13-1986 by Art. 33]
§ 251-6. Fee exemption granted. [Amended 7-13-2011]
Pursuant to the provisions of RSA 261:157-A, the Town shall waive the fee to
be charged for a permit to register one motor vehicle owned by any person
who was captured and incarcerated for 30 days or more while serving in
a qualifying war or armed conflict as defined in RSA 72:28, V, and who
was honorably discharged, provided that the person has provided the Town
Clerk with satisfactory proof of these circumstances.
§ 251-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-6
1:229

ARTICLE VI
Resident Tax
[Adopted 3-17-1987]
§ 251-7. Tax not be levied. [Amended 7-13-2011]
Pursuant to RSA 72:1-C, the Town of Bedford elects to not assess, levy, and
collect a resident tax.
§ 251-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-7
1:231

ARTICLE VII
Blind Exemption
[Adopted 3-13-1986 by Art. 29; amended 12-5-2001]
§ 251-8. Exemption granted. [Amended 7-13-2011]
The exemption from property taxes on a residence to the value of $35,000
as authorized by RSA 72:37 is hereby granted each year to each inhabitant
who is legally blind. Applications shall be subject to the provisions of RSA
72:33 and 72:34.
§ 251-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-8
1:233

ARTICLE VIII
Veteran's Exemption
[Adopted 12-5-2001]
§ 251-9. Exemption granted. [Amended 7-13-2011]
A veteran's tax credit of $500 is granted to persons qualifying under RSA
72:28.
§ 251-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-9
1:235

ARTICLE IX
Totally Disabled Exemption
[Adopted 12-5-2001]
§ 251-10. Exemption granted. [Amended 7-13-2011]
A tax credit of $2,000 for a service-connected disability is granted to
persons qualifying under RSA 72:35.
§ 251-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-10
1:237
Chapter 262
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic impact assessment — See Ch. 46, Art.
II.
Towing of vehicles in fire lanes — See Ch. 130.
Sale of motorized vehicles — See Ch. 146.
Skateboards — See Ch. 222.
Traffic regulation in parks — See Ch. 185.
Traffic control devices around street
openings — See Ch. 239, Art. II.
§ 262-1. Parking prohibited. [Adopted 2-5-1990]
Parking of motor vehicles on the following highways of the Town of
Bedford shall be prohibited at all times, except as otherwise indicated
below: [Amended 7-13-2011]
Name of Street Side Location
Back River Road
[Added 9-14-2016]
West From the intersection with
County Road north to the
property line of the Peter
Woodbury School site
Back River Road
[Amended 6-26-2002]
West From the South River Road
intersection 650 feet down Back
River Road
Camp Road [Added
11-18-2015]
Both From the intersection of Camp
Road at Back River Road to the
terminus of Camp Road
Chestnut Drive [Added
6-11-2014]
Both Entire length, beginning at the
intersection of Route 101 and
Chestnut Drive to its terminus,
including the adjacent ramp
leading to/from Chestnut Drive to
the Bedford High School/Middle
School complex
Chubbuck Road
[Added 11-18-2015]
East From the driveway at 4 Chubbuck
Road to a point approximately 60
feet south of that driveway
Chubbuck Road
[Amended 4-10-2002;
10-9-2002]
East From Wallace Road to the Public
Works driveway, between 7:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Chubbuck Road
[Amended
10-11-2000]
North In front of the guardrails and on
the southerly side from the
driveway of 4 Chubbuck Road to
60 feet west
A.
§ 251-10 BEDFORD CODE § 262-1
1:238
Name of Street Side Location
Club Acre Lane
[Amended 9-10-1997]
West From the South River Road
intersection to the dead end
County Road [Added
9-10-2014]
East and
west
Consistent with the current
section posted for no parking
County Road [Added
9-14-2016]
North From the intersection of Back
River Road to the western
property line of the Peter
Woodbury School site
County Road (by
McKelvie School)
North Liberty Hill Road east to first
school driveway
County Road (by Riley
Field)
North Nashua Road east 30 feet (no
parking here to corner)
County Road (by Riley
Field)
South Nashua Road east 75 feet
County Road
[Amended 1-8-2003]
North From the east most entrance of
McKelvie School to the east most
intersection of Wright Acres Road
County Road
[Amended 9-25-2002]
South From the intersection of Nashua
Road east to the Town Pool
entrance (#20 County Road)
Dalton Road West County Road to first driveway
Donald Street
Extension (by
LaCantina)
North Route 114 20 feet east (no
parking here to corner)
Donald Street
Extension (by
LaCantina)
South Route 114 20 feet east (no
parking here to corner)
Glen Road [Amended
9-10-1997]
Left From Old Drive to the dead end
Liberty Hill Road
[Added 9-10-2014]
North From a point on or near the
basketball courts at McKelvie
Intermediate School to the
intersection of County Road
Liberty Hill Road
[Added 9-10-2014]
South From the intersection of County
Road to the third driveway across
from the McKelvie Intermediate
School basketball courts
Liberty Hill Road (by
McKelvie School)
West County Road south to most
southerly school driveway
§ 262-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 262-1
1:239
Name of Street Side Location
Meetinghouse Road North Route 101 west to Fire
Department driveway Town Hall
driveway west to Bedford Center
Road
Meetinghouse Road South Route 101 west to Bedford
Center Road
Nashua Road
[Amended 8-15-2007]
Both From Route 101 to 1,500 feet
south of Nashua Road/County
Road
Nashua Road (by Little
League Field)
West Crest of hill (north of Little
League entrance) south to 15 feet
north of Highway Department
garage
Nashua Road (by Riley
Field) [Amended
7-12-1995]
East County Road North 20 feet (no
parking here to corner)
Nashua Road (by Riley
Field) [Amended
7-12-1995]
East From County Road to
Sportsman's Field driveway
entrance
Old Bedford Road (by
Bedford Village Inn)
East Route 101 north to BVI property
line
Old Bedford Road (by
Bedford Village Inn)
West Route 101 north to second BVI
driveway
Old Bedford Road (by
Memorial School)
North Bridge west to driveway of 54 Old
Bedford Road
Old Bedford Road (by
Memorial School)
South Bridge west to west boundary of
45 Old Bedford Road
Twin Brook Lane
[Added 5-9-2018]
Both From the intersection of Route
101 for a distance of 300 feet
Wathen Road North South River Road to crest of hill
Wathen Road South South River Road to Casa Mia
driveway
White Avenue
[Amended 9-25-2002]
Both From the intersection of Route
114 east to the intersection of
Bellemore Drive
Greenfield Parkway. No parking, standing or stopping zone between
Sentry Road and Cottage Walk to include the outside and center
abutments of both the east and west lanes between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m. [Amended 10-10-2007]
B.
Violations and penalties. Any person violating the terms of this section
shall be subject to a maximum penalty of $15.
C.
§ 262-1 BEDFORD CODE § 262-2
1:240
§ 262-2. Overnight parking. [Adopted 3-5-1974 by Art. 6]
§ 262-3. Prohibition of left turns. [Adopted 6-28-2006; amended
7-13-2011]
Left-hand turns are prohibited at all times from Upjohn Street onto South
River Road heading southbound.
§ 262-4. One-way streets. [Adopted 11-9-2005]
North Amherst Road from Bell Hill Road to Bedford Center Road is one-way
westbound.84
§ 262-5. Trucking on certain Town roads. [Adopted 12-22-1992]
From November 1 to April 1 of each year, no person shall park any
motor vehicle on any public highway between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 8:00 a.m. or at any other time in such a manner as to
impede snow removal operations.
A.
Any vehicle parked in violation of Subsection A hereof may be towed by
the Road Agent, the Chief of Police or their agents, or by independent
contractors engaged by the Road Agent or Police Chief. Any vehicles
so towed shall be stored and released to the owner only upon payment
of the cost of towing as established from time to time by the Board of
Selectmen.
B.
Any person violating Subsection A hereof shall be subject to a penalty
not to exceed $25 for each offense.
C.
Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given
herein. When not consistent with the context, words used in the present
tense include the future, words in the plural number include the
singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
NO THROUGH TRUCK ROUTES — A way over certain streets in the
Town, as designated herein, over and along which trucks cannot
operate.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.
TOWN — The Town of Bedford.
TRUCK — Any motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily
for the transportation of the property of greater than 26,000 pounds
manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating or gross combination
weight rating of more than 26,000 pounds; or[Amended 5-22-2013]
A.
84.Editor's Note: Original Section 15-4-2, Traffic regulation, Subsections (a) and (b), as
adopted 11-6-1986 and 4-15-1987, which immediately followed this section, was deleted
7-13-2011. See now § 262-5.
§ 262-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 262-5
1:241
(1) Any motor vehicle equipped with other than pneumatic tires; or
Any motor vehicle that satisfies the definition of "Tractor-Trailer"
as defined by RSA 259:109; or
(2)
Any vehicle of any size used in the transportation of material found
to be hazardous pursuant to RSA 147-B:2VII and/or 147-B:2VIII; or
(3)
Any vehicle designed to transport more than 15 passengers
including the driver.
(4)
Application of regulation. All trucks within the Town shall be operated
only over and along the routes which truck travel is permitted.
B.
Exceptions: This section shall not prohibit: [Amended 5-22-2013]
(1) Any school bus as defined by RSA 259:96;
(2) Any mixed-use school bus as defined by RSA 259-96-a;
Any antique vehicle as defined by RSA 259-4 equipped with other
than pneumatic tires;
(3)
Any vehicle owned and/or operated by or at the direction of the
Town of Bedford;
(4)
Operation on street of destination. The operation of trucks upon
any street where necessary to the conduct of business at a
destination point, provided that streets upon which such traffic
is permitted are used until reaching the intersection nearest the
destination point;
(5)
Emergency vehicles. The operation of emergency vehicles upon
any street in the Town;
(6)
Public utilities. The operation of trucks owned or operated by the
Town, public utilities, or any contractor or material man, while
engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets,
street improvements, or street utilities within the Town;
(7)
Detour trucks. The operation of trucks upon any officially
established detour in any case where such truck could lawfully be
operated upon the street for which such detour is established.
(8)
C.
There is hereby established within the Town the following routes where
no through trucking shall be allowed, unless an exception is allowed as
aforementioned: [Amended 7-13-2011]
Name of Street Location
Atwood Lane [Amended
4-9-2003]
Intersection of Ridgewood Road south
to its end as a public way
Back River Road [Amended
12-22-1992]
From Smith Road to the Merrimack
Town line
D.
§ 262-5 BEDFORD CODE § 262-5
1:242
Name of Street Location
Darby Lane [Amended
8-14-1991]
Entire length
Donald Street [Added
12-12-2012]
Between Route 114 and the
Manchester town line including
Donald Street Extension between the
hours of 9:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Gage Girls Road [Amended
10-9-2002]
From Beals Road to the Merrimack
Town Line
Greenfield Parkway
[Amended 8-13-2008]
From Liberty Hill Road to Wallace
Road
Hazen Road Entire length
Holbrook Road [Amended
12-10-2003]
From New Boston Road to the
intersection of Old Bedford Road
Jenkins Road [Repealed
3-23-2017]
Jenkins Road [Amended
10-9-2002]
From Beals Road to the Merrimack
Town line
Joppa Hill Road Route 101 to New Boston Road and
New Boston Road to Goffstown Town
line
Liberty Hill Road From Smith Road to the Merrimack
Town line
Meadow Road [Amended
8-13-2008]
From Liberty Hill Road to Wallace
Road
Meetinghouse Road (east and
west)
Between Route 101 and the exit and
entrance ramps to Route 101 east
Nashua Road From Route 101 south to Wallace Road
Old Bedford Road [Amended
12-10-2003]
From Route 101 to the intersection of
Rundlett Hill Road
Palomino Lane South River Road to Whittemore
Street
Patten Road [Amended
3-29-2006]
Entire length
Pauline Street Entire length
Tinker Road Entire length
Wallace Road From Route 101 south to the
Merrimack Town line
Wallace Road Route 101 to New Boston Road
Wallace Road [Amended
10-9-2002]
From Beals Road to the Merrimack
Town Line
§ 262-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 262-5
1:243
§ 262-6. Speed limits. [Adopted 1-27-1999]
Name of Street Location
Wallace Road [Added
9-10-2014]
From New Boston Road to the
Goffstown, NH town line
Enforcement.
Maintenance of maps. The Town Clerk shall keep and maintain
accurate maps setting out no through truck routes on which truck
traffic is not permitted, the maps shall be kept on file in the office
of the Town Clerk and shall be available to the public.
(1)
Posting of signs. The Department of Public Works is authorized to
post "no through trucking" signs as listed above.
(2)
Failure to post. A person shall not be charged with violating the
provisions of this section by reason of operating a truck upon a
street wherein truck travel is prohibited unless appropriate signs
are posted on such street.
(3)
E.
When effective. This section shall become effective two weeks after the
date on which the Town Council adopted said ordinance.
F.
Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-22-2013]
The fines for violation of this section are as follows:
(a) First: $250 per violation;
(b) Second: $500 per violation;
(c) Third: 5750 per violation;
Fourth and each additional violation: $1,000 per violation for
violations occurring within three calendar years from the date
of the first violation.
(d)
(1)
If said fine is not paid by the due date, an additional amount of $10
per day will be assessed until paid.
(2)
The operator of any vehicle in violation of this chapter and section
shall be responsible for any and all fines as set forth herein.
(3)
Violations of this chapter and section by an operator occurring
more than three years after the date of the first violation shall be
considered a "first" violation and that successive violations shall
adhere to the fine schedule set forth in § 262-5G(1), above.85
(4)
G.
85.Editor's Note: Original Section 15-4-2(e), Four-Way Stop Signs, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted 7-13-2011.
§ 262-5 BEDFORD CODE § 262-6
1:244
According to RSA 265:60 and RSA 265:62, the prima facie speed limit
in the Town of Bedford where no hazard exists and it is not otherwise
posted shall be 30 miles per hour.
A.
Speed limits on the following streets shall be as indicated below in the
locations described.
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Back River Road
[Amended 2-24-1999]
35 Entire length
Blueberry Lane
[Amended 1-27-1999]
25 From Glen Road to
approximately 550 feet north of
the Glen Road intersection in
the vicinity of 44 Wendover Way
Boynton Street
[Amended 2-24-1999]
35 Entire length
Campbell Road
[Amended 2-24-1999]
35 Entire length
Glen Road [Amended
1-27-1999]
25 From Wendover Way to its deadend
Huntington Ridge Road
[Added 5-9-2018]
25 Entire length
Joppa Hill Road
[Amended 2-24-1999]
35 From Route 101 to New Boston
Road
Liberty Hill Road
[Amended 2-24-1999]
35 Entire length with the exception
from Edinburgh Drive to Caron
Road
Liberty Hill Road
[Amended 2-24-1999]
30 From Edinburgh Drive to Caron
Road
McAllister Road
[Amended 2-24-1999]
35 From Ministerial to New Boston
Road
Meetinghouse Road
[Amended 2-24-1999]
35 Entire length
Nashua Road
[Amended 8-15-2007]
30 From Route 101 to a point 1,500
feet south of Nashua Road/
County Road intersection
Nashua Road
[Amended 2-24-1999]
35 Entire length except from Route
101 to a point 1,500 feet south
of Nashua Road/County Road
intersection
North Amherst Road
[Amended 2-24-1999]
35 Entire length
B.
§ 262-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 262-6
1:245
§ 262-7. Stop signs. [Adopted 8-18-1999]
Name of Street At Intersection
Arrowhead Drive Flintlock Road
Atwood Lane Palomino Lane
Atwood Lane Ridgewood Road North and South
Back of Shop and Save exit Colby Court
Back of Walmart near
Harborside
Colby Court
Back River Terrace Back River Road North and South
Barrington Drive Old English Road
Beals Road Gage Girls Road (four-way)
Beals Road Wallace Road
Beaver Brook Road North Amherst Road
Bedford Center Meetinghouse Road
Bedford Street Mack Street
Bedford Street Whittemore Street North and South
Beech Street Stowell Road
Birkdale Road Essex Road
Birkdale Road Joppa Hill Road
Blackbird Drive Lindahl Road
Blackbird Drive Oriole Drive
Bracken Circle Old Evergreen Road
Brick Mill Road Wallace Road
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Oak Drive [Amended
1-27-1999]
25 From Meetinghouse Road to its
dead-end
Palomino Lane
[Amended
11-17-1993]
25 Between Whittemore Street and
Wayside Drive
Pilgrim Drive [Added
7-27-2016]
25 Entire length
Sebbins Pond Drive
[Added 12-12-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-06]
25 Entire length
Wallace Road
[Amended 2-24-1999]
35 Entire length
§ 262-6 BEDFORD CODE § 262-7
1:246
Name of Street At Intersection
Brick Mill Road [Amended
8-15-2007]
Ledgewood, both sides
Burleigh Terrace Riddle Drive Lane
Butterfield Lane Pasture Lane
Buttonwood Road Chandler Road
C.R. Sparks entrance Kilton Road
Cambridge Road Birkdale Road (2)
Cambridge Road Wallace Road
Campbell Road Joppa Hill Road
Campbell Road North Amherst Road
Camp Road [Added
11-18-2015]
Back River Road
Canary Lane Blackbird Drive
Canary Lane Oriole Drive
Cardinal Court Oriole Drive
Carleton Crossing Nursing
Home
Colby Court entrance and exit Shop and
Save Colby Court
Catesby Lane Rosewell Road
Chandler Road Bedford Center Road
Chandler Road Ministerial
Checkerberry Lane Smith Road
Cherry Lane Dunlap Drive
Chesham Lane Hawk Drive
Chesham Lane Powder Hill Road
Chickadee Court Sparrow Lane
Chippendale Drive Dunlap Drive
Christmas Circle [Amended
11-9-2005]
Arbor Lane
Church Road Wallace Road
Cider Mill Road Eagle Drive
Cider Mill Road Joppa Hill Road East and West
Clifton Road Stowell Road
Colonial Drive Pilgrim Drive
Constitution Drive Constitution (2)
Corporate Drive Old Bedford Road
Cote Lane Donald Street
County Road Back River Road East and West
§ 262-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 262-7
1:247
Name of Street At Intersection
County Road Entrance of Town Pool
County Road Liberty Hill Road
County Road Nashua Road
Courtland Drive King Road (2)
Darby Lane Joppa Hill Road
Darby Lane Rosewell Road
Darling Street Swan Avenue (2)
Davies Street Boynton Street
Deacon Road Buttonwood Road
Deacon Road Ministerial Branch
Donald Street Old Bedford Road
Dunlap Drive Essex Road
Eagle Drive Hawk Drive
Eagle Drive Oriole Drive, east and west entrances
Eastman Avenue South River Road
Edinburgh Drive Liberty Hill Road
Edinburgh Drive Meetinghouse Road
Entrance of Caldor's Kilton Road
Entrance Peter Woodbury
School
County Road
Essex Road Cambridge Road
Exit of McKelvie School County Road
Exit Peter Woodbury School County Road
Fairlane Drive Birchwood Circle
Fairlane Drive North Amherst Road
Farmhouse Road Beals Road
Federation Road Beals Road
First Street Worthley Road
Forest Drive Meadowcrest Drive
Fox Run Joppa Hill Road
Gage Girls Road Liberty Hill Road
Gage Road Nashua Road
Galloway Lane Holbrook Road
Garrison Drive Holbrook Road
Gault Road Liberty Hill Road
Glen Road Blueberry
§ 262-7 BEDFORD CODE § 262-7
1:248
Name of Street At Intersection
Golden Drive Campbell Road
Grafton Drive Beals Road
Grafton Drive Wentworth Drive
Grant Drive North Amherst Road
Greeley Hill North Amherst Road
Greenmeadow Lane Veronica Drive
Hamilton Way Nashua Road
Hardy Road North Amherst Road
Harrod Lane Smith Road
Harvard Lane Nathan Cutler Drive
Hawk Drive Eagle Drive
Hearthside Circle Joppa Hill Road
Heather Drive Sebbins Pond
Hersey Street Plummer Road
Hersey Street Whttemore Street
Highland Farms Liberty Hill Road
Highland Farms Drive Meadowcrest Drive
Hitching Post Lane Hardy Road
Horizon Drive Smith Road (2)
Jackson Square Wallace Road East and West
Jenkins Road Beals Road (four-way)
John Goffe Drive County Road
Joppa Hill Road [Added
9-10-2014]
Cider Mill Road (four-way)
Joppa Hill Road North Amherst (four-way)
Juniper Drive Smith Road (2)
Kahliko Lane Hitching Post Lane
Keene Street Boynton Street
Lancaster Lane Pembroke Way
Ledgewood Drive Jenkins Road
Liberty Hill Road [Added
7-20-2016]
County Road
Lindahl Road Hawk Drive
Mack Street Palomino Lane East and West
Magazine Street Wallace Road
Maiden Lane Brick Mill Road
§ 262-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 262-7
1:249
Name of Street At Intersection
Mailloux Court Tirrell Road
Martha's Way Pasture Lane
Mayflower Drive Meetinghouse Road
McAfee Farm Road Bracken Circle
McAllister Road Ministerial North and South
McAllister Road Wallace Road
McIntosh Lane Campbell Road
McIntosh Lane Cider Mill Road North and South
McKelvie School Liberty Hill Road (2)
Meadow Road Liberty Hill Road
Meadow Road Wallace Road
Meadowcrest Road Back River Drive
Meetinghouse entrance St. Elizabeth Seton
Meetinghouse Road Gault Road
Meetinghouse Road Liberty Hill Road (4 way)
Meetinghouse Road Patten Road (3)
Middleton Drive Joppa Hill Road
Middleton Drive McAfee Farm Road
Ministerial Branch Ministerial
Ministerial Drive Wallace Road
Mountain Road Pulpit Road
Nashua Road [Added
7-20-2016]
County Road
Nashua Road Wallace Road
Neighborhood Court Greeley Hill
Newbury Lane McAfee Farm Road
Newcastle Lane Golden Drive
Newfane Road Hawk Drive
Newfane Road Powder Hill Road
Normand Circle Parker Lane North and South entrances
North Amherst Road [Added
7-13-2011]
Wallace Road (four-way)
Nuthatch Lane Eagle Drive
Oak Drive Glen Road (2)
Oak Drive Meetinghouse Road
Old Bedford Road Holbrook Road (3)
§ 262-7 BEDFORD CODE § 262-7
1:250
Name of Street At Intersection
Old English Road Gage Girls Road
Old English Road Liberty Hill Road
Old English Road Pheasant Run
Old English Road West Wind Drive
Old Evergreen Road Joppa Hill Road
Old Farm Road Ministerial
Old Sawmill Road (Little Pond Estates) Mailloux Court
Olde Bedford Way Old Bedford Road
Olde Lantern Road Lindahl Road
Orchard Hill Circle Meetinghouse Road
Oriole Drive Olde Lantern Road
Palomino Lane Wayside Drive
Parker Lane Joppa Hill Road
Pauline Street Boynton Street
Pembroke Way Campbell Road
Pembroke Way Catesby Lane
Perry Road Joppa Hill Road
Perry Road North Amherst Road
Pilgrim Drive Meetinghouse Road
Plummer Road Boynton Street
Plummer Road Palomino Lane (four-way)
Pond Point Drive Mountain Road
Pond Point Drive Rockbound
Powder Hill Road Campbell Road
Powder Hill Road Chesterfield Place
Pulpit Road Mountain Road
Quincy Drive Jenkins Road (2)
Ray's entrance Back River Road
Rev. Houston Drive Beals Road
Riddle Drive Ministerial Drive
Ridgewood Road South River Road
Rockbound Road Pulpit Road
Rosehill Donald Street
Rosewell Road Campbell Road
Rumford Lane McAllister Road
Rundlett Hill Hazen (four-way)
§ 262-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 262-7
1:251
Name of Street At Intersection
Rundlett Hill Old Bedford
Rundlett Hill Road Donald Street (2)
Sandy Pond Parkway Mulberry Lane
Sandy Pond Parkway Sebbins Pond
Savoie Street Donald Street
Seabee Street Mack Street (2)
Seabee Street Plummer Road (2)
Seabee Street Whittemore Street (2)
Seabee Street Woodbury Lane (2)
Sebbins Pond Road County Road
Shepard Hill Quincy Drive
Smith Road Liberty Hill Road
Somerville Drive South River Road
South Hills Drive [Added
5-9-2018]
South Hills Terrace
Sparrow Lane Campbell Road
Sparrow Lane Eagle Drive
Spartan Drive King Road
Spring Hill Wallace Road
Stafford Catesby Lane
Stage Coach Lane Wallace Road
Steeple View Lane Campbell Road
Steppingstone Road Ministerial Branch (2)
Stonehenge Road Ministerial Branch
Stonehenge Road Old Farm Road
Strawberry Hill Liberty Hill Road
Swan Avenue Donald Street
Tavistock Drive Meadowcrest Drive
Tebbetts Wallace Road
Technology Drive Entrance of Continental Pet
Technology Drive Exit of Continental Pet
Three Corners Pond Point Drive
Three Corners Pulpit Road
Tinker Road Joppa Hill Road
Tirrell Road Back River Road
Upjohn Street South River Road
§ 262-7 BEDFORD CODE § 262-7
1:252
Name of Street At Intersection
Veronica Drive Smith Road
Walmart entrance Colby Court
Wathen Road South River Road
Wayside Drive Boynton Street
Wellesley Drive Campbell Road
Wendover Way Blueberry Lane
Wendover Way Plummer Road
Weymouth Drive Hunters Road
Weymouth Drive Quincy Drive
Whitney Court Campbell Road
Whittemore Street Palomino Lane (four-way)
Whittemore Street Plummer Road
Wiggin Road Wallace Road
Winchester Lane Stowell Road
Winter Drive Nathan Cutler Drive
Wolfe Wallace Road
Woodbury Court South River Road
Woodbury Lane Boynton Street
Woodbury Lane Palomino Lane East and West
Worthley Road Rundlett Hill Road
York Road Birkdale Road
York Road Cambridge
§ 262-8. Parking on Town property. [Added 7-19-2017]
This section shall govern, regulate and control vehicular parking on the
following Town of Bedford properties:
Sportsman Field Parking, Nashua Road Student Parking Area,
LOT-1 COLOR GREEN.
(1)
11-13 Nashua Road (former DPW facility) Student Parking Area,
LOT-2 COLOR BLUE.
(2)
Town Pool and Recreation Facilities - County Road Student Parking
Area, LOT-3 COLOR YELLOW Parking Area.
(3)
(4) Town of Bedford Tennis Court Parking - County Road.
A.
Vehicular parking in the locations specified in Subsection A(1) through
(3) above is restricted to only those holding a valid Town of Bedford
High School student parking permit and when:
B.
§ 262-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 262-8
1:253
Bedford High School is in session beginning 1/2 hour before
Bedford High School classes begin and continuing thereafter until
1/2 hour after Bedford High School classes end, including any
changes in class schedule due to weather or as specified by the
Superintendent, Bedford School District;
(1)
Bedford High School is open for classes during the school year as
specified by the Superintendent, Bedford School District.
(2)
Public parking areas:
Vehicular parking at the Bedford Tennis Court, identified as
"TENNIS PARKING ONLY — ALL OTHERS TICKETED AND
TOWED" is restricted to members of the public that are actively
using a tennis court. Any vehicle parked for any length of time
in a parking spot identified as "TENNIS PARKING ONLY — ALL
OTHERS TICKETED AND TOWED" shall be subject to a Town
of Bedford parking violation as per Subsection C(3) and shall be
towed from the parking spot at the owner's expense.
(1)
Vehicular parking at the Bedford Town Pool and Recreation Facility
in spaces not designated for use as Town of Bedford High School
student parking is restricted to members of the public that are
actively using the Town Pool or Recreation Facilities; all others will
be ticketed as per Subsection C(3), and the vehicle shall be towed
at the owner's expense.
(2)
Anyone who parks at the Town Tennis Court(s) or the Town Pool
or Recreation Lot who is not actively using the Town Tennis Court
Facility or the Town Pool/Recreation Facilities at 20 County Road
shall be fined not less than $100 for the first offense and $200
for each successive offense, and the vehicle shall be towed at the
owner's expense. For the purposes of this section, the registered
owner of the vehicle in violation shall be subject to the provisions
of this section.
(3)
C.
Parking in the locations specified in Subsection A(1) through (3) is
unrestricted except as regulated in Subsection B, but no overnight
parking is permitted in the locations specified in Subsection A(1)
through (4).
Overnight parking is defined as any time 1/2 hour after official
sunset as defined by the National Weather Service until 1/2 hour
before official sunrise except:
When the Bedford High School facilities are open for an
authorized and sanctioned school or Town event, including
athletic event(s) and non-school-related private events as
approved by the Superintendent of Schools or designee;
(a)
When the recreation facilities contiguous to locations in
Subsection A(1) through (4) are in use as authorized and
(b)
(1)
D.
§ 262-8 BEDFORD CODE § 262-8
1:254
permitted by the Town of Bedford Parks and Recreation
Department;
Outdoor lighted facilities contiguous to parking locations
specified in Subsection A(1) through (4) are in use (Outdoor
lighted facilities are considered closed once lights are no
longer on.);
(c)
When the Parks and Recreation Department may allow special
activities after hours in concurrence with the Police Chief for
which parking in locations in Subsection A(1) through (4) may
be permitted as restricted and directed by the Chief of Police.
(d)
Town of Bedford High School student parking permit(s):
Requirement: Bedford High School student parking permit(s) are
required and must be displayed to park a vehicle in the locations
specified in Subsection A(1) through (3) during those date(s) and
time(s) as per Subsection B(1) and (2).
(1)
Qualification(s): In order to submit an application for a Town of
Bedford High School student parking permit, the applicant must be
a registered Bedford High School student or the parent/guardian
thereof and satisfy any/all other requirements established by the
Town Manager.
(2)
Obtaining a Town of Bedford High School student parking permit:
Town of Bedford High School student parking permits may be
obtained by qualified and approved applicants from the Town of
Bedford Finance Department.
Qualified applicants or a parent or legal guardian of a qualified
applicant must submit all required document(s) and the fee to
the Finance Department.
(a)
(3)
Permit parking plan:
Each Town of Bedford High School student parking lot and
spot number shall be assigned in a process as determined by
the Town Manager or designee.
(a)
Town of Bedford High School student parking permit(s) are
valid only for the specified lot and space for the specified
school year and are not valid in any other student parking
lot or space. Violation of this section will subject the permit
holder, operator or owner of the vehicle to a penalty as set
forth in Subsection F, and the vehicle in violation shall be
towed at the owner's expense.
(b)
Town of Bedford High School student parking permit(s) are
not transferable between students/qualified applicants and are
valid only when used by the qualified and approved permit
holder. One permit per qualified applicant only.
(c)
(4)
E.
§ 262-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 262-8
1:255
Town of Bedford High School student parking permit(s) may
be used by the qualified and approved permit holder in any
vehicle that is legally registered in the State of New Hampshire
or other state and must be clearly displayed and visible from
the front windshield of the vehicle.
(d)
Lost/stolen parking permits: Lost/stolen/misplaced Town of
Bedford High School student parking permits may be replaced
upon application by the approved permit holder or the permit
holder's parent or legal guardian to the Town of Bedford
Finance Department for a replacement permit accompanied by
the required fee.
(e)
Enforcement and violation(s):
The registered owner of any vehicle who violates any of the terms,
conditions, or requirements set forth in this section shall be subject
to a penalty of $25 for the first offense, $50 for the second or most
recent offense that occurs within one year from the first or most
recent offense and $100 for the third offense that occurred within
one year and each successive violation that occurs within one year
from the first or most recent offense except for violation(s) as per
Subsection C above.
(1)
Vehicles parked in violation of this section shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in Subsection F(1) by ticketing by the Bedford
Police Department in conformance with the penalties set forth in
Subsection F(1), and the vehicle in violation shall be towed at the
owner's expense.
(2)
Any use of any altered, unauthorized manufactured, unauthorized
duplication, stolen or counterfeit Town of Bedford High School
student parking permit shall be subject to a penalty of $200, and
any Town of Bedford High School student parking permit and/or
privileges shall be revoked for one calendar year from the time the
penalty was assessed.
(3)
This section and any/all subsections shall be enforced by any duly
sworn member of the Bedford Police Department or any municipal
police officer assigned to an authorized detail assignment by the
Bedford Police Department for any event(s) that require use of any
locations specified in Subsection A(1) through (4).
(4)
F.
G. Effective: This section will be effective upon passage.
§ 262-8 BEDFORD CODE § 262-8
1:256
Chapter 92
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 130. Zoning — See Ch. 275.
§ 262-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 262-8
1:257

ARTICLE I
Marking Lot Boundaries
[Adopted 7-20-1987]
§ 92-1. Marker requirements.
No approved lot shall have a building permit issued until all angles of the
boundaries of such lots are marked by boundary markers of granite, drill
holes in granite, or durable ledges. Offset markers may be used where
natural or historical obstructions require or during road construction. The
markers must be certified as set, as specified on the final plat, by a
registered surveyor. All markers must be visible from one another, or, in
cases of obstructions, wood stakes shall be placed every 50 feet during
construction.
§ 92-2. Waiver.
The Building Code Official or his agent shall waive this requirement if, in his
opinion, it is obvious there are no setback encroachments.
§ 92-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-2
1:259

ARTICLE II
Administration and Enforcement of Building Code
[Adopted 10-10-2007]
§ 92-3. Purpose.86
The purpose of this article is to establish a local Building Department and
associated inspection services to provide verification that all constructionrelated
services meet the minimum requirements for building safety as
allowed under RSA 675:2, 674:51 and 673:1, V. This article is adopted
for the further purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, prosperity,
convenience, or general welfare, as well as to provide efficiency and
economy in the process of development of the Town of Bedford. To further
these purposes, building permits shall be required for the new construction
of buildings and activities as outlined under the adopted Building Codes.
§ 92-4. Building Code Official.
As authorized and required under RSA 673:1, V, and RSA 674:51, III(c), the
Town of Bedford creates the position of Building Code Official. The position
qualifications shall be established by the Town of Bedford personnel policy
and final approval of the position shall be by the Town manager. The
Building Code Official shall report directly to the Bedford Fire Chief.
§ 92-5. Department policies and procedures.
The Building Code Official shall establish a written policy governing the
operation of the Building Department. This policy will cover all aspects
of the operation of the Building Department including but not limited to
application procedures, fee collections and refunds, permit-processing
guidelines, documentation requirements and other policies or guidelines as
deemed necessary for the efficient operation of the staff. The Town Council
shall approve these policies and procedures. Town of Bedford ordinances
shall supersede the Department policy. The Town Manager is authorized by
the Town Council to approve editorial changes to the Department handbook.
The handbook shall be reviewed and approved by Council no less than every
three years.
§ 92-6. Definitions.
Where terms are not specifically defined in this article, their meaning shall
be derived from adopted codes. Where the terms are not defined under any
adopted code, their meaning shall be their ordinarily accepted meanings
within the context they are used.
ACTIVELY PURSUED — That no more than 180 calendar days have passed
without inspection. The 180 days shall be based upon the permit issuance
date or the date the last field inspection was performed and approved.
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 92-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-7
1:261
§ 92-7. Appeal procedure.
§ 92-8. Permits required; fees.
Building Code Board of Appeals. As outlined in RSA 673:1, the Bedford
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act as the Building Code Board of
Appeals until such time as the legislative body creates a separate and
distinctive Building Code Board of Appeals.
A.
If an owner or builder feels aggrieved by a decision of the Building Code
Official, he or she can appeal such decision to the Bedford Building
Code Board of Appeals. Thereafter, any person aggrieved by the
decision of the Board of Appeals may appeal to the Superior Court of
Hillsborough County.
B.
Authority. Permits are required as authorized under RSA 676:11 to
676:13. Property owners or their agents are required to secure the
appropriate permits prior to the start of work.
A.
Types of permits required.
Building permits are required for activities as outlined in the
adopted residential and nonresidential Building Code.
(1)
Electrical permits are required for work as defined in RSA 319-C:2,
III. A New Hampshire licensed electrician as outlined in RSA 319-C
must perform all electrical installations unless excepted as noted
in RSA 319:C3 and property owners performing electrical
installations within their existing primary dwelling. An electrical
permit will only be issued to the license holders themselves unless
otherwise approved by the Building Department.
(2)
Plumbing permits are required for work as defined in RSA 329-A:2,
IV. A New Hampshire licensed plumber must perform all plumbing
installations unless as excepted in RSA 329-A:13. The Town of
Bedford limits the scope of work which can be done by homeowners
to minor installations (those that entail relocating or replacing
existing plumbing fixtures) within their primary dwelling (where
the individual currently resides) only. A plumbing permit will only
be issued to the license holders themselves unless otherwise
approved by the Building Department.87
(3)
Mechanical permits are required for activities as outlined in the
adopted Mechanical and Fuel Gas Codes.
(4)
Septic system permits are required for the installation of new
septic systems and for the repair of existing septic systems.
(5)
B.
Additional permits. The Town of Bedford reserves the right to require
other permits than those listed in this article upon request from the
C.
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 92-7 BEDFORD CODE § 92-8
1:262
§ 92-9. Building Codes.
Building Department to the Town Council. Should the Council approve
additional permits, they shall be noted in the Department handbook,
along with the appropriate fee schedule, and a supplement added to
this article.
Issuance of building permits.
The Building Code Official, or his designee, shall not issue building
permits under the following conditions:88
If issuance of the permit would constitute a violation of an
existing zoning ordinance or would result in violation of an
approved site plan.
(a)
If issuance of the permit would constitute a violation of a
proposed zoning ordinance change once they have been duly
noticed under the conditions as outlined in RSA 675:7.
(b)
If issuance of a building permit is in direct conflict with the
provisions of RSA 674:41, Erection of Buildings on Streets;
Appeals.
(c)
(1)
Applicants are required to allow the issuing agency adequate time,
as outlined in RSA 676:13, to review the proposed work when
reviews are required by any of the enforced/adopted codes as
referenced in § 92-9 of this article.
(2)
D.
Fees. The Building Code Official shall review and submit to the Town
Council, at their request, a report evaluating the Bedford permit fee89
schedule. This evaluation shall be a comparison of fees charged in
surrounding communities of similar size and activity. The report shall
also examine the needs of the Building Department and evaluate cost of
operating the Department as it relates to permit fees.
E.
Refunds. Refunds will be issued for nonactive permits upon receipt of a
formal request from the permit fee payee. The refunds will be reduced
at the rate of 16.6% per month (based upon issue date) for every month
the permit has been issued, minus administrative costs.
F.
The Town of Bedford as authorized under RSA 674:51-a and 674:51
shall enforce, adopt and amend the following codes to be used as
the minimum requirements for construction enforced by the Town of
Bedford to provide for the general welfare and safety:
Providing for the issuance of permits and collections of fees the
Town votes to enforce the current edition of the International
Building Code referenced in RSA 155-A, as amended by the State
(1)
A.
88.Note: Statute requires permits to be withheld in certain cases. See full text of RSA 676:12.
89.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the offices of the Bedford Building
Department.
§ 92-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-9
1:263
Building Code Review Board, for the purpose of regulating and
controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement,
addition to, and use of all structures not covered by the
International Residential Building Code with the following
amendments:
Amend the IBC section outlining architect/engineer
responsibilities during construction by adding the following
responsibilities: When the laws of the State of New Hampshire
require that construction documents be prepared by registered
architects or engineers or the plans do not meet the
prescriptive requirements of the code, the registered
architects or engineers who have prepared plans,
computations and specifications or the registered architects
or registered engineers who have been retained to perform
construction phase services shall perform the following tasks
for the portion of the work for which they are directly
responsible:
Review, for conformance to the design concept, shop
drawings, samples and other submittals, which are
submitted by the contractor in accordance with the
requirements of the construction documents.
[1]
Review and approval of the quality control procedures for
all code-required controlled materials, structural tests and
special inspections.
[2]
Be present at intervals appropriate to the stage of
construction to become generally familiar with the
progress and quality of the work and to determine, in
general, if the work is being performed in a manner
consistent with the construction documents and accepted
engineering practice standards.
[3]
The design professional shall submit to the Building
Department documentation verifying compliance with the
above requirements at regular intervals, which shall be
noted at the time of permit issuance.
[4]
The tasks listed in this section are in addition to
requirements for structural observation or other duties
specified in Section 1704, Section 1709 or elsewhere in
the adopted International Building Code.
[5]
(a)
Add a new section regarding architect/engineer qualifications:
When the requirements of codes dictate there shall be design
professionals preparing plans, those professionals shall have
their license based upon the discipline required for the plans
being prepared. Any design professional wishing to stamp
plans for a discipline other than the one his or her license
(b)
§ 92-9 BEDFORD CODE § 92-9
1:264
is based upon may be required to submit additional
documentation validating his or her competency in the
additional area of design.
Projects controlled by the International Building Code shall comply
with the Architectural Barrier-Free Design Code for New
Hampshire (ABFDC-NH) and the Americans With Disability Act
Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG), as adopted by the ABFDC-NH,
where required by state law and by code section. The design
professional of record shall be required to verify compliance.
(2)
Adopt the current edition of the International Mechanical code as
referenced in RSA 155-A as amended by the State Building Code
Review Board.
(3)
Adopt the current edition of the International Plumbing Code as
referenced in RSA 155-A, as amended by the State Building Code
Review Board with the following amendments:
Add Section governing maximum hot water temperature: Hot
water temperatures supplying fixtures for domestic or
personal hygiene use shall be limited to a maximum of 130° F.
(55° C.). A tempering device conforming to ASSE 1017 shall
be installed to control water temperature. This provision shall
not supersede the requirements for protective shower valves
as noted in the code or the hot water temperature limitations
required for nonresidential occupancies.
Enforce the current energy requirements of the adopted
and amended state residential and nonresidential Building
Codes. Verification of these requirements must be through
the submission of ComCheck software for nonresidential
projects and through ResCheck software or PUC-approved
energy compliance packages.
[1]
Providing for the issuance of permits and collection of
fees the Town votes to enforce the current edition of the
International Residential Building Code referenced in RSA
155-A, as amended by the State Building Code Review
Board.
[2]
(a)
Insert the following values for climatic and geographic design
criteria:
Wind speed: 90 mph; ground snow load: 70 pounds per
square foot; weathering: severe; frost line depth: 48
inches; termite probability: slight to moderate; winter
design temperature: 0°; flood hazard: Flood Insurance
Rate Maps; seismic design class: C.
[1]
Modify the section controlling stairway light activation
to read: Where lighting outlets are installed in interior
[2]
(b)
(4)
§ 92-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-9
1:265
stairways, there shall be a wall switch at each floor level
to control the lighting outlet where the stairway has six
or more risers. The control for activation of the required
interior stairway lighting shall be accessible at the top and
bottom of each stairway without traversing any step of
the stairway. The required control shall be illuminated in
the off position. The illumination of exterior stairs shall be
controlled from inside the dwelling.
Modify garage separation specifications. Substitute 5/8
inches Type X gypsum board for all references to 1/2
gypsum board.
[3]
Adopt the appendices for each of the codes referenced in RSA
155:a. Where any appendix conflicts with any local ordinance or
other state code, the more stringent requirement shall take
precedence unless state statute or local ordinance prohibits the use
of the specific requirements.
(5)
Providing for the establishment of the minimum regulations
governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings
and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities
and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and
use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for
human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures;
by adopting the current edition of the International Property
Maintenance Code. This Property Maintenance Code shall not
apply to those single residential dwelling units that are owneroccupied.
(6)
The enforcement of the above referenced State of New Hampshire
adopted codes (with state and local amendments) and the International
Property Maintenance Code does not preempt the enforcement of the
regulations adopted by the State of New Hampshire regulatory
agencies responsible for those professions requiring licensing under
state law, nor does it preempt the enforcement of current regulations
recognized by the New Hampshire Fire Marshal's office. In those
situations where code requirements are different the Town of Bedford
reserves the right to enforce those requirements that are more
stringent.
B.
Town enforcement of updated code editions shall be the effective date
of adoption by the state. The conditions outlined in Subsection D shall
govern those permits to be controlled by the updated codes. The
Building Department shall post notices as determined by the Town
Council to warn of impending code changes warranted by this section.
C.
Code changes will become effective for those complete permit
applications received the first day after the effective date referenced
D.
§ 92-9 BEDFORD CODE § 92-9
1:266
§ 92-10. Certificate of occupancy.
§ 92-11. Fines.
§ 92-12. Appeals.
in Subsection C. Approved permits not having been actively pursued
within 180 days of issuance of the permit.
In addition to a building permit, a certificate of occupancy shall be
required prior to the use of any new or modified area or structure for
which a permit is required.
A.
No person shall use or permit the use of any building, structure, or
premises or part thereof hereafter erected, relocated, altered, repaired,
converted or extended until a certificate of occupancy is issued by the
Building Code Official or his designee.
B.
The certificate of occupancy is required to insure compliance with the
approved site plans by the Planning Board and the requirements of the
Town of Bedford zoning and subdivision regulations and Building Code.
C.
Work in progress. The penalty for starting work prior to issuance of
the required permit shall be a minimum surcharge of $100 or twice the
calculated permit fees for the project, whichever is greater.
A.
Completed work.
The penalty for completing work and using said building, space,
structure or premises without benefit of a permit and a certificate
of occupancy shall be no less than $150 per year for each year
it is determined said violation exists. The most recent Town-wide
property evaluation will be used to determine what improvements
have been made to the property. In addition to the fine, the owner
and the owner's heirs, successors and assigns agree to waive any
claim against the Town of Bedford and to indemnify the Town
of Bedford with respect to any claim arising out of the use or
occupancy of that portion(s) of the property for which no permits
were secured. Such indemnification shall be recorded at the
Registry of Deeds for the property in question.90
(1)
In lieu of fines the property owner may elect to secure the required
permits from the Building Department and be subject to all
requirements associated with the building permit process.
(2)
B.
Work in progress. Appeals for this fine shall be brought to the Building
Code Board of Appeals.
A.
90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 92-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-12
1:267
Completed work. Appeals for this fine shall be brought to the Town
Manager. Thereafter, any person aggrieved by the decision of the Town
Manager may appeal to the Bedford Town Council.
B.
§ 92-12 BEDFORD CODE § 92-12
1:268
Chapter 153
HISTORIC DISTRICT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic District — See Ch. 275, Art. VII.
§ 153-1. Adoption of Historic District.91
An Historic District is adopted under the direction of the Historic District
Commission and the boundaries thereof are established pursuant to RSA
31:89 as follows:
Wallace Road North to Church Road; that area enclosed by an outer
boundary beginning at a point in the center line of Wallace Road 400
feet north of the center line of Church Road;
A.
Easterly to Church Road and parallel to Ministerial Road; thence in
an easterly direction along a line 400 feet north of and parallel to the
center line of Church Road to the intersection with a line 400 feet west
of and parallel to Ministerial Road;
B.
Easterly to intersection and parallel to Chandler Road; thence in a
northerly direction along said line to the intersection with a line 400
feet north of and parallel to Chandler Road;
C.
Southerly to intersection and parallel to Bedford Center Road; thence
in an easterly direction along said line to the intersection with a line
400 feet northwest of and parallel to Bedford Center Road;
D.
Northerly to intersection and parallel to Liberty Hill Road; thence in
a northeasterly direction along said line to the intersection with a line
400 feet easterly of and parallel to Liberty Hill Road;
E.
Southerly to intersection and parallel to Meetinghouse Road; thence in
a southerly direction along said line to the intersection with a line 400
feet southerly of and parallel to Meetinghouse Road;
F.
Westerly to intersection and parallel to Route 101; thence in a westerly
direction along said line to the intersection with a line 400 feet
southeasterly of and parallel to Route 101;
G.
Southwesterly to intersection to power line west of Wallace Road;
thence in a southwesterly direction along said line to the intersection
with the easterly edge of the power line right-of-way to the west of
Wallace Road;
H.
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 92-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1
1:269
Chapter 275
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning and zoning — See Ch. 46.
Building construction — See Ch. 92.
Historic District — See Ch. 153.
Live entertainment and minimum
attire — See Ch. 170.
Signs and banners — See Ch. 216.
Historic District Commission
regulations — See Ch. 285.
Northerly along power line to intersection and parallel to Church Road;
thence in a northerly direction along said right-of-way to the
intersection with a line 400 feet of and parallel to Church Road; then in
an easterly direction to the point of beginning.
I.
§ 153-1 BEDFORD CODE § 153-1
1:270
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 275-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of
the Town of Bedford, New Hampshire."
§ 275-2. Authority.
This chapter is enacted by the Town of Bedford pursuant to the authority
granted by the New Hampshire Legislature as stipulated in Section 674:16
of the Revised Statutes Annotated, 1983, as amended.
§ 275-3. Purpose.92
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety, and general
welfare of the inhabitants of Bedford by: lessening congestion in streets;
securing safety from fires, panic, and other dangers; providing adequate
light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land and buildings; avoiding
undue concentration of population; facilitating the adequate provision of
transportation, solid waste facilities, water, sewerage, schools, and parks,
child day care; assuring the proper use of natural resources and other
public requirements; encouraging the preservation of agricultural lands
and buildings; and encouraging the installation and use of solar, wind, or
other renewable energy systems and protecting access to energy sources
by the regulation of orientation of streets, lots, and buildings; establishing
maximum building height, minimum setback requirements, and limitations
on type, height, and placement of vegetation; and encouraging the use of
solar skyspace easements under RSA 477. [RSA 674:17]
§ 275-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to:
§ 275-5. Interpretation.
In interpreting any provision of this chapter, it shall be held as the minimum
requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, and
All buildings or structures erected, reconstructed, altered, enlarged,
or relocated after the effective date of this chapter or applicable
amendment;
A.
The use of any building, structure, or land which is different from its
use prior to the effective date of this chapter or applicable amendment;
and
B.
Any land which has been subdivided after the effective date of this
chapter or applicable amendment.
C.
92.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 275-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-5
1:271
general welfare of the Town. Whenever any provision of this chapter is at
variance with any other provision of the chapter, or with the requirements
of any other lawfully adopted rule or regulation, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the highest standard, shall govern. [RSA 676:14]
§ 275-6. Definitions.
Except where specifically defined herein, the words used in this chapter
shall carry their customary meaning. The following words are specifically
defined:
ABANDONMENT — The cessation of a use as indicated by the visible or
otherwise apparent intention of an owner to discontinue a use of a structure
or lot; the removal of the characteristic equipment or furnishings used in
the performance of the use, without its replacement by similar equipment
or furnishings; or the replacement of a use or structure by a different use or
structure.
ABUTTER — Any person whose property is located in New Hampshire
and adjoins or is directly across the street or stream from the land under
consideration. For purposes of receiving testimony only, and not for
purposes of notification, the term "abutter" shall include any person who
is able to demonstrate that their land will be directly affected by the
proposal under consideration. For purposes of receipt of notification by a
municipality of a local land use board hearing, in the case of an abutting
property being under a condominium or other collective form of ownership,
the term abutter means the officers of the collective or association, as
defined in RSA 356-B:3, XXIII.
ACCESSORY BUILDING (STRUCTURE) — A building or structure, detached
from but located on the same lot and within the same zoning district,
which is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building.
Accessory buildings shall not contain bedrooms.[Amended 3-14-2006;
3-14-2017]
ACCESSORY USE — A use which exists on the same lot and within the same
zoning district and which is customarily incident and subordinate to the
principal use.[Amended 3-14-2017]
ACRE — A measure of land containing 43,560 square feet.
ACTIVE AND SUBSTANTIAL DEVELOPMENT — The construction of
permanent physical appurtenances to the site, such as, but not limited to,
footings, streets, and water- and sewer lines.
ALTERATION — Any change or rearrangement in structural parts or exit
facilities; or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by
increasing in height.
ALTERNATIVE TREATMENT CENTER — An "alternative treatment center"
as defined in RSA 126-X:1, a not-for-profit entity registered under RSA
126-X:7 that acquires, possesses, cultivates, manufactures, delivers,
transfers, transports, sells, supplies, and dispenses cannabis, and related
§ 275-5 BEDFORD CODE § 275-6
1:272
supplies and educational materials, to qualifying patients and alternative
treatment centers.[Added 3-8-2016]
APPLICANT — An owner or his/her designated representative who is
submitting an application for development.
BASEMENT — A portion of a building, at least partly below grade, which
has more than 1/2 of its height, measured from finished floor to finished
ceiling, above the average finished grade of the ground adjoining the
building. A basement is not considered a story unless its ceiling is six feet
or more above the finished grade.
BERM — A mound of soil, either natural or man-made, used to obstruct
views.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Zoning Board of Adjustment of the Town
of Bedford.
BOARDING- , LODGING, OR ROOMING HOUSE — Any dwelling unit which
is occupied by more than two adult persons not related by blood or marriage
and which provides sleeping accommodations on either a transient or
permanent basis, with or without meals, but without separate cooking
facilities. This definition shall not apply to group quarters for special-needs
groups.
BUFFER — An area within a property or site, generally adjacent to and
parallel with the property line, either consisting of natural existing
vegetation or created by the use of trees, shrubs, fences, and/or berms,
designed to limit continuously the view of and/or sound from the site to
adjacent sites or properties.
BUILDING — Any combination of materials, whether portable or affixed to
the ground, used for the sheltering, housing, or the enclosure of persons,
animals, chattels, property, or materials of any kind. Such "building" shall
include open porches, open breezeways, and any other roofed areas.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The area of a lot or site that is covered by
buildings.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the average existing
ground level adjoining the building to the average height of the highest roof
surface.[Amended 3-12-1996]
ALTERNATIVE TREATMENT CENTER (CULTIVATION LOCATION) —
A cultivation location as defined in RSA 126-X:I, IV; namely, a locked
and enclosed site under the control of an alternative treatment center
where cannabis is cultivated, secured with one or more locks or other
security devices in accordance with RSA 126-X and the Department of
Health and Human Services administrative rules.
A.
ALTERNATIVE TREATMENT CENTER (NON-CULTIVATION
LOCATION) — An alternative treatment center operated in accordance
with RSA 126-X and the Department of Health and Human Services
administrative rules that has a separate location for the cultivation of
cannabis.
B.
§ 275-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-6
1:273
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is located.
BUSINESS CENTER DEVELOPMENT — A tract of land that has been
planned, developed, and operated as an integrated facility for a number
of separate office buildings and supporting ancillary uses with special
attention given to circulation, parking, utility needs, aesthetics, and
compatibility.
CAPITAL FACILITIES FEE — A fee or assessment imposed upon
development, including subdivisions, building construction, or other land
use change, in order to help meet the demands occasioned by that
development for the construction or improvement of public capital facilities
owned or operated by the Town of Bedford.[Added 3-9-1993]
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY (CO) — A statement signed by the Building
Code Official permitting occupancy and use of a building.
CERTIFIED SOIL SCIENTIST — A person who, by reason of special
knowledge of pedological principles acquired by professional education and
practical experience as specified by RSA 310-A:84, is qualified to practice
soil science, and who has been duly certified by the Board of Natural
Scientists.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION FACILITY/HEALTH CLUB — A health and/
or recreation facility operated as a business and open to the public for
a fee. It shall include health and fitness clubs, and specialty fitness uses,
such as yoga studios or CrossFit® facilities. It shall also include places of
amusement, such as bowling alleys, miniature golf courses, and similar
types of establishments.[Amended 3-13-2018]
COMMERCIAL USE — Any use involving in part or in whole the sale of
merchandise, materials or services, but not including home occupations as
defined in this section.[Amended 3-11-2008]
COMMON OPEN SPACE — That land designated in a cluster development
which is uncovered and of sufficient size and good quality, open,
unenclosed, natural, unpaved, and easily accessible which is specifically
set aside for common use and enjoyment, and restricted only for such
recreational and conservation uses as parks, playgrounds, swimming, golf
courses, and conservation areas. While the term "common land" may be
either singular or plural, the intention and emphasis is on quality and
suitability rather than numbers of parcels.
CONDOMINIUM — A building, or group of buildings, in which units are
owned individually, and the structure, common areas, and facilities are
owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis. It is a legal form
of ownership of real estate and not a specific building style.
DAY-CARE CENTER — A private establishment enrolling four or more
children under five years of age and where tuition, fees, or other forms of
compensation for the care of the children is charged, and which is licensed
or approved to operate as a day-care center by the State of New Hampshire.
§ 275-6 BEDFORD CODE § 275-6
1:274
DWELLING, ACCESSORY ATTACHED APARTMENT — A residential living
unit that is within or attached to a single-family dwelling, and that provides
independent living facilities for one or more persons, including provisions
for sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel of land
as the principal dwelling unit it accompanies, consisting of not more than
1,000 square feet.[Added 3-11-1997; amended 3-9-2010; 3-14-2017]
DWELLING, DUPLEX — A building that contains two separate dwelling
units.[Added 3-12-1996]
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-UNIT — A building containing three or more
dwelling units.[Added 3-12-1996]
DWELLING, SINGLE ATTACHED — A building containing one dwelling unit
which is attached to one or more additional single-dwelling buildings by a
common vertical wall, such as with townhouses.[Added 3-12-1996]
DWELLING, SINGLE DETACHED — A building containing one dwelling unit
which is not attached to any other dwelling unit.[Added 3-12-1996]
ELDERLY HOUSING — See definition of "elderly housing" in
§ 275-21B(2).[Amended 3-11-2003; 3-14-2017]
EVENT/CONFERENCE CENTER — A facility, located in a building, which is
rented, leased or otherwise made available to any person or group for the
purpose of hosting public or private events of a social, civic, or business
nature, often with accommodations for food service.[Added 3-13-2018]
EXCAVATION — A land area which is used, or has been used, for the
commercial taking of earth materials, such as sand, gravel, rock, soil, or
construction aggregate produced by quarrying, crushing, or other mining
activity.
FARM — A parcel of land used for agricultural activities.
FEE PAYER — A person applying for Planning Board approval of a
subdivision or site plan which would create new development.[Added
3-9-1993]
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the horizontal area of several floors of
a building and its accessory buildings on the same lot, measured from the
exterior faces of the walls. It does not include cellars, unenclosed porches,
or attics not used for human occupancy or for commercial and/or industrial
use.
FLOOR AREA, NET — The total of all floor areas of a building, excluding
stairwells, equipment rooms, storage areas, interior vehicular parking, and
all floors below the first or ground floor, except when used or intended to be
used for human habitation.
FRONTAGE —
The distance along the lot line dividing a lot from either:
A public highway, excepting limited access highways as defined by
RSA 230:44 and Class VI highways; or
(1)
A.
§ 275-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-6
1:275
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — A retail place of business engaged in
supplying goods and services essential to the normal operation of
automobiles, such as dispensing of automotive fuel and motor oil, vehicle
washing and lubrication services, rental of trailers or equipment, and sales
of merchandise not accessory to the motor vehicle. It shall not include body
or fender work, painting, or major automobile repairs.
GENERAL SERVICE OR REPAIR ESTABLISHMENT — A commercial
establishment, the primary concern of which is the rendering of service
and repair activities on equipment and appliances rather than the sale of
goods. Such establishments include but are not limited to watch, clock,
radio, television, home appliances, and bicycle repair.
HIGH-INTENSITY SOIL SURVEY (HISS) — A soil map prepared using the
methods prescribed by the Society of Soil Scientists of Northern New
England, in the publication "High Intensity Soil Maps for New Hampshire,
January 1987," as amended.
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation conducted entirely within the
dwelling unit or principal building, including any garage or barn that is
physically attached to the dwelling by at least one common wall or attached
by a fully enclosed breezeway that does not exceed 20 feet in length,
customarily incidental and secondary to the use of the structure for
dwelling purposes and which does not adversely affect or undermine the
residential character of the neighborhood. Examples of home occupations
include but are not limited to seamstress, hairdresser, lawyer, tutor,
musician, photographer, antique dealer, architect, dentist, or
engineer.[Amended 3-8-2005]
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — A private nonprofit corporation,
association, or other nonprofit legal entity under the laws of the State of
New Hampshire established by the developer to provide for the ownership,
care, and maintenance of common open space lands and site improvements.
HOTEL — A building where lodging is offered to transient guests for
compensation and in which there are more than five sleeping rooms which
contain no cooking facilities.
INFORMATION PROCESSING OPERATIONS — A building in which data
and information is stored electronically and may be combined, broken
down, or aggregated for transmittal or storage purposes.
JUNKYARD — Any business and any place of storage or deposit, whether
in connection with another business or not, which has stored or deposited
two or more unregistered motor vehicles which are no longer intended
or in condition for legal use on the public highways, wrecked, scrapped,
ruined, or dismantled motor vehicles, motor vehicle parts, old iron, metal,
glass, cordage, paper, batteries, rags, brass, copper, rope, rubber, debris,
(2) A road shown on an approved and recorded subdivision plan.
"Frontage" along culs-de-sac shall be a line parallel to the front lot line,
at the appropriate front yard building setback depth from the front lot
line, between the points of intersection with the side lot lines.
B.
§ 275-6 BEDFORD CODE § 275-6
1:276
waste, tires, old metals, bottles, cotton or woolen mill waste, unfinished
cloth, other waste, or discarded or secondhand material. [RSA 236:91 and
236:112]
KENNEL — An establishment licensed to operate a facility housing dogs,
cats or other household pets and or where grooming, breeding, boarding,
training, or selling of animals is conducted as a business.[Added
3-11-2008]
KITCHEN — An area that provides all of the following: a refrigerator of
any size or dimension; a surface for food preparation; a sink with piped
water; and a dedicated space or location for a device to cook foodstuffs,
not including plug-in countertop appliances such as microwave ovens or
toasters.[Added 3-8-2005]
LOT — A parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or
as otherwise permitted by law, which is occupied by, or designed to be
occupied by, one principal building (except as otherwise specified herein)
and its accessory buildings or uses customarily incident to it, together with
such open spaces and yards as are required by this chapter.
LOT COVERAGE — That portion of the lot that is covered by impervious
surfaces as defined in the Nonresidential Site Plan Review Regulations.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way
from which legal access to the lot may be obtained.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the front
lot line; or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, a
line 10 feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum
distance from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than the front or rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which existed as shown or described on a plat
or deed in the records of the Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds on or
before the effective date of the first Zoning Ordinance adopted by the Town
on December 19, 1953.
LOT SIZE, MINIMUM — The smallest lot area established by the Zoning
Ordinance on which a principal use or structure may be located in a
particular zoning district.
LOUNGE — A portion of a restaurant intended primarily for consumption of
beverages.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING — Any structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width
and 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 square
feet or more, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected
to required utilities, which include plumbing, heating, and electrical heating
systems contained therein. Manufactured housing as defined herein shall
not include pre-site-built housing.
§ 275-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-6
1:277
MEMBERSHIP CLUB — A group of people organized for a common purpose
to pursue common goals, interests, or activities and usually characterized
by certain membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues, regular
meetings, and/or a constitution and bylaws.
MINI WAREHOUSING/SELF-STORAGE FACILITY — A building or group
of buildings, with controlled access, which contains individual,
compartmentalized stalls or lockers for the storage of personal property,
goods, or wares.[Added 3-13-2018]
MOTEL — An establishment providing transient accommodations
containing five or more rooms, the majority of which have direct access to
the outside without the necessity of passing through the main lobby of the
building.
NEW DEVELOPMENT — An activity which results in:
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimensions, or location of
which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of the
Zoning Ordinance, but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or
amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR BUILDING — A structure or building
the size, dimensions, or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption,
revision, or amendment to the Zoning Ordinance, but which fails by reason
of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present
requirements of the zoning district.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to
the adoption, revision, or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance, but which
fails, by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment, to conform to the
present requirements of the zoning district.
OFFICE — A portion of a building wherein services are performed involving
predominantly administrative, professional, or clerical operations.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — A commercial establishment,
the primary concern of which is the rendering of a service to persons or
individuals, rather than the sale of products. Such establishments include
but are not limited to barber- and beauty shops, shoe repair, dry-cleaning
and laundry services (pickup and delivery only), and tailoring or
dressmaking.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign attached to and projecting from the wall of a
building with the face of the sign at an interior angle of more than 45° to the
building wall to which it is attached. Projecting signs may have a maximum
The creation of a new dwelling unit (except for the equal replacement
of existing units);
A.
B. A net increase in the gross floor area of any nonresidential building; or
The conversion of a legally existing use to another permitted use if such
change or use would create a net increase in the demand for public
capital facilities, as defined by this chapter.
C.
§ 275-6 BEDFORD CODE § 275-6
1:278
area of eight square feet. The sign area of a projecting sign shall not include
the area of supporting brackets with no text, images or graphics. Projecting
signs must maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet from the ground
to the bottom of the sign and have a maximum height of 15 feet from the
ground to the top of the sign. Signs may not project more than five feet
from a wall surface. Projecting signs may not be internally illuminated. A
projecting sign should align with some horizontal element of the building
facade.[Added 3-13-2012]
PUBLIC CAPITAL FACILITIES — Facilities and equipment owned,
maintained, or operated by the Town of Bedford.[Added 3-9-1993]
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT OPERATIONS — A building or portion
of a building in which are located facilities for scientific research,
investigation, testing, or experimentation, but not facilities for
manufacturing or sales of products except as otherwise permitted by this
chapter.
RESTAURANT — An establishment whose principal business is serving food
and which does not include any of the following operations:
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — An establishment whose principal business
is the sale of foods, frozen desserts, or beverages in ready-to-consume
individual servings, for consumption either within the restaurant building
or for carry-out, and where either:
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land that is generally used for the location of a
street, walkway, utility line, or other accessway, that is separate and distinct
from the lots and parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included
within the dimensions or areas of such other lots or parcels.
An establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and/
or beverages in previously prepared, prepackaged, ready-to-consume
individual servings; or
A.
An establishment that includes a drive-up or drive-through facility or
curb service; or
B.
An establishment where there are fewer than 15 customer seats per
1,000 square feet of gross floor area in the establishment; or
C.
An establishment that does not provide waiter/waitress service to the
customer seating (exclusive of salad bars).
D.
Foods, frozen desserts, or beverages are usually served in paper,
plastic, or other disposable containers;
A.
Customers are not served their food, frozen desserts, or beverages by a
restaurant employee at the same table or counter where the items are
consumed; or
B.
The establishment includes a drive-up or drive-through service facility
or offers curb service.
C.
§ 275-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-6
1:279
SETBACK, MINIMUM STRUCTURE — A line parallel to the front, side,
and/or rear lot line and set back from said lot line a sufficient distance as
specified in this chapter. The yard setback measurements establish the area
in which all structures must be erected or placed. No part of a building or
structure shall extend across the minimum yards specified in Table 1, Table
of Dimensional Regulations,93 except "permissible projections" specified in
the Building Code adopted by the Town Council and referenced in § 275-85,
Building permit procedure, of this chapter. Such projections, including roof
eaves, steps, window sills, and similar architectural features, rain leaders,
chimneys, fire escapes and other required elements of a means of egress
shall be allowed to project into the required yards to the distance specified
in the Building Code.94[Amended 3-14-2000]
SHORT-TERM RENTAL HOUSING — The rental of any residential dwelling
unit, or portion thereof, for residential occupancy of less than 30
consecutive days.[Added 3-13-2018]
SIGN — Any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, situated
outdoors or indoors within 18 inches of a window pane and visible from the
exterior of the building, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct,
or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business,
product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters,
figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected
images.[Amended 3-12-2013]
SIGN AREA — The entire face, including the surface and any molding,
framing, and projections, but not including the base, wall or column
supports. Individual letters and logos mounted on a building without any
distinguishing border, panel or background shall be measured by the area
of the smallest rectangle enclosing all of the words, symbols and logos. If
the symbol or logo is irregularly shaped or taller than the text, the sign area
shall be the area of the smallest rectangle enclosing the text plus the area of
the smallest rectangle enclosing the logo or symbol.[Amended 3-8-2016]
STREET — A thoroughfare used, or intended to be used, for passage or
travel by motor vehicles.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials for occupancy or use, such as a
building, bridge, trestle, tower, framework, an above ground tank or group
of tanks exceeding 500 gallons, tunnel, tent, stadium, platform, shelter,
pier, wharf, bin, sign, fences and retaining walls over six feet in height,
swimming pools, sports courts with fences over six feet in height, or the
like.[Amended 3-11-2008; 3-13-2012; 3-10-2015]
TRAILER — A portable structure without permanent foundation, which can
be towed, hauled, or driven and primarily designed as temporary living
accommodation for recreational, camping, and travel use, or a temporary
working accommodation for persons engaged in adjoining construction. The
words "trailer," "travel trailer" and "recreational vehicle (RV)" shall have the
same meaning for purposes of this section.[Amended 3-14-2006]
93.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
94.Editor's Note: See Ch. 92, Building Construction.
§ 275-6 BEDFORD CODE § 275-6
1:280
TRUCK TERMINAL — Land and buildings used as a relay station for the
transfer of a load from one vehicle to another or one party to another. The
terminal cannot be used for permanent or long-term accessory storage for
principal land uses at other locations. The terminal facility may include
storage areas for trucks and buildings or areas for the repair of trucks
associated with the terminal.
WAREHOUSE — A building used primarily for the storage of goods and
materials.
WELL — A structure or device designed and installed to provide potable
water supply.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES — As defined in
§ 275-38.[Amended 3-14-2000; 7-13-2011]
WORKFORCE HOUSING — Any housing unit that is affordable to
households based on the following standards: [Added 3-10-2009]
YARD, FRONT — An open unoccupied space within and extending the full
width of the lot, between the street property line and the closest part of
a structure nearest to such street line. In the case of a corner lot which
has frontage on two streets, the yard areas abutting both streets shall be
considered front yards for setback purposes.
YARD, REAR — An open unoccupied space within and extending the full
width of the lot, between the rear lot line and the closest part of the
structure nearest to such lot line.
YARD, SIDE — An open unoccupied space within the lot between the side
lot line, not a street line, and the parts of the structure nearest to such lot
line.
ZERO LOT LINE HOUSING — The location of a building on a lot in such a
manner that one or more of the building's sides rest directly on a lot line. No
building or structure projections, including roof eaves, bay windows, rain
leaders, or chimneys shall project across the lot line.[Added 3-14-2000]
"Workforce rental housing" is defined as a housing unit that has a
monthly rent not exceeding 30% of the gross income of a household
earning no more than 60% of the median income for a three-person
household for the Manchester, New Hampshire, Fair Market Rent Area
as published annually by the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development;
A.
"Workforce ownership housing" is defined as housing that can be
purchased at a price, including the combination of mortgage loan debt
service, property taxes and insurance, that does not exceed 30% of
the gross income of a household earning no more than 100% of the
median income for a four-person household for the Manchester, New
Hampshire, Fair Market Rent Area as published annually by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
B.
§ 275-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-6
1:281

ARTICLE II
Establishment of Districts
§ 275-7. District names. [Amended 3-9-1993; 3-13-2012; 3-14-2017;
3-12-2019]
For the purposes of this chapter, the Town of Bedford is hereby divided into
the following districts:
Zoning District District Description
Residential and
Agricultural
R&A To provide areas for agricultural uses and
for single-family residential
neighborhoods in conventional or cluster
residential developments at a density of
1 1/2 acres per dwelling unit.
Institutional uses are also permitted.
Properties are most likely served by onsite
well and septic systems, but there
are areas with access to public water and
sewer. The R&A provides for the lowest
density of development in Bedford, to
preserve the Town's rural character.
General Residential GR To provide areas for single-family
residential neighborhoods, in
conventional or cluster residential
developments at a density of 1/2 acre to
1 1/2 acres per dwelling unit, depending
on access to public water and sewer.
Institutional uses are also permitted. The
GR includes neighborhoods in Bedford
which have historically been more
densely settled.
Apartment
Residential
AR To provide areas for multifamily
residential development and duplexes.
Minimum lot size is 40,000 square feet
plus 4,000 square feet per dwelling unit,
with up to 12 units per building.
Properties are most likely served by
public water and sewer. Some
institutional uses, such as schools, parks
and day cares are permitted.
Civic and Institutional CI To provide areas for recreational, civic,
and community uses, such as golf
courses, cemeteries, religious institutions
and schools.
§ 275-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-7
1:283
Zoning District District Description
Neighborhood
Commercial
NC To provide areas for small retail, office
and personal service establishments that
are intended to serve the needs of the
surrounding neighborhood.
Commercial CO To provide areas for retail, office, medical
office, personal service establishments
and related commercial uses primarily
serving local needs.
Commercial 2 CO-2 To provide areas for areas for retail,
office, medical office, personal service
establishments and related commercial
uses primarily serving local needs. The
size of building floor areas are not
restricted in the CO-2.
Highway Commercial HC To provide areas for a wide range of
commercial uses, including those that are
convenient to the traveling public, such
as gasoline service stations and
automotive repair.
Office OF To provide areas for professional office,
medical office, financial institutions and
day cares.
Service and Industrial SI To provide areas for industrial uses,
including manufacturing, research and
development centers, and distribution
and warehousing facilities. Permitted
residential uses include elderly and
workforce housing developments.
Performance Zone PZ To provide areas for a variety of uses
including mixed use, retail, workforce
housing, office, medical office, research
and development and industrial uses
serving both regional and local needs.
The PZ provides for flexibility in land use
development in exchange for meeting
certain site layout, landscaping, parking
and environmental design standards.
Residential uses are not permitted except
by approval of a waiver by the Planning
Board. This is an innovation land use
control ordinance where the Planning
Board serves as the land development
review board for all zoning and planning
matters with the exception of
encroachments into the wetland setback.
§ 275-7 BEDFORD CODE § 275-7
1:284
Zoning District District Description
Overlay Districts
Historic District
(overlay)
HD To preserve, protect, and enhance the
historic and aesthetic character of
Bedford's Town center and surrounding
residential areas.
Wetland Conservation
District (overlay)
WCD To preserve the environmental quality of
wetlands, protect fish and wildlife
habitats, maintain ecological balances,
and safeguard drinking water supplies.
Floodplain
Development District
(overlay)
FDD To preserve public safety and minimize
damage to property from flood events by
requiring additional safeguards for
structures and land uses located within
flood hazard areas as determined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
River Corridor Smart
Growth District
(overlay)
RC To provide areas for higher density
commercial development in an attractive
walkable and livable environment.
Residential uses are permitted together
with commercial uses in a mixed-use
development. (The RC Overlay District is
not in effect until the Planning Board
adopts Design Review Guidelines.)
§ 275-8. Location of districts.
The location of said districts is delineated on the map entitled "Zoning Map,
Town of Bedford," as amended, which shall hereinafter be referred to as the
"Zoning Map" and shall be made part of this chapter. [RSA 674:20]
§ 275-9. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where any uncertainty exists with respect to the boundary of any district as
shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
Boundaries indicated as a street, utility line, and watercourse or other
water body shall be construed to be the center line thereof.
A.
Boundaries indicated as following approximately parallel to a street,
utility line, and watercourse or other water body shall be construed to
be parallel to the nearest line thereof, and the number placed on the
Zoning Map between the boundary and such line shall be the distance
in feet between them as measured at a right angle from such line.
B.
Where a boundary apparently follows a property line, it shall be
interpreted as such. Such property line shall be interpreted as one
existing at the time of enactment of this chapter.
C.
§ 275-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-9
1:285
Where a boundary is indicated as intersecting the center line of a
street, utility line, and watercourse or other water body, it shall be
construed to intersect at right angles to said center line or, in the case
of a curved center line, at right angles to the tangent of the curve at the
point of intersection.
D.
In the case of uncertainty of the location of a district boundary, the
Zoning Administrator shall determine the exact location of said
boundary. An aggrieved party may appeal this decision to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
E.
§ 275-9 BEDFORD CODE § 275-9
1:286
ARTICLE III
Use and Dimensional Regulations
§ 275-10. General provisions.
Except as herein provided, no building or land shall be used except for the
purposes permitted in the district as described in this article. A permit for
the construction, alteration, enlargement, moving, demolition, or use of a
building or structure shall not be issued by the Building Code Official unless
it complies with the provisions of this article and/or has been granted a
variance or special exception by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 275-11. Junkyards.
No junkyard or place for the storage of discarded machinery, vehicles, or
other scrap materials shall be maintained in any district.
§ 275-12. Fires or other ruins.
No owner or occupant of land in any district shall permit a fire or other
ruins to be left, but shall remove the same within one year.
§ 275-13. Prohibited uses.
Any persistent uses that may be obnoxious or injurious by reason of the
production or emission of odor, dust, smoke, refuse matter, fumes, noise,
vibration, or similar conditions or that are dangerous to the comfort, peace,
enjoyment, health, or safety of the community are prohibited.
§ 275-14. Signage.95
No sign shall be constructed in any district unless it is in compliance with
§ 275-66, Minimum landscape requirements for signage, and Article IX of
this chapter.
§ 275-15. Parking.96
All development shall comply with the parking requirements specified in
the Bedford Land Development Control Regulations and as required by the
Planning Board.
§ 275-16. Duplex, multiple dwelling units and nonresidential
development. [Amended 3-12-1996]
All duplex and multiple dwelling units and nonresidential development shall
comply with the Nonresidential Site Plan Review Regulations of the Town of
Bedford.
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 275-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-17
1:287
§ 275-17. Sewage disposal.
All wastewater and sewage disposal systems shall be constructed and
maintained in accordance with the standards set and enforced by the Water
Supply and Pollution Control Division (WSPCD) of the New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services (NHDES).
§ 275-18. Trailers.
No person shall park or occupy any trailer on the premises of any occupied
dwelling or on any lot which is not a part of the premises of any occupied
dwelling, except as follows:
§ 275-19. Excavations of earth materials.
No property owner shall permit any excavation of earth materials on his or
her premises without first obtaining Planning Board approval in accordance
with the Town of Bedford's Site Plan Regulations for Excavations.
§ 275-20. Capital facilities fees. [Added 3-9-1993; amended
3-13-2001]
The parking of one trailer in a private garage building or in a rear yard
is permitted provided that said trailer is not occupied and the trailer
belongs to the owner or lessee of the land it occupies.
A.
The temporary use of a trailer by a person engaged in adjoining
construction work or for whom a residence is being built, provided that
such use is shown to be a temporary expediency, may be permitted by
the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall grant such
permission for a period not to exceed three months excepting that he/
she may renew in his/her discretion such permission at the expiration
of said three-month period. [Amended 3-8-1994]
B.
Any property owner or lessee may accommodate one trailer of a
nonpaying guest in their rear yard for a period not exceeding 30 days
in any one year.
C.
Purpose. This section is enacted pursuant to RSA 674:21, and in order
to:
(1) Promote the public health, safety and welfare, and prosperity;
Ensure that adequate and appropriate facilities are available to
individuals who may come to be located in the Town of Bedford;
(2)
Prevent scattered or premature development of land as would
involve danger or injury to health, safety, or prosperity by reason
of the lack of water supply, drainage, transportation, schools, fire
protection, or other public services, or necessitate the excessive
expenditure of public funds for the supply of such services;
(3)
A.
§ 275-17 BEDFORD CODE § 275-20
1:288
Provide for the harmonious development of the municipality and its
environs;
(4)
(5) Ensure the proper arrangement and coordination of streets; and
Ensure streets of sufficient width to accommodate existing and
prospective traffic.
(6)
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
IMPACT FEE — A fee or assessment imposed upon development,
including subdivision, building construction, or other land-use change,
in order to help meet the needs occasioned by the development for
the construction or improvement of capital facilities owned or operated
by the municipality, including and limited to water treatment and
distribution facilities; wastewater treatment and disposal facilities;
sanitary sewers; stormwater, drainage and flood-control facilities;
public road systems and rights-of-way; municipal office facilities; public
school facilities; the municipality's proportional share of capital
facilities of a cooperative or regional school district of which the
municipality is a member; public safety facilities; solid waste collection,
transfer, recycling, processing and disposal facilities; public libraries;
and public recreation facilities, not including permanently unimproved
open space.
B.
Authority to assess impact fees. The Planning Board is hereby
authorized to assess impact fees, as herein defined, and in accordance
with the standards herein set forth. The Planning Board shall have
the authority to adopt regulations to implement the provisions of this
chapter. Impact fee formulas may be adopted in the Bedford Zoning
Ordinance, the Bedford Subdivision Regulations, and/or the Bedford
Nonresidential Site Plan Regulations.
C.
Assessment methodology.
The amount of any impact fee shall be a proportional share of
municipal capital improvement costs which is reasonably related to
the capital needs created by the development, and to the benefits
accruing to the development from the capital improvements
financed by the fee.
(1)
Upgrading of existing facilities and infrastructures, the need for
which is not created by new development, shall not be paid for by
impact fees.
(2)
In the case of development created by a change of use,
redevelopment, expansion, or modification of an existing use, the
capital facilities fee shall be based upon the net positive increase in
the impact created by the new use as compared to that which was
or would have been assessed for the previous use.
(3)
D.
E. Administration of impact fees.
§ 275-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-20
1:289
Each impact fee shall be accounted for separately, shall be
segregated from the Town's general fund, may be spent upon order
of the governing body, and shall be used solely for the capital
improvements for which it was collected, or to recoup the cost of
capital improvements made in anticipation of the needs for which
fees are collected to meet.97
(1)
All impact fees shall be assessed at the time of Planning Board
approval of a subdivision or site plan. When no Planning Board
approval is required, or has been made prior to the adoption of this
section, impact fees shall be assessed prior to, or as a condition for
the issuance of a building permit or other appropriate permission
to proceed with development. [Amended 3-8-2005]
(2)
Impact fees shall be collected at the time a certificate of occupancy
is issued. If no certificate of occupancy is required, impact fees
shall be collected when the development is ready for its intended
use. [Amended 3-8-2005]
(3)
The Town of Bedford and the assessed party may establish an
alternate, mutually acceptable schedule of payment of impact fees
in effect at the time of subdivision plat or site plan approval by the
Planning Board. [Amended 3-8-2005]
(4)
If an alternate schedule of payment is established, the Town of
Bedford may require developers to post bonds, letters of credit,
accept liens, or otherwise provide suitable measures of security
so as to guarantee future payment of the assessed impact fees.
[Amended 3-8-2005]
(5)
In the event that bonds or other debt instruments have been issued
for public capital facilities which were constructed in anticipation
of new development, or are issued for advanced provision of capital
facilities identified in this chapter, capital facilities fees may be
used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments.
(6)
Waiver and appeal of fees.
Any person may request from the Planning Board, a full or partial
waiver of capital facilities fee payments required by this section
where it can be shown that reduced impact or no new impact will
be created due to mitigating circumstances.
(1)
On-site and off-site improvements which are required by the
Planning Board as a result of subdivision or site plan review,
including but not limited to extension of water and sewer mains or
the construction of roads or other infrastructure, which would have
to be completed by the developer regardless of the capital facilities
fee provisions, shall not be considered eligible for waiver under this
(2)
F.
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 275-20 BEDFORD CODE § 275-20
1:290
section. Any aggrieved party may appeal any decision under this
§ 275-20 to the Superior Court as provided for in RSA 677:15.98
Refund of fees paid. Any fee payer shall be entitled to a refund of that
fee, plus accrued interest where:
The capital facilities fee has not been encumbered or legally bound
by the Town Council to be spent for the purpose for which it was
collected within a period of six years from the date of the final
payment of the fee; or
(1)
The Town Council has failed, within the period of six years from
the date of the final payment of such fee, to appropriate the nonfee
share of related capital improvement costs.
(2)
G.
Credits.
Land for capital facilities and/or public capital facility
improvements may be offered by the fee payer as total or partial
payment of the required fee. The offer must be determined to
represent an identifiable dollar value computed in a manner
acceptable to the Planning Board.
(1)
The Planning Board may authorize to the fee payer a capital
facilities fee credit in the amount of the value of the contribution.
Any claim for credit must be made no later than the application
acceptance and public hearing on the development proposal before
the Planning Board. Determinations made by the Planning Board
pursuant to the credit provisions of this section may be appealed to
the Superior Court as provided by RSA 677:15.
(2)
H.
Periodic review of fee schedules. The capital facilities fee schedules
found in the Bedford Land Development Control Regulations shall be
reviewed annually by the Planning Board using the methodology
established in the schedules. Such review may result in the Planning
Board recommending to the Town Council that adjustments be
approved in one or more of the fees. Adjustment of the fees shall
not be approved more frequently than once per fiscal year. Schedule
adjustments to the recreation impact fee or the Kilton Road impact fee
which would change the methodology prescribed in the Bedford Land
Development Control Regulations shall be made only by amendment to
this chapter.99
I.
Applicability. This chapter shall not be deemed to affect the existing
authority of the Planning Board over subdivisions and site plans,
including but not limited to the authority to declare a development to be
premature or scattered in accordance with the regulations of the Board
and in accordance with RSA 674:36, II(a).
J.
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 275-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-21
1:291
§ 275-21. Use regulations.
The following Subsections A through F below refer to the Table 2, Table of
Uses, which is located at the end of this chapter.
Uses permitted by right.
A use listed in the Table of Uses is permitted as a matter of right
in the district in which it is denoted by the letter "P," subject to all
other applicable local, state, and federal regulations.
(1)
Wireless telecommunications facilities. Facilities that are less than
six feet in height, mounted at ground level or mounted on a
building, and less than 200 square feet in area (such as residential
satellite dishes and TV antennas) shall be permitted by right in
all zoning districts, subject to the existing building setback
requirements of each zoning district, and no building permit shall
be necessary for erections of such a facility. [Added 3-11-1997]
(2)
A.
Uses permitted by right with conditions imposed.
"P" listings in Table of Uses. A use listed in the Table of Uses
and denoted by the letter "P" and a superscript number (footnote)
indicates a use that is permitted by right only when in compliance
with the conditions imposed as specified in the appropriate
footnote(s); subject to all other applicable local, state, and federal
regulations.100
(1)
Elderly housing. Elderly housing shall be permitted in the zoning
districts as set forth in Table 2101 subject to the following
provisions: [Added 3-9-1993102]
Definition. As used in this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated: [Amended 3-8-2005]
ELDERLY HOUSING —
Any housing intended and operated for occupancy by at
least one person 55 years of age and older. All elderly
housing developments shall include a minimum of 25%
of the units as affordable housing for low-income elderly
persons. Affordable housing as used in this section, shall
mean rental, lease, or ownership interest in housing which
is subsidized for a minimum period of 30 years through
either governmental, public, or private mechanisms,
including tax credits, for persons with a household income
limit not exceeding 80% of the area median income for
households of various sizes (AMI) established by the
United States Department of Housing and Urban
[1]
(a)
(2)
B.
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
101. Editor's Note: Table 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
102. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 275-21 BEDFORD CODE § 275-21
1:292
Development for the metropolitan statistical area which
includes the Town of Bedford.
Elderly housing shall provide, and make available to
residents therein, significant on-site facilities and services
specifically designed to meet the physical or social needs
of older persons, including but not limited to dining
facilities; housekeeping services; security services; group
transportation; and personnel response services. The
Planning Board may waive some or all of the facilities or
services where:
The proposed development provides alternative
arrangements that are satisfactory to the Planning
Board; or
[a]
The development provides more than the required
25% of affordable housing as defined above.
[b]
[2]
Dimensional regulations.
[1] Minimum lot area shall be one acre;
Minimum lot frontage shall be 100 feet on a Class II, IV, or
V roadway;
[2]
Minimum setbacks shall be 35 feet at the front yard and
25 feet at the side and rear yards;
[3]
[4] Maximum building height shall be 48 feet; and
Minimum green space shall be 30% of the total site
acreage.
[5]
(b)
Density. A maximum of 28 dwelling units per acre shall be
permitted.103
(c)
Special conditions. Elderly housing shall be served by
municipal sewer, municipal water, group transit services, and
structures shall be fully sprinklered.
(d)
Site plan. Elderly housing proposals shall be subject to the
provisions of the Site Plan Review Regulations of the Town of
Bedford.
(e)
Elderly housing in cluster residential developments. Elderly
housing shall be permitted in cluster residential developments in
the Residential/Agricultural Zone and the General Residential Zone
subject to the following provisions: [Added 3-11-2003]
(3)
103. Editor's Note: Former Subsection d, Parking, which immediately followed this subsection,
was repealed 3-11-2008.
§ 275-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-21
1:293
Definition. The term "elderly housing" as used in this section
shall mean housing intended and operated for occupancy by at
least one person 55 years or older per unit.
(a)
Dimensional regulations. Dimensional regulations shall be the
same as specified in Article V, Cluster Residential
Development.
(b)
Density. Density shall be the same as specified in Article V,
Cluster Residential Development.
(c)
Special conditions. Elderly housing shall be subject to the
requirements of § 275-34J, Design standards for single
attached dwellings for elderly and workforce housing.
(d)
Workforce housing. Workforce ownership and rental housing shall
be permitted in the General Residential, Apartment Residential,
Performance Zone and Service Industrial Zoning Districts subject
to the following provisions: [Added 3-10-2009; amended
3-12-2019]
Development criteria.
At least 1/4 of the units in the development meet the
affordability requirements for workforce housing in
§ 275-6 of this chapter. [Amended 3-11-2014]
[1]
Retain the development criteria and affordability
standards herein for a minimum period of 30 years
through a suitable deed restriction, easement or other
instrument deemed acceptable to the Bedford Planning
Board and as monitored through annual reports for
workforce rental housing units and prior to the time of unit
sale or resale for workforce ownership units provided to
the Bedford Planning Department.
[2]
Occupancy in the development is not restricted to any age
group.
[3]
The development provides more than 50% of the units in
the development with two or more bedrooms.
[4]
Workforce housing units shall be similar in exterior
appearance and otherwise visually indistinguishable from
market-rate units and dispersed throughout the
development.
[5]
Workforce housing units must be constructed in
proportional relationship to market-rate units in the
development, and all workforce housing units must be
completed and made available for sale or rental before
the final 10% of the market-rate units are approved for
occupancy.
[6]
(a)
(4)
§ 275-21 BEDFORD CODE § 275-21
1:294
Dimensional regulations.
In the AR, CO, CO-2, OF and SI Zones: [Amended
3-13-2012]
[a] Minimum lot area shall be one acre;
Minimum lot frontage shall be 100 feet on a Class II,
IV, or V roadway;
[b]
Minimum setbacks shall be 35 feet at the front yard
and 25 feet at the side and rear yards;
[c]
[d] Maximum building height shall be 48 feet ; and
Minimum green space shall be 30% of the total site
acreage.
[e]
[1]
The dimensional standards listed in Subsection B(4)(b)[1]
above shall apply to workforce housing in the GR Zone
except for the following: Maximum building height shall be
35 feet.
[2]
(b)
Density.
In the AR, CO-2, PZ and SI Zones a maximum of 12
dwelling units per acre of net developable area shall be
permitted. There shall be a maximum of 12 units in any
one building in the AR and PZ Zones and no restrictions as
to the number of units in one building in the CO-2 and SI
Zones. [Amended 3-13-2012; 3-12-2019]
Net developable area is that portion of the tract which
remains after deducting the land area of all surface
water bodies; wetlands; and public/private rights-ofway
for streets and utilities. In the case of mixed-use
sites, building footprints and paved areas for parking
and circulation, which are not also used by the
workforce housing development, shall be deducted.
[a]
[1]
In the GR Zone each building shall have a minimum lot
area of 40,000 square feet plus 4,000 square feet per
dwelling unit. There shall be a maximum of 12 units in any
one building.
[2]
(c)
Special conditions. Workforce housing shall be served by
municipal sewer and municipal water, and structures shall be
fully sprinklered.
(d)
Site plan. Workforce housing proposals shall be subject to the
provisions of the Site Plan Review Regulations of the Town of
Bedford.
(e)
§ 275-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-21
1:295
Workforce ownership housing. Workforce ownership housing shall
be permitted in the Residential and Agricultural and the General
Residence Zoning Districts subject to the following provisions:
[Added 3-10-2009; 3-12-2019]
Each workforce ownership housing structure may contain up
to four dwelling units or single-family detached workforce
ownership housing structures may be constructed on
individual lots having a lot frontage and lot area that is 1/
3 smaller than is otherwise permitted in the zoning district.
These provisions do not supersede compliance with ENV-Ws
1005.06 of the Subdivision and Individual Sewage Disposal
System Design Rules of the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services.
(a)
All of the bonus units gained under this provision must meet
the affordability requirements for workforce ownership
housing in § 275-6 of this chapter.
(b)
Workforce ownership units must retain the development
criteria and affordability standards herein for a minimum
period of 30 years through a suitable deed restriction,
easement or other instrument deemed acceptable to the
Bedford Planning Board (the "affordability restriction") and as
monitored through reports provided to the Bedford Planning
Department prior to the time of unit sale or resale; and the
thirty-year affordability restriction shall recommence upon the
sale of workforce ownership property subject to the affordable
restriction if the workforce ownership property is sold prior to
the expiration of the current affordability restriction.
(c)
Occupancy in the development is not restricted to any age
group.
(d)
Developments with workforce ownership housing units shall
provide more than 50% of the units in the development with
two or more bedrooms.
(e)
Workforce ownership housing units must be constructed in
proportional relationship to market-rate units in the
development, and all workforce housing units must be
completed and made available for sale before the final 10% of
the market-rate units are approved for occupancy.
(f)
Workforce ownership housing units shall be similar in scale
and exterior appearance and be otherwise visually
indistinguishable from market-rate units in the development
and dispersed geographically throughout the development.
(g)
(5)
C. Uses permitted by special exception.
§ 275-21 BEDFORD CODE § 275-21
1:296
"S" listings in Table of Uses. A use listed in the Table of Uses and
denoted by the letter "S" may be permitted as a special exception
if such approval is granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment
in accordance with the conditions set forth in § 275-91C, Special
exceptions, of this chapter; subject to all other applicable local,
state, and federal regulations. Footnote conditions may also be
specified in addition to the special exception requirements.
(1)
(2) (Reserved)104
Nursing homes. Nursing homes shall be permitted in the General
Residential Zoning District by special exception of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, subject to existing standards set forth in
§ 275-91C, Special exceptions, of this chapter and with these
further conditions: [Added 3-9-1993]
(a) The lot shall be a minimum of five acres;
The site shall comply with the buffer zone requirements of
§ 275-21F(2) of this chapter; and
(b)
The site shall be served by municipal sewer and municipal
water.
(c)
(3)
Wireless telecommunications facilities. New commercial groundmount
wireless telecommunications facilities may be permitted by
special exception of the Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance
with the provisions of Article VI, Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities, of this chapter.
(4)
Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses shall be denoted by a (-) in the Table of
Uses. Unless a use is specifically permitted in a district as indicated in
the Table of Uses, it shall be prohibited.
D.
Nonconforming uses. Refer to § 275-91C, Special exceptions, for
provisions regarding nonconforming uses.
E.
Supplemental provisions.
Home occupations.
In the zoning districts which permit the establishment of a
home occupation, there shall be two classes of home
occupations identified as Level I and Level II. All home
occupations must comply with the following provisions:
Not more than one commercial vehicle in connection with
such home occupation shall be stored on the premises;
[1]
(a)
(1)
F.
104. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(2), Accessory attached apartments, as amended, was
repealed 3-8-2016. See now Subsection I.
§ 275-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-21
1:297
No more than 650 square feet of the existing net floor area
of the principal building, including any attached garage or
barn, shall be devoted to such use; [Amended 3-8-2005]
[2]
There shall be no display of goods or wares visible from
the street; and
[3]
The building and premises occupied shall not be rendered
objectionable or detrimental to the residential character of
the neighborhood because of exterior appearance, traffic,
emissions of odor, smoke, dust, noise, electrical
disturbance, on-site storage of hazardous materials as
determined by the Bedford Fire Department, or in any
other way.
[4]
Level I home occupations do not require a permit from the
Planning Board as long as the following provisions are met:
[1] There shall be no nonresident employees;
[2] The use shall generate no additional vehicular traffic; and
The home occupation shall not advertise with a sign on the
premises.
[3]
(b)
All other home occupations shall be defined as Level II home
occupations and shall require a home occupation permit
hearing and approval from the Planning Board. The following
provisions shall apply specifically to Level II home occupations:
The home occupation shall be carried on strictly by the
owner of the principal building, who shall also reside in
said building. Should the owner move his/her residence,
the home occupation must be discontinued within three
months;
[1]
No more than two nonresidents shall be employed or
otherwise engaged in the conduct of the business therein;
[2]
A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be
provided plus 1 1/2 spaces per employee;
[3]
If the home occupation is a day-care facility, no more
than 12 children shall be permitted, and a minimum of 50
square feet of outside play area for each enrolled child
shall be provided. No portion of the outside play area
shall be located within 25 feet of the side or rear property
lines. In addition, off-street parking must be provided for
employees plus an appropriate off-street area for dropoff
and pickup of children must also be provided; [Amended
3-9-2010]
[4]
(c)
§ 275-21 BEDFORD CODE § 275-21
1:298
Septic system design/capacity for home occupations that
have any nonresident employees or that utilize large water
or wastewater volumes, such as day-care facilities, hair
salons, and catering services, shall be verified in writing
by a licensed New Hampshire septic designer or a
professional engineer; and [Amended 3-11-2008]
[5]
A certificate of occupancy for the proposed use shall be
issued by the Building Code Official to verify conformance
with the preceding standards. [Amended 3-9-1999]
[6]
Buffer zone.
A buffer zone shall be provided along the property line of a
development in the Apartment Residential Zone or any type
of commercial or industrial development which abuts or is
directly across the street (excluding a limited access highway)
from a General Residential Zone, Residential and Agricultural
Zone, or a Civic and Institutional Zone in the following manner:
Function and materials. The buffering shall provide a yearround
dense visual screen in order to minimize adverse
impacts. It shall consist of evergreen trees and existing
vegetation or, upon approval from the Planning Board,
may include fencing, berms, boulders, mounds, deciduous
vegetation, or combinations thereof to achieve the same
objectives.
[1]
Buffer strip width.
The width of the required buffer strip shall be
calculated by the formula of 25 feet plus one foot
of horizontal distance for each one foot of vertical
building height, for a total buffer width of not less than
50 feet.
[a]
Building height shall be measured from the lowest
existing grade along the abutting residential/civic
property line to the soffit (or highest horizontal
support) of the proposed building which is visible from
the abutting zoning district.
[b]
[2]
Design and planting specifications.
Arrangement of plantings in buffers shall provide
maximum protection to adjacent properties and avoid
damage to existing plant material. No parking,
roadway, or structure shall be located within any part
of the buffer.
[a]
The vegetative planting portion of the buffer shall be
at least 25 feet in width and shall consist of evergreen
[b]
[3]
(a)
(2)
§ 275-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-21
1:299
trees, of which 1/3 of the trees shall be at least eight
feet in height and the remainder not less than six feet
in height at the time of planting and shall include a
mixture of varieties which do not lose lower branches,
such as Austrian pine and spruce.
Trees shall be planted 10 feet on center and shall be
staggered in parallel, serpentine, and/or broken rows.
[c]
Plantings shall be installed according to accepted
horticultural standards and shall be maintained
regularly.
[d]
Dead and dying plants shall be replaced by the
property owner during the next planting season.
[e]
The diagram in Figure 13, Buffer Zone Planting Diagram,
illustrates the concepts discussed above.105
(b)
Boarding- , lodging, or rooming house. Boarding- , lodging, or rooming
houses shall not be permitted in any zoning district. [Added
3-14-2000]
G.
Alternative treatment centers. Pursuant to the authority provided in
RSA 674:21, the Planning Board may grant a conditional use permit
for an alternative treatment center (cultivation location) in the Service
Industrial District (SI District) and may grant a conditional use permit
for an alternative treatment center (non-cultivation location) in the
Performance District (PZ District). [Added 3-8-2016]
Purpose and intent. The purpose of this subsection is to implement
NH RSA 126-X, authorizing the use of therapeutic cannabis, and
to regulate the location and operations of alternative treatment
centers, so as to promote and protect the public health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the Town of Bedford. The intent of this
Subsection is to:
Provide for the safe sale and distribution of therapeutic
cannabis to patients who qualify to obtain, possess and use
cannabis for medical purposes under RSA 126-X and as
managed by the New Hampshire Department of Health and
Human Services; and
(a)
Protect public health and safety through reasonable limitations
on business operations as they relate to location, noise, air,
building, neighborhood and patient safety, security for the
business and its personnel, and other health safety concerns.
(b)
(1)
H.
105. Editor's Note: Figure 13 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 275-21 BEDFORD CODE § 275-21
1:300
The following criteria must be satisfied in order for the Planning
Board to grant a conditional use permit for an alternative
treatment center:
An alternative treatment center shall not be located within
1,000 feet of the property line of a public or private elementary
or secondary school or designated drug-free zone.
(a)
An alternative treatment center (non-cultivation location) shall
not be located within 1,000 feet of a residential district (R&A,
AR, GR).
(b)
The alternative treatment center shall be located in a
permanent building and may not be located within a trailer,
manufactured home, cargo container, or any structure that
has axles with wheels. Drive-through services at an alternative
treatment center are prohibited.
(c)
(d) Hours of operation shall be approved by the Planning Board.
The alternative treatment center shall provide for the proper
disposal of cannabis remnants or byproducts, which remnants
or byproducts shall not be placed in the facility's exterior
refuse containers.
(e)
A security plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Bedford
Police Department. The security plan must take into account
the measures that will be taken to ensure the safe delivery
of any product to the facility (including permitted times for
delivery), how the product will be secured onsite, and how
patient transactions will be facilitated in order to ensure safety.
The applicant shall provide to the Police Department a detailed
narrative and floor plan, as well as any other relevant
documentation, describing how the alternative treatment
center shall be secured.
(f)
(g) The use of cannabis is prohibited on the property.
The alternative treatment center shall emit no cannabisrelated
fumes, vapors, or odors which can be smelled or
otherwise perceived from beyond the lot lines or the property
where the facility is located.
(h)
(2)
Accessory attached apartment. One accessory attached apartment shall
be permitted in single-dwelling residences in the General Residential
(GR) District and the Residential and Agricultural (R&A) District with
these stipulations: [Added 3-8-2016]
An accessory apartment shall be clearly incidental to the primary
use of the property for a single dwelling, and such accessory living
space shall not exceed 1,000 square feet;
(1)
I.
§ 275-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-21
1:301
§ 275-22. Dimensional regulations.
An accessory apartment shall either be constructed within or
attached to a single dwelling;
(2)
The primary residence and the accessory apartment shall be
connected by an interior doorway such that the accessory
apartment is attached to the primary residence through habitable
interior space. [Amended 3-14-2017]
(3)
Septic system design/capacity shall be approved by the New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services;
(4)
No new entrance or exit to an accessory apartment shall be
constructed facing the front of the single dwelling;
(5)
One parking space shall be provided for an accessory apartment,
and no new curb cut from the street shall be constructed; and
(6)
Exterior construction and materials shall be uniform with the single
dwelling.
(7)
General provisions. No building or structure shall be erected, enlarged,
altered or moved, nor shall any existing lot size be changed or new
lot created, except in accordance with Table 1, Table of Dimensional
Regulations, or as otherwise specified herein. (See Table 1 at the end of
this chapter.)
A.
Incentive bonus dimensional standards. In recognition of the need to
protect the overall integrity and character of the Route 101 highway
corridor, as well as to promote a system of access management for
properly servicing parcels within this highway corridor, incentive bonus
standards have been created as a means for rewarding those who
choose to voluntarily develop their properties in a way that is most
compatible with the stated goals of the Route 101 Corridor Study, 2002.
Deeded rights-of-way.
Land abutting Route 101. Individuals who voluntarily agree
to provide easement deeds over that portion of their land
that is zoned Commercial or Commercial with Historic District
Overlay and is within 50 feet of the present center line of
Route 101, thereby reserving this easement area for future
widening or similar improvements, may be compensated by
being allowed to develop the remainder of their property to an
extent greater than that allowed by the maximum impervious
coverage requirements otherwise permitted by Footnote 18 of
Table 1, Table of Dimensional Regulations.106 The amount of
excess impervious coverage can be calculated by the formula
shown in Figure 1.
(a)
(1)
B.
106. Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 275-21 BEDFORD CODE § 275-22
1:302
Land for future service roads. Individuals who voluntarily
agree to provide fee simple deeds over that portion of their
land that is zoned Commercial, Commercial-2 or Commercial
with Historic District Overlay and is shown on a plat approved
by the Bedford Planning Board for a new municipal service
road to facilitate access management for Route 101 may be
compensated by being allowed to develop the remainder of
their property to an extent greater than that allowed by the
maximum impervious cover requirements otherwise permitted
by Footnote 18 of Table 1, Table of Dimensional Regulations.
The amount of excess impervious coverage can be calculated
by the formula shown in Figure 1.107 [Amended 3-13-2012]
(b)
Land for shared-access driveways. Individuals who voluntarily
agree to provide easement deeds over that portion of their land
that is zoned Commercial, Commercial-2 or Commercial with
Historic District Overlay and is shown on a site plan approved
by the Bedford Planning Board for a shared-access driveway to
facilitate access management for Route 101 may be compensated
by being allowed to develop the remainder of their property to
an extent greater than that allowed by the maximum impervious
coverage requirements otherwise permitted by Footnote 18 in
Table 1, Table of Dimensional Regulations. The amount of excess
impervious coverage can be calculated by the formula shown in
Figure 2.108 [Amended 3-13-2012]
(2)
Corner sight area. [Added 3-11-2014]
For the purposes of this subsection, "corner sight area" means
the portion of a corner lot lying within a triangle area formed by
measuring 20 feet from the corner of the lot along each property
line adjacent to the intersecting street, and then connecting the
two points.
(1)
No planting, wall, fence, sign, or other object that creates an
obstruction to motorists' vision shall be planted, erected or
maintained higher than 1 1/2 feet above the adjoining street grade
within the corner sight area. This does not apply to naturally
accumulating snow or snowplowing activities conducted by a Town
or state agency.
(2)
C.
Accessory structures shall comply with front, side and rear yard
setbacks in accordance with Table 1, Table of Dimensional Regulations;
except within the General Residential (GR) District and the Residential
Agricultural (R&A) District, where one accessory structure of 120
square feet or less may have a minimum setback of five feet from the
side or rear property line, provided the structure is not higher than
D.
107. Editor's Note: Figure 1, Incentive Bonus Formula, is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
108. Editor's Note: Figure 2, Incentive Bonus Standard for Shared Access to Route 101 and
Interconnecting Parking Lots, is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 275-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-22
1:303
§ 275-23. Nonconforming lots, structures and uses.
12 feet and is not placed on a permanent foundation. The wetland
setback provisions found in Article IV, § 275-28, shall not apply to the
one-hundred-twenty-square-foot accessory structure described above.
[Added 3-8-2016; amended 3-13-2018]
Nonconforming lots.
Structures shall be permitted on a lot having frontage or an area
which is less than that required by Table 1, Table of Dimensional
Regulations,109 if said structure is permitted by right within that
district and if the following provisions are met:
The lot was a legal lot of record and duly recorded at the
Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds prior to the adoption
of the original Zoning Ordinance on December 19, 1953, or
the lot was otherwise legally created after December 19, 1953;
[Amended 3-8-2011]
(a)
The lot is capable of supporting a well and septic system
designed and installed in compliance with all applicable Town
and State of New Hampshire Water Supply and Pollution
Control Division regulations;
(b)
All uses, buildings, structures, wells, or septic systems shall
comply with the setback requirements in the Table of
Dimensional Regulations; and
(c)
Sufficient frontage to accommodate a private driveway
intersecting with a public highway (except Class I or VI), or an
approved subdivision road located in the Town of Bedford must
be available. [Added 3-12-1996]
(d)
(1)
If two or more lots of record are contiguous and in single ownership
on or after the effective date of this chapter (March 13, 1991)
and if any of said lots are vacant and do not comply with the
dimensional requirements of frontage and area, then those lots
shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of
this chapter. This provision shall not apply to lots in a subdivision
approved by the Planning Board or to lots otherwise legally created
after December 19, 1953. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to nonconforming lots acquired by a person or entity on or
after September 18, 2010. Any lots that were merged between
March 13, 1991 and September 17, 2010, pursuant to this
provision may be restored back to their original state with approval
by the Planning Board, so long as they conform with Subsection
A(1) of this § 275-23. [Amended 3-10-1998; 3-8-2011]
(2)
A.
109. Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 275-22 BEDFORD CODE § 275-23
1:304
No portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which
diminishes compliance with frontage and area requirements
established by this chapter, nor shall any division be made which
creates a lot with frontage or area below said requirements.
Further, yard dimensions and requirements, other than those
applying to area and frontage, shall conform to the regulations for
the district in which the lot is located.
(3)
Nonconforming structures.
Where a lawful building or structure exists at the effective date
of this chapter, or applicable amendment, that could not be built
under the terms of this chapter or amendment by reason of
restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other
dimensional requirements, the building or structure may be
continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions:
No such nonconforming building or structure may be enlarged
or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, but
any building or structure or portion thereof may be altered to
decrease its nonconformity;
(a)
A nonconforming building or structure which is destroyed by
fire or other hazard may be restored to its former bulk,
provided that it was not destroyed voluntarily and restoration
is begun within 12 months after the act of destruction; and
(b)
Should a nonconforming building or structure be intentionally
moved for any reason for any distance whatsoever, it shall
thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which
it is located after it is moved.
(c)
(1)
B.
Nonconforming uses. Where on the effective date of adoption of this
chapter or applicable amendment, a lawful use of land exists which
would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this chapter, the
use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided
that:
No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased nor
extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter;
(1)
No such nonconforming use shall be moved, in whole or in part, to
any portion of the lot other than that occupied by such use at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter;
(2)
If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of more than 12 consecutive months, any subsequent use of
such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter
for the district in which such use is located;
(3)
C.
§ 275-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-23
1:305
No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this
chapter shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming
use of land; and
(4)
No junkyard may continue as a nonconforming use for more than
one year after the effective date of the adoption of the first Zoning
Ordinance of the Town of Bedford, except that a junkyard may
continue as a nonconforming use in a commercial or industrial
district if within that period it was screened, not less than eight feet
in any case as to screen completely the operations of the junkyard.
Plans of screening shall have been approved by the Planning Board
before the screening was erected.
(5)
§ 275-23 BEDFORD CODE § 275-23
1:306
ARTICLE IV
Wetlands Conservation
[Added 3-12-1991; amended 3-10-1992]
§ 275-24. Purpose.
It is intended that this article shall:
§ 275-25. Wetland defined. [Amended 3-11-1997; 3-13-2007]
Prevent the development of structures and land uses on wetlands and
areas adjacent to wetlands which will contribute to pollution of surface
and groundwater by sewerage, toxic substances, and sedimentation;
A.
Prevent the destruction of or significant changes to wetlands areas
adjacent to wetlands which provide flood protection, recharge the
groundwater supply, augment stream flow during dry periods, and filter
water flowing into ponds and streams;
B.
Protect unique and unusual natural areas and rare and endangered
species;
C.
Protect fish and wildlife habitat, maintain ecological balances, and
enhance ecological values such as those cited in RSA 482-A; [Amended
7-13-2011]
D.
Protect the quality of existing drinking water supplies and potential
future public water supplies;
E.
Prevent unnecessary or excessive expense to the Town for the purpose
of providing and/or maintaining essential services and utilities which
might be required as a result of misuse or abuse of wetlands;
F.
Preserve and enhance the aesthetic value associated with wetlands in
the Town of Bedford;
G.
Provide in all new subdivisions approved subsequent to adoption of this
article sufficient lot size to place a house and approved septic system
without locating them in wetlands; and
H.
Recognize the unequal and unique burden of wetland property owners
and minimize restrictions which may be placed upon such properties.
[Added 3-13-2007]
I.
Wetlands are those lands that are inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support,
and that, under normal circumstances, does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
A.
Methods for identifying and mapping wetlands shall utilize the
publications Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual, 1987
and Regional Field Indicators for Identifying Hydric Soils in New
B.
§ 275-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-25
1:307
§ 275-26. Applicability.
§ 275-27. Permitted uses.
England, 1995. A New Hampshire certified wetlands scientist shall
perform the wetlands delineation.
All applications for a building permit, subdivision, or site plan approval
shall be subject to the provisions of this article and § 275-91B,
Variances, except that notwithstanding § 275-4A of this chapter,
amendments to any setbacks or buffer areas in excess of the March
11, 1997, fifty-foot setback specified in this chapter shall not apply
to developed properties or to those properties currently under
construction or which have received all appropriate building permits
as of the effective date of the amendment, or to the reconstruction,
alteration, enlargement or relocation of buildings thereon, or the
addition of accessory structures thereto. Any subsequent (after the
effective date of the amendment) subdivision of exempted properties
shall comply with the more recent amendment(s). [Amended
3-13-2007]
A.
Any applicant seeking said approval(s) will be responsible for providing
the required information before the appropriate approval or a permit
can be granted.
B.
Standards established herein shall constitute the rules of overlay
zoning and shall be superimposed over all other zoning districts, or
portions thereof, within the Town. The provisions herein shall apply in
addition to all other applicable ordinances and regulations.110
C.
In those areas that have been identified as a wetland, permitted uses
are those which are compatible with the specified purposes of this
chapter.
A.
Hydric B soils. Such uses for Hydric B soils shall include: [Amended
3-11-1997]
Drainageways to include streams, creeks, or other paths of normal
runoff water and common agricultural drainage;
(1)
Green spaces and access roads, if no alternative is feasible. Any
and all fill material used shall not detract from the rate of the
soils permeability or adversely affect the appearance of abutting
properties;
(2)
(3) Satisfaction of minimum lot requirements; and
(4) Those specified under Subsection C, Hydric A soils.
B.
110. Editor's Note: Former Subsection (d), Mitigation procedures, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 3-14-2000.
§ 275-25 BEDFORD CODE § 275-27
1:308
§ 275-28. Specific provisions.
Hydric A soils. Hydric A soil uses do not alter the surface configuration
by the adding or removing fill and shall include: [Amended
3-11-1997]
(1) Agriculture;
(2) Forestry and tree farming;
(3) Wildlife habitat development and management;
(4) Conservation areas and nature trails;
Recreation uses consistent with the purpose and intent of this
article as defined in § 275-24A;
(5)
The construction of fences, footbridges, catwalks, and wharves
only, provided:
(a) Said structures are constructed on posts or pilings;
The natural contour of the wetland is substantially preserved;
and
(b)
The Conservation Commission has reviewed the proposed
construction and presented its comments.
(c)
(6)
The efficient provision of public services. Uses not specifically
included above may be considered by the Planning Board, upon
approval of a mitigation plan. (See § 275-29, Procedural
requirements.)
(7)
C.
Construction of a roadway or other accessway, utility right-of-way,
communication lines, power lines, and pipelines across a wetland may
be permitted by the Planning Board if, after receiving comments from
the Conservation Commission, the Planning Board determines that:
The proposed construction is essential to the productive use of land
or water outside the wetland; and
(1)
No reasonable alternative to the proposed construction exists
which does not cross or alter a wetland, or which has less
detrimental impact on a wetland.
(2)
D.
Structures and underground storage tanks shall be set back at least
50 feet from Hydric A soils and at least 50 feet from Hydric B soils.
[Amended 3-11-1997; 3-13-2012]
A.
No septic tank or leach field (edge of bed) may be constructed or
enlarged closer than the approved distance set forth by the State of
New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services, Water Supply
and Pollution Control Division.
B.
§ 275-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-28
1:309
§ 275-29. Procedural requirements. [Amended 3-13-2007]
Any fill material which is authorized to be placed in a wetland must
be of such quality as to allow for the continued permeability of water;
access roads, however, may be paved.
C.
A New Hampshire Wetlands Board dredge and fill application shall be
submitted for any proposed change to a wetland (RSA 483-A), as well
as an application to the United States Army Corps of Engineers where
applicable.
D.
Any setback or buffer established in excess of the Subsection A
requirement of 50 feet shall exempt those properties as specified in
Subsection A of § 275-26, Applicability, as modified. [Added
3-13-2007]
E.
Where maps or field investigations indicate that a Wetland District is
present on a proposed development site and may be impacted by the
development, the Planning Board may require that those wetlands be
delineated by a jurisdictional wetlands delineation map prepared by a
New Hampshire certified wetlands scientist.
A.
The Planning Board may allow the applicant to submit a jurisdictional
wetlands delineation map for only the portion of the parcel proposed
for development. Before any such relaxing of these regulations can
occur, the applicant shall identify the "development envelope," and any
change to said area will require reevaluation by the Board for the
purpose of this article.
B.
Where the presence of a wetland has been identified, the boundaries
of said district shall be clearly marked on the site with appropriate
flagging along the entire perimeter of the wetland.
C.
Where no evidence has been produced, or received, either by the
applicant or the Town, that a wetland is present on the site, a
jurisdictional wetlands delineation map shall not be required under this
article.
D.
The Planning Board and/or Town Planner shall notify the Conservation
Commission of all applications for proposed projects which may impact
a wetland for the purpose of allowing the Commission to make
recommendations prior to final action on such application.
E.
In the event that the accuracy of the wetland boundaries submitted by
the applicant is suspect, the Planning Board may call upon the services
of a New Hampshire certified soil and/or wetland scientist to reexamine
said area and report the findings to the Planning Board for a boundary
determination. The cost of said services shall be paid by the applicant.
[Amended 7-13-2011]
F.
The Town shall make reasonable effort to identify and notify by mail the
owners of all properties that would be affected directly by a proposed
G.
§ 275-28 BEDFORD CODE § 275-29
1:310
setback or buffer amendment to this article. Notification will be made
as soon as possible after initiation of work on proposed ordinance
changes.
§ 275-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-29
1:311

ARTICLE V
Cluster Residential Development
[Added 3-10-1987]
§ 275-30. Authority and purpose.
§ 275-31. Districts where applicable.
The cluster residential development option shall be available only within the
General Residential and the Residential Agricultural Districts.
§ 275-32. General provisions.
This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of RSA 674:21,
Innovative Land Use Controls.
A.
The cluster residential development (CRD) option is intended to enable
and encourage greater flexibility in the design of residential
subdivisions than would otherwise be possible following conventional
subdivision practice. By allowing reduced lot sizes, housing can be
developed in such a manner as to promote the most appropriate use
of land; to facilitate the economical and efficient provision of public
services; to promote open space conservation; to protect the natural
and scenic attributes of the land; and to expand opportunities for
the development of affordable housing in the Town of Bedford, all in
accordance with the goals and objectives of the adopted Master Plan.
[Amended 3-14-2000]
B.
Minimum tract area. The minimum tract area for a cluster residential
development shall contain at least 15 acres.
A.
Permitted use. Cluster residential developments shall be restricted to
the following uses: [Amended 3-14-2000]
(1) Single detached dwellings;
(2) Single attached dwellings used exclusively as elderly housing;
One- to four-unit attached dwellings used exclusively for workforce
ownership housing; [Added 3-10-2009]
(3)
Structures that are accessory to the above-listed principal
residential uses; and
(4)
The following accessory uses, which are permitted as common
facilities for the use or benefit of residents of the CRD:
Outdoor recreational facilities, including tennis courts, golf
courses, swimming pool, basketball courts, playgrounds,
beaches, docks, and trails;
(a)
Indoor recreational facilities, including a swimming pool,
clubhouse, cabana, spa, and tennis courts;
(b)
(5)
B.
§ 275-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-32
1:313
(c) Storage facilities for CRD maintenance equipment; and
Community gardens, agricultural and horticultural operations,
and timber management.
(d)
Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited in the CRD District:
[Added 3-11-2003; amended 7-13-2011]
Helipads on any lot or open space within a cluster development;
and
(1)
The keeping or raising of livestock and poultry on the premises
of any lot or open space within a cluster development. Livestock
and poultry shall include but not be limited to cattle, goats, sheep,
swine, horses, buffalo, bison, llamas, alpacas, emus, ostriches,
yaks, elk, deer, chickens, turkeys, or guinea fowl.
(2)
C.
D. (Reserved)111
Water and sewerage service.
Water system. All dwelling units shall be served by a municipal
water system if access to such system is available within 1,000 feet
of the tract, except where preempted by state law; otherwise, all
units shall be served by a single or community water system or
individual wells. [Amended 3-11-2014]
(1)
Sewerage system. All dwelling units shall also be served by the
municipal sewerage system if access to such system is available
within 1,000 feet of the tract; otherwise, all units shall be served by
a single or community sewerage system. [Added 3-8-1988]
(2)
E.
Construction inspection. The developer shall be responsible for paying
the costs of providing additional construction inspection services in
situations where the magnitude of the development is such that it would
overburden the Building Code Official.
F.
Compliance with local regulations. All cluster residential development
proposals shall comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter;
the Subdivision and Nonresidential Site Plan Review Regulations; and
other pertinent ordinances, regulations, and policies of the Town of
Bedford.
G.
Private roads. Private roads will be acceptable within the development,
provided that they are designed and constructed in accordance with
Town road standards, except that the Planning Board may approve
reductions in the required right-of-way width and modifications in block
design standards.
H.
111. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Bedroom limitation, was repealed 3-8-2016. Former
Subsection (c), Home occupation prohibition, which immediately followed this subsection,
was repealed 3-9-1999.
§ 275-32 BEDFORD CODE § 275-32
1:314
§ 275-33. Permitted density.
Water and sewerage facilities. Water and sewerage facilities shall be
designed and installed in accordance with local and state standards.
Municipal or community systems shall be located within the rightsof-
way of the internal street system. The design and layout of such
facilities must have prior written approval of appropriate local and
state authorities. Such facilities shall be installed at the expense of the
developer.
I.
Common open space area. The common open space area, as herein
defined, shall constitute at least 25% of the total tract area and shall be
comprised of environmentally sensitive areas as well as land suitable
for parks, recreation, conservation, or agricultural purposes. Of the
minimum common open space area, no more than 25% shall be
comprised of environmentally sensitive areas including surface water
bodies, land defined as the Wetland Conservation District, and in the
absence of municipal sewerage facilities or municipal water facilities,
soil types classified as "N/A" (Not Allowed) in the Soils and Steep Slopes
Regulations contained in the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of
Bedford. [Amended 3-14-2000]
J.
Wetland Conservation District. The Wetland Conservation District shall
be as defined in Article IV of this chapter.
K.
Net developable area. Net developable area is that portion of the tract
which remains after deducting the following from the total tract area:
[Added 3-14-1989]
(1) Actual public/private right-of-way area(s) for streets and utilities;
(2) All surface water bodies; [Added 3-12-1996]
One-hundred percent of all Hydric A soils and 75% of Hydric B
soils; and [Amended 3-11-1997]
(3)
In the absence of municipal sewerage facilities or municipal water
facilities, all soil types classified as "N/A" (Not Allowed) in the
Soils and Steep Slope Regulations contained in the Subdivision
Regulations of the Town of Bedford. [Amended 3-12-1996]
(4)
L.
Definition. The permitted density is the number of dwelling units
allowed in the development. This number shall not exceed the number
which would be allowed using conventional subdivision requirements
for the zoning district(s) in which the cluster residential development
is proposed except for density bonuses permitted for workforce
ownership housing developments provided for in Subsection B of this
section. [Amended 3-10-2009]
A.
Computation of permitted density. The total number of dwelling units/
lots that shall be permitted on a tract of land proposed for a cluster
residential development shall be determined by the following steps:
B.
§ 275-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-33
1:315
§ 275-34. Design requirements.
Computation of lot size [Amended 3-12-1996]
Where municipal sewerage facilities or municipal water
facilities will serve the development, compute the minimum
lot size using Table 1, Table of Dimensional Requirements, in
§ 275-22, Dimensional Regulations;
(a)
Where community or individual septic systems and community
or individual wells will serve the development, compute the
minimum lot size using Table 1A of the soils and steep slope
regulations of the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of
Bedford.
(b)
(c) The computation is a weighted average of all usable soils.
Usable soils are the soils of the tract minus surface water
bodies, 100% of Hydric A soils and 75% of Hydric B soils, and
soil types classified as "N/A" (Not Allowed) identified in Table
1A. [Amended 3-11-1997]
(d)
(1)
Compute the dwelling unit density by using the following formula:
Divide the "net developable area" (see definition) by the
minimum lots size as computed in Subsection B(1)(a) or (b).
[Amended 3-12-1996]
(a)
One additional lot shall be permitted for each four acres of
Hydric B. [Amended 3-11-1997]
(b)
(2)
Sites in more than one zone [Added 3-14-1989]
If the proposed cluster residential development is located in
more than one zoning district, then the total number of
dwelling units allowed within the tract shall be the sum of
those allowed for the portion of land lying within each zoning
district.
(a)
Where the calculation results in a fraction of a unit, and the
fraction is 1/2 or greater, the number of units may be rounded
to the next larger whole number.112
(b)
(3)
Diversity and originality. Diversity and originality in lot layout and
individual building design shall be encouraged to achieve the best
possible relationship between development and the land.
A.
Drainage. Natural surface drainage channels shall be either
incorporated into the overall site design or shall be preserved as part of
the required open space.
B.
112. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(4), Workforce ownership housing, added 3-10-2009,
which immediately followed this section, was repealed 3-12-2019.
§ 275-33 BEDFORD CODE § 275-34
1:316
Architectural styles. Architectural styles which are compatible with the
natural amenities and topography of the site will be encouraged.
C.
Design priorities. Lots, buildings, streets, parking areas, and cluster
units shall be designed and arranged to:
(1) Minimize alteration of the natural site features to be preserved;
(2) Relate to surrounding properties;
(3) Improve the view from and view of buildings;
(4) Lessen the area devoted to motor vehicle access; and
Avoid the adverse effects of noise, shadows, lights, and traffic on
the residents of the development.
(5)
D.
Open space.
That portion of the common open space area which is not
comprised of environmentally sensitive areas, but which is
comprised of land suitable for parks, recreation, conservation, or
agricultural purposes, shall have a shape, dimensions, character,
and location that will ensure its usability for those purposes by
all residents of the CRD. Forty percent of the minimum common
open space area, all of which is suitable for parks, recreation,
conservation, or agricultural purposes, shall be retained in
contiguity. The first acre of such common open space retained in
contiguity shall have a minimum horizontal dimension, whether
length or width, of 200 feet, and there shall be an additional 25 feet
of minimum horizontal dimension for each additional acre of such
common open space retained in contiguity. [Amended 3-14-2000]
[Example #1. In the case of a minimum CRD tract area of 15
acres, 25% of the tract, or a total of 3.75 acres, is required for
common open space. Forty percent of the common open space
which amounts to 1.5 acres, is required to be contiguous and
suitable for parks, recreation, conservation, or agricultural
purposes, and have a minimum dimension of 200 feet. The acre
and a half of usable open space which would be provided in this
minimum size CRD is a reasonable area for a small neighborhood
playground or passive park.]
[Example #2. A one-hundred-acre CRD would yield 25 acres of
common space of which 10 acres would be required to be
contiguous and suitable for parks, recreation, conservation, or
agricultural purposes with a minimum dimension of 425 feet. Ten
acres of usable open space represents an adequate area to support
park facilities and playfields, or alternatively, is coincident with
the current use standards for a range of open space uses including
agriculture and forestry.]
(1)
E.
§ 275-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-34
1:317
Open space areas shall be easily accessible to pedestrians. The
Planning Board is empowered to require pedestrian walks which
shall interconnect all dwelling units and open space area.
(2)
The common open space may be used for the following park,
recreation, conservation, or agricultural purposes: [Amended
3-14-2000]
Outdoor recreational facilities, provided that no more then
10% of the required common open space be devoted to outdoor
recreational facilities with impervious surfaces such as tennis
courts, swimming pools, and basketball courts;
(a)
(b) Community water supply wells;
Community leaching systems of subsurface wastewater
disposal systems;
(c)
Community gardens, and agricultural and horticultural
operations; and
(d)
(e) Timber management.
(3)
External boundaries of the tract.
Minimum frontage. The minimum frontage on a state-or Townmaintained
road of Class V designation, or better, shall be 100 feet
in the aggregate which may consist of two fifty-foot rights-of-way
serving as access to the development.
(1)
Buffer zone.
All single detached dwellings, together with any accessory
buildings, structures, and other man-made improvements,
shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from the external
boundary of a cluster residential development. The fifty-foot
perimeter buffer shall be comprised of existing vegetation and
shall be included in the square footage of each lot area. The
Planning Board may permit roads, driveways and utilities to
cross through the buffer as needed to access lots within the
development. [Amended 3-8-2016]
(a)
All single attached dwellings, together with any accessory
buildings, structures, and parking facilities, shall be located a
minimum of 100 feet from the external boundary of a cluster
residential development. The Planning Board may permit
streets and utilities to cross through the one-hundred-foot
buffer area, and may allow certain outdoor recreational
facilities within this area, provided that such improvements
are compatible with adjacent land uses. Existing vegetation,
including significant large trees, shall be preserved in this
area, and the Planning Board may require additional landscape
materials to be integrated with the existing vegetation in order
(b)
(2)
F.
§ 275-34 BEDFORD CODE § 275-34
1:318
to provide effective screening on a year-round basis between
the CRD and adjacent land uses.
The buffer shall be located and flagged by a surveyor licensed
by the State of New Hampshire, and permanent markers
identifying the buffer and its no-disturbance requirement shall
be placed along the contour of the buffer, generally not more
than 75 feet apart. Where buffers intersect property lines,
the marker shall also be placed on the property line. [Added
3-12-2013]
(c)
Internal design requirements.
The total number of dwelling units that will be allowed in a cluster
residential development shall be determined as shown under
§ 275-33, Permitted density, of these provisions. There shall be
no required minimum lot size for individual building lots within a
CRD; however, lot sizes must comply with Env-Ws 1005.06 of the
Subdivision and Individual Sewage Disposal System Design Rules
of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services.
[Amended 3-14-2000]
(1)
The road frontage for individual building lots within clusters shall
be negotiated between the Planning Board and the developer in the
interest of encouraging flexibility in site design, but road frontages
on individual lots shall not be less than 25 feet. [Amended
3-8-2016]
(2)
The following standards shall govern building setback:
The depths of all front yards (measured from building to rightof-
way) within individual clusters shall not be less than 30 feet;
and
(a)
The depth of side and rear yards (measured from building
to property lines) shall not be less than 20 feet. [Added
3-14-1989]
(b)
(3)
Each new cluster residence that is served by an individual septic
system and is less than 20,000 square feet in area may be required
to submit a final grading plan to the Planning Board as part of the
submission for Planning Board approval. [Added 3-14-2000]
(4)
G.
Lots abutting preexisting single dwelling residences. To ensure the
protection of preexisting residences, the Planning Board has the option
of requiring that proposed cluster lots abutting lots with an existing
single residence will conform to the minimum area requirements of the
abutting lots. [Amended 3-12-1996]
H.
Design standards for single detached dwellings. Single detached
dwellings shall be located on individual lots. The structures may be
placed on the lots in a zero lot line arrangement such that one side yard
I.
§ 275-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-34
1:319
§ 275-35. Management requirements.
An integral part of the cluster residential development submission requires
the preparation and presentation to the Planning Board, by the developer,
of the proposed articles of association or incorporation which establishes
the homeowners' association. Said document must be approved, in writing,
by the Planning Board prior to the granting of development approval, but
only after legal review by the Board's counsel. The cost of such legal review
shall be borne by the developer. Any proposed changes in such articles of
association or incorporation shall require the prior written approval of the
Planning Board. The following shall apply to the provisions of the articles of
association or incorporation:
setback is eliminated. Where a zero lot line arrangement is proposed
for single detached dwellings located on individual lots, the Planning
Board may allow one of the side yard setbacks to be reduced or
eliminated in a consistent pattern for all lots, provided that the side
yard setbacks on adjacent lots shall not be eliminated in such a manner
so as to result in the single detached dwellings located thereon sharing
a party wall. [Added 3-14-2000]
Design standards for single attached dwelling for elderly and workforce
housing. [Added 3-14-2000; amended 3-10-2009]
There shall be a maximum of four single attached dwellings per
building. There shall be a minimum of 50 feet of separation
between all such buildings.
(1)
Each single attached dwelling shall have available a private yard of
at least 500 square feet adjacent to the building and dedicated to
the exclusive use of the residents of said building. The private yard
space may contain patios, decks, fences, landscaping, gardens, and
other outdoor facilities. [Amended 3-10-2009]
(2)
The installation of residential sprinkler systems shall be required
for buildings containing single attached dwellings. Where
municipal water service is not available, on-site water storage
facilities shall be designed and installed to provide fire protection
and suppression capabilities for buildings containing single
attached dwellings. [Amended 3-11-2008]
(3)
Workforce ownership housing units shall be designed to be similar
in exterior appearance, scale and massing and be otherwise
visually indistinguishable from market-rate units in the
development. They shall also be geographically dispersed
throughout the development. [Added 3-10-2009]
(4)
J.
Membership.
Membership in the homeowners' association shall be mandatory for
cluster subdivision property owners and made a required covenant
in all deeds issued or passed.
(1)
A.
§ 275-34 BEDFORD CODE § 275-35
1:320
The association shall provide voting and use rights in the open
space area(s) when applicable and may charge dues or levy
assessments to cover expenses which may include tax liabilities
of common areas and for the maintenance of such common areas,
open space areas, improvements, rights-of-way, utilities, etc.
(2)
Such organization shall be responsible for the perpetuation,
maintenance, and function of all common lands, uses, and facilities.
(3)
Restrictive covenants.
All lands and improvements shall be described and identified as to
location, size, use, and control in a restrictive covenant.
(1)
These restrictive covenants shall be written so as to run with the
land and become a part of the deed of each lot or dwelling unit
within the development.
(2)
B.
Continuance of restrictive covenants and the association.
Such restrictive covenants and the association shall continue in
effect so as to control the availability of facilities for their intended
function, and to protect the development from additional
unplanned densities and use.
(1)
Such association shall not be dissolved, nor shall such association
dispose of any common, open space or natural land by sale or
otherwise, except to an organization or association conceived and
organized to own and maintain such areas, without prior written
consent of the Planning Board.
(2)
C.
Open space land.
Except as may otherwise be allowed by the Planning Board in
accordance with this article, any and all open space lands within
a cluster residential development tract shall be held in common
ownership by the dwelling unit owners. [Amended 3-14-2000]
(1)
All open space, however, has been set aside to lessen the
environmental impact of subdivisions on the Town. Therefore, any
change in the open space, other than to maintain it in reasonable
order and condition in accordance with the approved final plan,
requires prior written approval of the Planning Board.
(2)
D.
Failure to maintain open space areas.
Notification by Town. In the event that the organization established
to own and maintain the open space areas, or any successor
organization, or the owner or owners of the dwelling units located
within the development who own said open space shall, for any
reason, fail to maintain the open space in reasonable order and
condition in accordance with the approved final plan, the Town
Council shall serve written notice upon such organization,
(1)
E.
§ 275-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-35
1:321
§ 275-36. CRD options involving two noncontiguous tracts [Added
3-14-2000]
The Planning Board is authorized to administer and grant conditional use
permits to allow a CRD to include two noncontiguous tracts: one tract for
development on which all dwelling units will be developed and a second
tract which will provide for the minimum common open space. Options
available through the conditional use permit process include the retention
of the open space tract by the homeowners' association or the conveyance
of the open space tract, for permanent protection purposes, to a
governmental entity or to a private land trust. Where the proposed open
space tract includes developable land and is of an area that exceeds the
successor organization, or residents setting forth the deficiencies
in the maintenance, order, and condition of the open space.
Contents of notice. Such notice shall include a demand that said
deficiencies be cured forthwith and that a statement of intent to
comply and a date of compliance shall be filed with the Town
Council within 14 days of said notice.
(2)
Public hearing. If such maintenance shall not have been performed
or said statement of intent shall not have been filed by the stated
time, the Town Council shall hold a public hearing, with notice
to the officers of the organization and notice as required by RSA
676:4(d). At the hearing, the organization or the residents of the
development shall show cause why such maintenance has not been
performed. [Amended 3-11-2003]
(3)
Court action. Following the hearing, the Town may initiate court
action to remedy the violation, including the right to enter and
perform the necessary maintenance, the right to recoup costs
associated with such maintenance, the right to place liens on
individual units, the right to levy fines, and the right to collect
attorney's fees. [Amended 3-11-2003]
(4)
Compatibility with existing documents. Provisions of this section
shall in no way be in derogation of, or supplant the rights of the
Town as provided in any declaration or other documents related to
a cluster which are recorded in the Registry of Deeds. [Amended
3-11-2003]
(5)
Cost of such maintenance by the Town.
The cost of such maintenance by the Town shall be assessed
against the properties in the development in direct relation to their
proportionate interest in the common area and shall become a tax
lien on said properties.
(1)
At the time of entering upon said common areas for the purpose of
maintenance, notice of such lien shall be filed in the office of the
Hillsborough County Register of Deeds.
(2)
F.
§ 275-35 BEDFORD CODE § 275-36
1:322
requirements for common open space, the tract, or a portion thereof, may
be transferred to the tract that is to be developed for dwelling units as part
of the CRD.
Retention of the open space tract by a homeowners' association. Where
the tract to be retained as open space is located within 1/4 mile of the
tract that will be developed such that the residents of the CRD will
have ready access, an unobstructed view, or other benefit from the open
space tract, the Planning Board may allow the CRD to occur on two
tracts, provided that the open space tract is encumbered by covenants
and restrictions that permanently protect its status as open space, and
that the open space tract is linked by deed or other appropriate legal
instrument to the dwelling units on the development tract. The distance
between tracts shall be measured in a straight line, from property
boundary to property boundary.
A.
Conveyance of the open space tract. Where the tract to be retained as
open space is deemed important to the Town of Bedford in accordance
with the Town's officially adopted open space plans and policies, the
Planning Board may allow the CRD to occur on two tracts, provided that
the open space tract is conveyed, subject to covenants, restrictions,
or agreement, to a governmental entity or to a private land trust.
In granting a conditional use permit under these circumstances, the
Planning Board shall make a finding that the open space benefits to the
community from the cluster residential development occurring on two
lots exceed any benefits to be derived from the protection of common
open space that would otherwise occur in a standard cluster residential
development on a single tract. The Planning Board shall also approve
the deed of conveyance including all covenants and restrictions, and
any maintenance agreements concerning the open space.
B.
Transfer of the right to develop dwelling units. In any application for a
conditional use permit for a CRD including two noncontiguous tracts,
where the size of the open space tract exceeds the area requirements
for common open space in accordance with this article, and where
the excess area of the open space tract meets the standards of net
developable area in accordance with § 275-32L, Net developable area,
of this chapter, the Planning Board may allow the transfer of the right
to develop dwelling units that would otherwise be able to be built on
that excess portion of the open space tract to the CRD development
tract. The maximum number of units that can be transferred under
these circumstances is equal to the number of dwelling units that
could theoretically be developed on an area equivalent to 90% of the
minimum required open space area in accordance with § 275-32J,
Common open space, of this chapter, when subjected to an analysis of
the net developable area and the permitted density standards of this
article. In granting a conditional use permit under these circumstances,
the Planning Board shall make a finding that the water supply and
subsurface wastewater disposal facilities available to the development
C.
§ 275-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-36
1:323
tract are capable of accommodating the additional dwelling units to be
transferred from the open space tract.
Open space requirement for the development tract. In a CRD which
includes two noncontiguous tracts, the tract on which all dwelling units
will be developed shall retain a minimum of 10% of the minimum
open space as required pursuant to § 275-32J, Common open space,
of this chapter. No more than a 1/4 of said common open space shall
be comprised of environmentally sensitive areas, and the location and
arrangement of said common open space shall comply with the
standards of § 275-34E, Open space, of this chapter.
D.
A quarter of a mile limitation on the separation between noncontiguous
tracts is imposed upon those CRDs where the association would retain
ownership of the open space. A minimum requirement is set forth for
open space to be retained within the development tract. A total of 10%
of the required open space must be retained with the development
tract. Therefore, 90% of the required open space on the development
tract is available for the transfer of dwelling units from the
noncontiguous open space tract. [Amended 3-14-2000113]
E.
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 275-36 BEDFORD CODE § 275-36
1:324
ARTICLE VI
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
[Amended 3-14-2000]
§ 275-37. Purpose and intent.
It is the intent of this article to permit carriers to locate wireless service
telecommunications facilities within all areas of the Town of Bedford
consistent with appropriate land use regulations that will ensure
compatibility with the visual and environmental features of the Town. These
regulations are necessary in order to:
§ 275-38. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meaning
given herein:
ANTENNA — Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or
television communications through sending and/or receiving of
electromagnetic waves.
FALL ZONE — The area on the ground from the base of a ground-mounted
wireless telecommunications facility that forms a circle with a diameter
equal to twice the height of the facility, including any antennas or other
appurtenances. (See Figure A.)
Figure A
HEIGHT — The height above the average existing ground level adjoining
the structure.
MOUNT — The structure or surface upon which antennas are mounted,
including the following four types of mounts:
Facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunication services to the
residents and businesses of the municipality;
A.
Minimize adverse visual effects of towers through careful design and
siting standards and utilization of stealth facilities;
B.
Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through setback requirements.
C.
A. ROOF-MOUNTED — Mounted on the roof of a building.
B. SIDE-MOUNTED — Mounted on the side of a building.
§ 275-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-38
1:325
STEALTH FACILITY — Any communications facility which is designed to
blend into the surrounding environment. Examples of stealth facilities may
include architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted
antennas painted to match the existing structure, antennas integrated into
architectural elements, and antenna structures designed to look like a light
pole, clock tower, pine tree or similar alternative designs.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES — Wireless
telecommunications facilities with equipment used to promote or facilitate
wireless voice or data transmission. Wireless communications facilities are
limited to the following: facilities used to send and receive signals for
cellular telephones and pagers, wide-area specialized mobile radio (SMR),
digital devices and facilities known as personal communication services
(PCS), and radio broadcast antennas.
§ 275-39. General provisions.
C. GROUND-MOUNTED — mounted on the ground.
STRUCTURE-MOUNTED — Mounted on a structure other than a
building such as a water tank/tower.
D.
Signage. No advertising signage of any type shall be permitted on
wireless telecommunications structures or facilities, including logos,
banners, flags, or combinations of paint colors associated with
corporate identification.
A.
Location. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be permitted in
all zoning districts.
Noncommercial wireless service facilities less than six feet in
height and/or 200 square feet in area are not subject to a formal
review and do not require a building permit from the Bedford
Building Code Official.
(1)
Amateur (HAM) radio antennas are not subject to a formal review;
however, a building permit by the Bedford Building Code Official is
necessary for antennas exceeding six feet in height.
(2)
Commercial wireless service facilities that locate on previously
approved towers, utility poles or related structures do not require a
formal review; however, a building permit by the Bedford Building
Code Official is still necessary.
(3)
Commercial wireless telecommunications facilities to be located
on roofs, walls, or other existing structures such as water tanks/
towers, do not require a special exception by the Zoning Board
of Adjustment. Such facilities are subject to the requirements set
forth in § 275-40 below and Nonresidential Site Plan Review by the
Bedford Planning Board and shall require issuance of a building
permit from the Bedford Building Code Official.
(4)
B.
§ 275-38 BEDFORD CODE § 275-39
1:326
§ 275-40. Design requirements for antennas mounted on existing
structures other than previously approved facility.
The placement of wireless telecommunication antennas on roofs or walls
may be permitted by the Planning Board subject to standards set forth in
§ 275-42 and if the provisions below are met. In the case of preexisting
nonconforming structures, roof- and wall-mounted antennas and their
equipment shelters shall not increase any nonconformities.
New commercial ground mount wireless telecommunications
facilities may be permitted by Special Exception of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment upon the applicant proving that a wireless
telecommunications facility is necessary and that there are no
existing structures that are suitable to locate its wireless
telecommunications facility. New commercial ground mount
facilities must not exceed 130 feet in height above the average
existing ground level adjoining the structure. New ground mount
wireless telecommunications facilities are subject to § 275-41,
§ 275-43, and Nonresidential Site Plan Review by the Bedford
Planning Board and shall require issuance of a building permit
from the Bedford Building Code Official. The Zoning Board of
Adjustment has the option to hire an engineer of their choosing
paid for by the applicant.
(5)
Transfer to noncommercial entity. Any wireless structure that ceases
to provide service for a commercial use cannot be transferred, sold or
donated to a noncommercial entity. In addition, the structure cannot
be used for noncommercial use after ceasing to provide commercial
service.
C.
Annual declaration. The owner of a wireless telecommunications facility
shall file on or before January 1 of each year, a declaration with the
Zoning Administrator on a form that may be obtained from the Town
offices as to the continuing operation of every facility installed subject
to these regulations. Failure to do so shall be determined to mean that
the facility is no longer in use and considered abandoned, thus subject
to the provisions of § 275-45. Should the ownership of the facility
change, the Town shall be notified of the new ownership and mailing
address.
D.
Roofs mounts. When a wireless telecommunications facility exceeds six
feet in height, it must be of stealth design such as a chimney, steeple, or
cupola. Issuance of a building permit from the Bedford Building Code
Official is required for all roof mounts.
A.
Side mounts. Wireless telecommunications facilities that are sidemounted
shall not extend more than six feet above the roofline without
being of stealth design. Issuance of a building permit form the Bedford
Building Code Official is required for all side mounts.
B.
C. Historic District.
§ 275-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-40
1:327
§ 275-41. Required documentation for Zoning Board of Adjustment
special exception.
Any wireless telecommunications facility located on or within a
structure shall not alter the character-defining features and
distinctive construction methods.
(1)
Any alteration made to a structure within the Historic District to
accommodate a wireless telecommunications facility shall be fully
reversible.
(2)
Wireless telecommunications facilities authorized by this
subsection shall be concealed within or behind existing
architectural features, or shall be located so that they are not
visible from public roads and viewing areas.
(3)
Wireless telecommunications facilities located in the Bedford
Historic District shall comply with Article VII of this chapter.
(4)
Burden of proof. The applicant shall have the burden of proving that
there are no existing structures that are suitable to locate its wireless
telecommunications facility; that the proposed facility will fill an
existing significant gap in the ability of remote users to access the
national telephone network; that the manner in which the applicant
proposes to fill the significant gap in service is the least intrusive
manner with respect to visual impact, environmental impact and safety.
This will require a showing that a good-faith effort has been made
to identify and evaluate less intrusive alternatives, including that the
provider has considered less sensitive sites, alternative system designs,
alternative tower designs or placement of antennas on existing
structures. To meet that burden, all applications made to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment for a special exception must be accompanied by
the following:
A location plan of other existing commercial wireless
telecommunications towers or antennas within a three-mile radius
of the proposed site for a new facility, with complete documentation
(including financial information) to justify why the proposed facility
cannot utilize an existing or approved tower, building, antenna,
equipment area or other existing structure within a three-mile
radius for the following reasons:
The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity
of an existing or approved tower, building, antenna, equipment
area, or other existing structure as documented by a qualified
structural engineer licensed in New Hampshire, and the
existing or approved tower, building, antenna, equipment area
or other existing structure cannot be reinforced, modified, or
replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment
at a reasonable cost. Documentation with the stamp of the
(a)
(1)
A.
§ 275-40 BEDFORD CODE § 275-41
1:328
structural engineer must be submitted to the Board of
Adjustment with the location plan.
The planned equipment would cause interference materially
impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment
at an existing or approved tower, building, antenna, equipment
area or other existing structure as documented by a qualified
radio frequency (RF) engineer and the interference cannot be
prevented at a reasonable cost.
(b)
Existing or approved towers, buildings, antennas, equipment
areas, or other existing structures within the three-mile search
radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height
necessary to function reasonably as documented by a qualified
RF engineer.
(c)
Other unforeseen reasons which make it infeasible to locate
the planned telecommunications equipment upon an existing
or approved tower, building, antenna, equipment area, or other
existing structure.
(d)
A list of all contacts made with owners of potential sites regarding
the availability of potential space for a wireless
telecommunications facility.
(2)
Copies of all letters of inquiry made to owners of existing
structures that are suitable to locate its wireless
telecommunications facility, requesting a reply within 30 days, and
letters of rejection. If responses are not received within 30 days of
postmark, they may be considered unanswered and return receipt
requested forms from the United States Post Office shall be
provided.
(3)
If the application claims that a structure is not capable of physically
supporting proposed wireless telecommunications equipment, this
claim must be certified by a qualified structural engineer licensed
in New Hampshire and submitted to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The certification shall, at a minimum, explain the
structural issues and demonstrate that the structure cannot be
modified to support the wireless telecommunications facility
without unreasonable costs.
(4)
Master plan. A master plan of the applicant's ultimate transmission
proposal for the Town of Bedford, including the number of facilities
that will be needed to provide uninterrupted service within Bedford and
general locations for any necessary future facilities to effectuate the
applicant's master plan.
B.
Radio frequency coverage analysis. A coverage analysis for the
proposed site shall include, at a minimum, two antenna heights with a
minimum 10 feet of separation. In addition, the applicant shall provide
a composite map showing all proposed and existing sites within a
C.
§ 275-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-41
1:329
ten-mile radius from the proposed site as well as a summary sheet
identifying the following for each site propagated.
(1) Coordinates.
(2) Transmitter effective radiated power.
(3) Receive signal threshold.
(4) Antenna height.
(5) Antennas used with sectors.
Viewshed analysis. A viewshed analysis, including photographs of a
crane or a balloon moored at the site indicating the visibility of the
proposed structure from all abutting streets and other key locations
as determined by the Zoning Administrator. The use of a crane or
balloon shall be at the choice of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Public notification is required seven days in advance in the local daily
newspaper of wide circulation. [Amended 3-14-2017]
D.
Aesthetic impact mitigation proposal. An aesthetic impact mitigation
proposal which should include existing and proposed landscaping,
proposed site grading, proposed limits of clearing, siting considerations
relative to surrounding topography, color, camouflage, disguise
mechanisms (i.e., disguising a monopole as a pine tree or a light pole),
or other mitigation techniques.
E.
Radio frequency radiation emission. The applicant shall provide
appropriate documentation calculating the radio frequency radiation
emission per current Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
regulations taking into account all current users of the structure. A
copy of the document must be forwarded to the Building Code Official
at time of building permit application;
F.
Co-location.
No special exception or nonresidential site plan review will be
required if a company chooses to utilize an existing or approved
tower, building, equipment area, or other existing structure. A
building permit from the Building Code Official will still be
required. The co-locator shall also supply the Building Code Official
with appropriate documentation calculating the radio frequency
radiation emission per current Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) regulations taking into account all current users
of the structure.
(1)
Each commercial carrier application for a new wireless
telecommunications facility shall submit a written confirmation to
the Zoning Board of Adjustment specifying that the carrier agrees
to design and construct the new facility to structurally
accommodate the equipment of at least two carriers, including the
applicant. The spacing shall be based upon 10 feet per carrier,
(2)
G.
§ 275-41 BEDFORD CODE § 275-41
1:330
§ 275-42. Required documentation for Planning Board site plan
review.
utilization of three sectors and a total of 12 antennas per carrier.
The written document must also specify that the applicant agrees
to provide for shared use of the proposed facility to maximum
structural capacity at industry standard lease rates.
The applicant shall also submit a shared use evaluation form which
provides notice to all commercial carriers in the region that a new
wireless telecommunications facility is proposed to be erected and
that a potential opportunity for co-location exists.
(3)
All applications made to the Bedford Planning Board for a site plan
approval must be accompanied by the following:
(1) Nonresidential site plan per § 275-16 of this chapter;
(2) Bond for removal as set forth in § 275-44B below;
A copy of the relevant portion of a signed lease which requires
the applicant to remove the tower and associated facilities upon
cessation of operations at the site.
(3)
A.
In the case of antennas mounted on roofs, walls, or other structures,
such as a water tank/tower, the applicant shall also be required to
submit the following additional information to the Planning Board for
review:
The applicant shall provide a composite map showing all proposed
and existing sites within a ten-mile radius from the proposed site
as well as a summary sheet identifying the following for each site
propagated:
(a) Coordinates.
(b) Transmitter effective radiated power.
(c) Receive signal threshold.
(d) Antenna height.
(e) Antennas used with sectors.
(1)
A report prepared by a qualified and licensed structural engineer
licensed in New Hampshire indicating the existing structure's
suitability to accept the antenna and the proposed method of
affixing the antenna to the structure. Complete details of all
fixtures and couplings, and the precise point of attachment shall be
indicated. A viewshed analysis in accordance with § 275-41D may
be required at the discretion of the Planning Board.
(2)
B.
§ 275-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-43
1:331
§ 275-43. Design requirements for new commercial groundmounted
facilities.
New commercial ground-mounted wireless telecommunications facilities
shall be designed in accordance with the following:
Height.
The height of any such wireless telecommunications facilities must
not exceed 75 feet above the average existing ground level
adjoining the structure in the Residential and Agricultural District
and the General Residential District and must not exceed 130 feet
above the average existing ground level adjoining the structure
in all other districts. A favorable written recommendation from
the Manchester Airport must be received by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment if the proposed structure would be located within a
five-mile radius of this airport. [Amended 3-13-2018]
(1)
Any request for a wireless telecommunications facility that exceeds
130 feet in height must obtain a variance from the Zoning Board
of Adjustment and a favorable written recommendation from the
Manchester Airport.
(2)
All applicants must comply with the requirements of the Federal
Aviation Administration's (FAA) Advisory Circular AC 70/7460.2J
and must file notification to the FAA when required. No action
shall be taken until such time as the FAA has made a formal
determination of impacts.
(3)
A.
Stealth design. Towers and antennas shall be designed to blend into the
surrounding environment through the use of architectural treatment,
stealth design, and use of color except in instances where the color is
dictated by federal and state authorities such as the Federal Aviation
Administration. Disguise mechanisms are require unless the applicant
proves to the Zoning Board that natural conditions surrounding the
facility mitigate visual impacts to the Board's satisfaction.
B.
Equipment shelters. All equipment for new commercial groundmounted
facilities, including but not limited to generators and cabinets,
must be housed within an equipment shelter. The equipment shelter
shall be designed in accordance with one of the following requirements:
(1) Equipment shelters shall be located in underground vaults; or
Equipment shelters shall be designed so that the shelters are
architecturally consistent, with respect to materials and
appearance, to the buildings in the area of the wireless
telecommunications facility.
(2)
C.
Landscaping requirements. All ground-mounted wireless
telecommunications facilities shall require a landscaping plan that
D.
§ 275-43 BEDFORD CODE § 275-43
1:332
§ 275-44. Maintenance of facility and security for removal.
§ 275-45. Abandoned towers.
Abandoned towers shall be removed as follows:
provides for screening the base of the facility and all equipment with
existing vegetation and new plantings.
Fall zone. A new ground wireless telecommunication facility must
comply with the setback requirements for the zoning district in which
it is located, or be set back 100% of its height from all property
lines, habitable dwellings, businesses, institutional or public facilities,
whichever is greater. Exceptions: In all districts, except the Residential
Agricultural District and the General Residential District, the setback
may be reduced by the Zoning Board of Adjustment upon a showing by
the applicant that the facility is designed to collapse in a manner that
will not harm other property. In the Residential Agricultural District
and the General Residential District, all wireless telecommunication
facilities must be set back at least 750 feet from the nearest
residentially zoned property. [Amended 3-13-2018]
E.
Maintenance. The owner shall maintain the wireless
telecommunications facility in good condition. Such maintenance shall
include, but not be limited to, painting, structural integrity of the
mount and security barrier, and maintenance of the buffer areas and
replacement of dead and dying landscaping.
A.
Security for removal.
Each commercial carrier who receives approval for a new wireless
telecommunications facility shall submit a removal bond issued
to the Town of Bedford to guarantee that the facility will be
dismantled and removed within 90 days of cessation of wireless
telecommunications use. The amount of the surety shall also
include all site reclamation costs deemed necessary and reasonable
to return the site to its pre-construction condition, including the
removal of roads, and reestablishment of vegetation. The amount of
the surety shall be based upon the removal and restoration costs,
plus 15%, provided by the applicant and certified by a qualified
professional engineer licensed in New Hampshire.
(1)
The owner of the facility shall provide the Zoning Administrator
with a revised removal and restoration cost estimate and structural
evaluation prepared by a professional structural engineer licensed
in New Hampshire every five years from the date of the Planning
Board's approval of the site plan. If the cost has increased more
than 15%, then the owner of the facility shall provide a new bond
for the removal and restoration cost plus 15%.
(2)
B.
§ 275-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-45
1:333
At such time that a carrier plans to cease wireless telecommunications
use, such carrier will notify the Town by certified United States mail of
the proposed date of cessation of wireless telecommunications use. The
Zoning Administrator shall notify the owner of the land by certified mail
of the planned cessation of use and order the removal of the facility
within 90 days of receipt of the written notice.
A.
If the wireless telecommunications facility is not removed within this
time period, the Planning Board shall, after holding a public hearing
with notice to the owner and abutters, issue of declaration of
abandonment. At such time, the municipality may remove the wireless
telecommunications facility and return the site to its pre-construction
condition by utilizing the funds posted by financial surety to the Town
previously mentioned.
B.
§ 275-45 BEDFORD CODE § 275-45
1:334
ARTICLE VII
Historic District
§ 275-46. Purpose.
§ 275-47. Powers and duties of Historic District Commission.
It is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that the recognition,
preservation, enhancement, and continued use of buildings, structures,
sites, and areas within the Historic District defined in this chapter
having historical, architectural, cultural, or design significance are
required in the interest of the economic prosperity, cultural enrichment,
health, and general welfare of the community.
A.
The purposes of this article are to:
Safeguard the heritage of the Town of Bedford by providing for
the protection of the structures and areas representing significant
elements of its cultural, social, economic, political, and
architectural history;
(1)
Enhance the visual character of the municipality by encouraging
and regulating the compatibility of new construction within the
Historic District to reflect or respect established architectural
traditions;
(2)
Foster public appreciation of, and civic pride in, the beauty of the
Town of Bedford and the accomplishments of its past;
(3)
Strengthen the economy of the Town of Bedford by protecting
and enhancing the attractiveness of the community to residents,
tourists, and visitors;
(4)
(5) Conserve property values within the Town of Bedford; and
Promote the private and public use of structures and areas within
the Historic district of the Town of Bedford for the education,
pleasure, prosperity, and general welfare of the community.
(6)
B.
The Historic District Commission shall adopt and amend regulations for
the administration of the Historic District.
A.
The Historic District Commission shall be responsible for the
administration of this article and regulations within the Historic
District.
B.
The Historic District Commission shall review all applications for
permits for construction, alteration, removal, or demolition within the
Historic District.
C.
Such powers of review shall be limited to those considerations which
will have an impact on the character and integrity of the district.
D.
§ 275-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-47
1:335
§ 275-48. Location of district.
The location of the Historic District of the Town of Bedford shall be shown
on the Zoning Map, Town of Bedford, New Hampshire.
§ 275-49. Activities requiring review.
§ 275-50. Activities not requiring review by Commission. [Amended
3-14-2006]
The Historic District Commission shall not require review of the following
activities and as detailed in the Historic District Commission Regulations:
The Historic District Commission may consult with other boards and
officers of the Town, or with historical, cultural, or educational groups,
or persons to reach a decision.114
E.
The Historic District Commission shall have the power to accept and
use gifts, grants, or contributions for the exercise of its functions.
F.
Regulated activities. It is unlawful for any person to construct, alter,
move, or demolish any building, structure, or improvement which lies
within the Historic District without first obtaining a certificate of
approval from the Historic District Commission. [Amended
3-14-2006]
A.
Historic Commission review. For the purpose of this article, the
following activities shall be reviewed by the Historic District
Commission and as detailed in the Historic District Commission
Regulations: [Amended 3-14-2006]
Erection, alteration, sand blasting, abrasive cleaning, relocation,
or demolition of the building or structure, and construction on any
site; [Amended 3-14-2006]
(1)
Erection, alteration, or removal of any exteriors or visible features
of a building or structure;
(2)
Construction or reconstruction of any stone wall or fencing; and
[Amended 3-14-2006]
(3)
(4) Grading, excavation, or removal of stone walls, fences, and trees.
B.
Ordinary maintenance and repair. Ordinary maintenance and repair of
any architectural feature which does not involve removal or a change in
design, dimensions, materials, or outer appearance of such features.
A.
Painting or repainting of buildings or structures.
Colors employed shall be consistent with that of the balance of the
district and shall be presented in a conventional manner.
(1)
B.
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 275-47 BEDFORD CODE § 275-50
1:336
§ 275-51. Application procedure.
The following procedures shall be followed in processing applications for
approval of work covered by this article:
§ 275-52. Review criteria.
In making a determination on an application, the Historic District
Commission shall take into account the purposes of this article and
consider, but not be limited to, the following:
Unconventional designs, colors, or color combinations are
prohibited.
(2)
Application. An application, on forms established by the Historic
District Commission, shall be submitted to the Historic District
Commission for review and approval of any work to be performed
within the Historic District of the Town of Bedford.
A.
Fees. The applicant shall be required to pay an application fee and legal
notice fee as established by the Historic District Commission.
B.
Project description. The application shall include a narrative
description of the project and graphic materials of sufficient clarity
and detail to give the Commission a clear and certain understanding
of the applicant's intention regarding the work contemplated and its
consistency with the Historic District Ordinance and regulations.
C.
Application documents. The applicant shall supply site plans, building
plans, elevations, perspective sketches, photographs, building material
samples, or other information reasonably required by the Commission
to make its determination of approval or disapproval.
D.
Review by additional Town officials. In reviewing the application
package, the Commission may request reports and recommendations
regarding the feasibility of the applicant's proposal from the Planning
Board, Fire Chief, Building Code Official, Health Officer, and other
administrative officials who may possess information concerning the
impact of the proposal on the Historic District.
E.
Hearing The Historic District Commission shall conduct a hearing on
all applications, providing notice as required by law to each abutting
property owner and the general public.
F.
Approval. The Commission shall issue a certificate of approval or notice
of disapproval within 10 calendar days of the date of the final hearing
unless the applicant shall agree to an extension in writing. [Amended
3-14-2006]
G.
Historical, architectural, or cultural value. The historical, architectural,
or cultural value of the subject building(s), structure(s), or
landscape(s), and their relationship and contribution to the setting.
A.
§ 275-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-52
1:337
Compatibility. The compatibility of the exterior design, arrangement of
elements, texture, and materials proposed to be used in relationship to
existing buildings or structures and their settings.
B.
Scale and size. The scale and general size of new construction in
relation to existing surroundings with consideration of such factors
as height, width, street frontage, number of stories, roof type, facade
openings, and architectural detail.
C.
Other factors. Other factors, including yards, off-street parking,
screening, fencing, entrance drives, sidewalks, signs, lights, and/or
landscaping which might effect the character of any buildings or
structures within the district and similar factors which related to the
setting for such structure or grouping of structures.
D.
Project impact. Impact that the applicant's proposal will have on the
setting and the extent which it will preserve and enhance the historical,
architectural, and cultural qualities of the district and community.
E.
Compatible use. Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a
compatible use for a property which requires minimal alteration of the
building, structure, site, and its environment, or to use a property for
its originally intended purpose.
F.
Historical preservation. The distinguishing original qualities or
character of a building, structure, site and its environment shall not
be destroyed. The removal or alteration of any historical material or
distinctive architectural features should be avoided when possible.115
G.
Alterations. All buildings, structures, and sites shall be recognized as
products of their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and
which seek to create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged.
H.
Appropriate changes. Changes which may have taken place in the
course of time are evidence of the history and development of a
building, structure, site, and its environment. These changes may have
acquired significance in their own right, and this significance shall be
recognized and respected.
I.
Stylistic features and examples of skilled craftsmanship. Distinctive
stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship which
characterize a building, structure, or site shall be treated with
sensitivity.
J.
Restoration vs. replacement.
Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than
replaced, whenever possible.
(1)
K.
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 275-52 BEDFORD CODE § 275-52
1:338
§ 275-53. Certificate of approval.
In the event replacement is necessary, the new material should
match the material being replaced in composition, design, texture,
and other visual qualities.
(2)
Repair or replacement of missing architectural features should
be based on accurate duplications of features, substantiated by
historical, physical, or pictorial evidence rather than on conjectural
designs or the availability of different architectural elements from
other buildings or structures.
(3)
Cleaning. The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with
the gentlest means possible. Sand blasting and other cleaning methods
that will damage the historical building material shall not be
undertaken.
L.
Preservation of archaeological resources. Every reasonable effort shall
be made to protect and preserve archaeological resources affected by
or adjacent to any project.
M.
Contemporary design. Contemporary design for alterations and
additions to existing properties shall not be discouraged when such
alterations and additions do not destroy significant historical,
architectural, or cultural material, and such design is compatible with
the size, scale, color, material, and character of the property,
neighborhood, or environment.
N.
Additions or alterations. Whenever possible, new additions or
alterations to structures shall be done in such a manner that if such
additions or alterations were removed in the future, the essential form
and integrity of the original structure would be unimpaired.
O.
Demolition or relocation of buildings or other structures.
Before a building or other structure is demolished or moved out
of the district or neighborhood, the applicant shall, in good faith,
prepare a detailed plan for reuse of the vacated sight which the
Commission determines will meet the requirements of a certificate
of approval.
(1)
Such certificates of approval for demolition, relocation, or reuse
shall only be granted upon a showing by the applicant that to deny
such certificate would result in a hardship unique to the property in
question and that such hardship is not common to the neighboring
properties within the district or neighborhood.
(2)
P.
No regulated activities shall occur without first receiving a certificate
of approval from the Historic District Commission. [Amended
3-14-2006]
A.
B. Modifications of approved application [Amended 3-14-2006]
§ 275-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-53
1:339
§ 275-54. Appeals.
Any person or persons jointly or severely aggrieved by a decision of the
Historic District Commission shall have the right to appeal that decision to
the Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance with state law.
§ 275-55. Enforcement [Added 3-12-1996]
Any deviation from the approved application in the actual
construction, renovation, or change in a building or site shall
render such application null and void.
(1)
Modifications to an application must be approved by the Historic
District Commission at a regular public hearing.
(2)
In the event that an unanticipated modification is discovered to
be necessary during the actual construction process, the Bedford
Building Code Official may allow a reasonable substitution in
design or materials. The applicant shall then immediately file an
amended plan with the Historic District Commission.
(3)
The exterior work of the approved application must be completed
within two years after the issuance of the certificate of approval.
"Exterior work" is defined as construction of the building, painting,
landscaping, driveways, and retaining walls.
A.
Failure to complete the exterior work within two years, or receive an
extension of time from the Historic District Commission, shall result in
enforcement by the Zoning Administrator of § 275-87, Violations and
penalties, of this chapter. [Amended 3-14-2006]
B.
§ 275-53 BEDFORD CODE § 275-55
1:340
ARTICLE VIII
Performance Zoning District116
§ 275-56. Statutory authority. [Amended 3-8-1994]
This Article VIII is enacted by the Town of Bedford pursuant to RSA 674:21,
II. This innovative land use control ordinance shall provide for all approvals,
including the granting of conditional or special use permits, by the Planning
Board. Any decision made by the Planning Board under this innovative land
use control ordinance may be appealed directly to Superior Court in the
same manner provided by statute for appeals from the Planning Board,
as set forth in RSA 676:5, III, and RSA 677:15. A waiver process from
particular requirements set forth in Article VIII may be employed by the
Planning Board where the applicant demonstrates substantial compliance
with the standards set forth in Article VIII, § 275-58, Purpose, Subsections
A through E.
§ 275-57. Intent.
§ 275-58. Purpose. [Amended 3-13-2012]
The purposes of this Performance Zoning District Ordinance are:
Zoning was first implemented as a technique for separating
incompatible types of land development, thereby protecting lowintensity
uses from the harmful or disagreeable impacts of highintensity
uses. However, conventional zoning may produce its own set
of undesirable side-effects.
A.
As design and technology continually change in the marketplace, new
types of land uses are proposed which cannot be easily assigned to
existing zoning classifications. Too often, innovative land developments
are either denied outright (resulting in loss of tax revenue to the
municipality), appealed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment (where
special conditions are imposed), or subjected to lengthy rezoning
procedures (requiring a Town-wide ballot vote).
B.
Performance standards measure the quantifiable impacts of each
proposed development rather than prohibiting certain classes of land
use. This type of zoning offers an alternative method for implementing
community goals as outlined in the 1990 Bedford Master Plan and
the 1983 Route 3 Corridor Study, while protecting the right of private
property owners to utilize their land according to highest and best use.
C.
To attract environmentally acceptable commercial, industrial,
recreational, institutional, and residential uses to the District;
A.
116. Editor's Note: The title of this article was changed from U.S. Route 3 Corridor
Performance Zoning District to Performance Zoning District by Art. 2 of the 3-13-2012
Annual Town Meeting.
§ 275-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-58
1:341
§ 275-59. Boundaries of Performance Zoning District. [Amended
3-13-2012]
The boundaries and extent of the Performance Zoning District are as
delineated and depicted on the map entitled "Zoning Map, Town of Bedford,
NH 1993," and as afterwards amended.
§ 275-60. Definitions.
Except where specifically defined or otherwise referenced within this
article, words and terms used are intended to imply their customary
definition and meaning. The following words and terms are specifically
defined as follows:
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE — A commercial
establishment that devotes more than 15% of the total display, shelf, rack,
wall, table, stand or floor area, utilized for the display and sale of the
following items listed in Subsection A and B below. The establishment, as
one of the principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form
of consideration any one of more the following:[Added 3-14-1995]
To encourage diversity in the community tax base through appropriate
flexibility in land use and land use development;
B.
To optimize financial return on public infrastructure investments and
expenditures, including municipal sewer, municipal water supply, the
Manchester Airport, Class I and II public highways, and the Merrimack
River amenities;
C.
To minimize adverse traffic impacts on U.S. Route 3, the I-293/NH
Route 101 Interchange, and surrounding local streets and roadways;
and
D.
To preserve valuable historical, cultural, and natural features within the
district and to minimize adverse environmental impacts such as water,
air, light, noise pollution, flooding, clear cutting of vegetation, and the
blocking of scenic views.
E.
Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, video reproductions, slides,
tapes, records, CDs or other forms of visual or audio representations
which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas or meet the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or
"sexual conduct" as set forth in RSA-571-B:1; or
A.
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with sexual conduct as defined in RSA-571-B:1, other than
birth control devices. A commercial establishment may have other
principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale
or rental of material depicting or describing specified sexual conduct
or activities and still be categorized as adult video/bookstore. Such
other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial
B.
§ 275-58 BEDFORD CODE § 275-60
1:342
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar establishment
which during a substantial portion of the total presentation time features
live performances which meet the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or
"sexual conduct" as set forth in RSA 571-B:1, and/or features films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions, a
substantial portion of the total presentation time of which is devoted to
showing of material which meets the definition of "harmful to minors" and/
or "sexual conduct" as set forth in RSA 571-B:1.[Added 3-14-1995]
ADULT DRIVE-IN THEATER — An open lot or part thereof, with
appurtenant facilities, devoted primarily to the presentation of motion
pictures, films, theatrical productions and other forms of visual productions,
for any form of consideration to persons in motor vehicles or on outdoor
seats, in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time being
presented for observation by patrons is devoted to the showing of material
which meets the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct"
as set forth in RSA 571-B:1.[Added 3-14-1995]
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES — Adult bookstore or adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult drive-in theater, adult motel, adult motion picture
arcade, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, nude model studio, and/
or sexual encounter center as defined herein.117
establishments from being categorized as an adult video/bookstore so
long as one of its principal business purposes is offering for sale or
rental for consideration to specified material which depict or describe
specified sexual conduct or activities or specified anatomical areas.
"Specified sexual conduct or activities" means that the male
genitals in a state of sexual arousal and/or the vulva or more
intimate parts of the female genitals.
(1)
"Specified anatomical areas" means and includes any of the
following:
The fondling or other erotic touching of the human genitals,
public region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
(a)
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, or copulation, or sodomy;
(b)
(c) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
Excretory function as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in Subsection B(2)(a) through (c) above.
(d)
(2)
"Adult bookstore or adult video store" does not include an
establishment that sells books or periodicals as an incidental or
accessory part of its principal stock and trade and does not devote more
than 15% of the total display area of the establishment to the sale of
books and periodicals.
C.
117. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 275-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-60
1:343
ADULT MOTEL — A motel or similar establishment offering public
accommodations of any form of consideration which provides patrons with
closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides or photographic reproductions, a substantial portion of the
total presentation time of which is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis upon the depiction or description of materials which meet the
definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in RSA
571-B:1.[Added 3-14-1995]
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE ARCADE — Any place to which the public is
permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled still- or motion-picture machines,
projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show
images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, in which a
substantial portion of the total presentation of the images so displayed is
devoted to the showing of material which meets the definition of "harmful
to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in RSA 571-B:1.[Added
3-14-1995]
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An establishment with a capacity
of five or more persons where, for any form of consideration, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are
shown, and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is
devoted to the showing of material which meets the definition of "harmful to
minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in RSA 571-B:1, for observation
by patrons. For the definitions of adult cabaret, adult drive-in theater, adult
motel, adult motion-picture arcade, adult theater and this definition of adult
motion picture theater, a "substantial portion of the total presentation time"
shall mean the presentation of films or shows described above for viewing
on more than seven days within any fifty-six-consecutive-day period.[Added
3-14-1995118]
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
establishment, either indoor or outdoor in nature, which for any form of
consideration regularly features live performances, a substantial portion of
the total presentation time of which is distinguished of characterized by an
emphasis on activities which meet the definition of "harmful to minors" and/
or "sexual conduct" as set forth in RSA 571-B:1.[Added 3-14-1995]
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the average existing
ground level of a building footprint to the soffit (or highest horizontal
support) of the building.[Added 3-14-1995]
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches at breast
height (dbh) or 3 1/2 feet above grade.[Added 3-8-1994]
EASEMENT DEED — A legally binding document which provides the
grantee with specific entitlements related to the use and enjoyment of the
grantor's property.
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 275-60 BEDFORD CODE § 275-60
1:344
ELDERLY HOUSING — See definition of "elderly housing" in
§ 275-21B(2).119
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — The surface area of all man-made
improvements which effectively prevents the natural passage of water from
the ground surface to the underlying soil mass.
INCENTIVE BONUS STANDARDS; INCENTIVE BONUS — The provisions of
this article which provide potentially advantageous land use arrangements
to individuals as compensation for voluntarily utilizing their property(s) in a
preferred but not required manner.
LOADING/RECEIVING AREA — A portion of a structure which is reserved
for the primary purpose of providing structure access for the arrival and
dispersal of goods and products transported by truck or rail.
LOCAL ROADS and STREETS — All highways classified as Class IV or V
under RSA 229:5.
MATERIAL STORAGE AREA — That portion of a site routinely used for the
outdoor storage of any products, goods, or raw materials.
MUNICIPAL SEWER — An operational system constructed and maintained
for the collection and renovation of nonhazardous wastewater flows, which
is either owned and maintained by a municipality or a public utility company
licensed by the Public Utilities Commission of the State of New Hampshire.
MUNICIPAL WATER — An operational system constructed and maintained
for the purpose of distribution of potable water for general use, which is
either owned and maintained by a municipality or a public utility company
licensed by the Public Utilities Commission of the State of New Hampshire.
NOISE — Any objectionable sound produced by any unnatural activity.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — A place where a person who appears in a state
of nudity or displays male genitals in a state of arousal and/or the vulva
or more intimate parts of the female genitals and is observed, sketched,
drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other
persons who pay money or any form of consideration or such display is
characterized by an emphasis on activities which meets the definition of
"harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in RSA
571-B:1.[Added 3-14-1995]
NUISANCE ODOR — Any emission which produces and objectionable or
unhealthy smell.
PERFORMANCE ZONING STANDARDS, PERFORMANCE STANDARDS —
The specific provisions of this article which have been created for the
purpose of accomplishing the stated intent of the article or any portion
thereof.
REFUSE — Any natural or man-made product or by-product with a market
value below the total cost associated with proper disposal of the same.
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 275-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-60
1:345
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial enterprise
that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:[Added 3-14-1995]
SHARED-ACCESS DRIVES — Any privately owned curb cuts and/or traveled
ways which provide common access to more than one property.
U.S. ROUTE 3 — That section of highway known locally as South River Road,
which runs the length of Bedford, between the Merrimack and Manchester
corporate boundaries.
WATER-DEPENDENT STRUCTURES — A dock, wharf, pier, breakwater,
swimming float, boat ramp, or other similar structure or part thereof.
§ 275-61. Permitted uses. [Amended 3-14-1994; 3-14-1995;
3-11-1997; 3-10-1998; 3-14-2006; 3-11-2008; 7-13-2011; 3-13-2012;
3-10-2015; 3-8-2016; 3-13-2018]
All land uses, or combinations thereof, enumerated hereunder are
permitted within the Performance Zoning District subject to review for
suitability by the Planning Board. Prior to any Planning Board approval
of a proposed use, the applicant must demonstrate that the proposed use
will meet all of the performance standards established in the following
sections, the Bedford Subdivision Regulations, the Bedford Nonresidential
Site Plan Review Regulations, and shall not produce any negative impacts
on surrounding properties.
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex; or
A.
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same
sex when one or more persons is in the state of nudity; or
B.
Where the activities in Subsection A or B is characterized by an
emphasis on activities which meets the definition of "harmful to minors"
and/or "sexual conduct", as set forth in RSA 571-B:1.
C.
A. Research and development operations.
B. Manufacturing.
C. Warehousing and truck terminal facilities.
D. Professional and business offices.
Retail, wholesale and rental trades, commercial service, and repair
facilities, subject to Footnote 37 in Table 2, Table of Uses.120
E.
Restaurants, fast-food restaurants, hotels, motels, and other hospitality
services.
F.
120. Editor's Note: Table 2 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 275-60 BEDFORD CODE § 275-61
1:346
§ 275-62. Dimensional performance standards.
Medical/dental services and related facilities, including hospitals and
nursing homes and assisted living facilities.
G.
H. Personal service establishments.
I. Places of worship and related religious facilities.
J. Public and private educational institutions.
Public and private commercial and noncommercial recreation areas
and open space.
K.
L. Water-dependent structures.
M. Business center developments.
N. Membership clubs.
Gasoline service stations. Gasoline service stations are subject to
Footnote 12 in Table 2, Table of Uses, of this chapter.121 Gasoline
service stations and their accessory uses may be permitted in the PZ
Zone only by the granting of a conditional use permit by the Planning
Board. Applications for a conditional use permit shall address the
following: purpose of the Performance Zoning District, dimensional
standards, highway improvements, sewer and water connections,
setbacks, landscaping, signage, parking, screening of refuse and
pumps, lighting, environmental safeguards, nuisance odors, market
data to support the proposed location, access to a signalized
intersection, existing and future traffic analysis, identification of
existing stations within a five-mile radius, and provisions for
termination of the conditional use permit if the station is abandoned.
O.
P. Banks and other financial institutions.
Q. Funeral homes.
R. Parking lot/structure.
S. Information processing.
T. Day-care facilities.
Adult entertainment businesses. Adult entertainment businesses are
subject to § 275-72.
U.
V. Kennel.
Alternative treatment center (non-cultivation location). Alternative
treatment centers are subject to § 275-21H.
W.
X. Workforce housing. [Added 3-12-2019]
121. Editor's Note: Table 2 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 275-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-62
1:347
Table of Performance Dimensional Standards.
In order to accomplish the stated intent and purpose of this article,
as well as ensure that the goals and objectives of both the 1990
Bedford Master Plan and the 1983 Route 3 Corridor Study are
fulfilled, performance zoning standards enumerated within Table
3, Table of Performance Dimensional Standards, have been
developed.122
(1)
No building or structure shall be erected, enlarged, altered, or
relocated, nor shall any existing lot size be changed or new lot
created within the Performance Zoning District, except in
accordance with the Table of Performance Dimensional Standards
or as otherwise specified within this article. [Amended
3-13-2012]
(2)
A.
Incentive bonus standards.
In recognition of the need to protect the overall integrity and
character of the Performance Zoning District, as well as to promote
the development of a system of local roads and utilities for properly
servicing properties within the Performance Zoning District, the
performance zoning standards presented in Table 3, Table of
Performance Dimensional Standards, have been formulated so as
to include incentive bonus standards. [Amended 3-13-2012]
(1)
These incentive bonus standards have been created as means for
rewarding those who choose to voluntarily develop their properties
in a way that is most compatible with the stated goals and
objectives of the 1990 Bedford Master Plan and the 1983 Route 3
Corridor Study.
(2)
Incentive bonus standards which are implicit in these performance
zoning standards include:
Minimum lot areas and frontage.
Purpose. Recognition that less restrictive minimum lot
area and frontage requirements for sites which either
front on local roads or have shared access from Route 3
can promote favorable development along this corridor,
without adversely affecting traffic patterns.
[1]
Reduction in minimum lot area and frontage. As an
incentive bonus to encourage this concept of local road
construction and/or shared access, minimum lot area and
frontage requirements will be relaxed from a minimum lot
size of three acres with 300 feet of frontage, to 1.5 acres
with 150 feet of frontage when a municipal water supply
and/or municipal sewer is not available.
[2]
(a)
(3)
B.
122. Editor's Note: Table 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 275-62 BEDFORD CODE § 275-62
1:348
Waiver of soils and steep slopes regulation. The Planning
Board may further waive the soils and steep slopes
regulation contained within the Subdivision Regulations of
the Town of Bedford, New Hampshire, for sites created
under this incentive bonus standard. (See Figure 4,
Incentive Bonus Standards.123)
[3]
Municipal sewer and water connections.
Purpose. Recognition that sites created which take
advantage of the incentive bonus standard outlined above
should have an additional incentive bonus to expend funds
for connection to municipal sewer and a municipal water
supply.
[1]
Reduction in minimum lot area and frontage. This
incentive bonus standard is provided by allowing these
sites to further reduce minimum lot area to one acre with
75 feet of frontage.
[2]
Waiver of construction improvements. This incentive is
provided in order to offset the cost of providing these
utilities. This incentive bonus can also be attained by
contributing funds to a Town-administered fund for future
utility connection in lieu of actually constructing these
improvements at the time of subdivision. (See Figure 4,
Incentive Bonus Standards.)
[3]
(b)
Easement deeds.
Land within 50 feet of U.S. Route 3. Recognition that
individuals who voluntarily agree to provide easement
deeds over that portion of their land within 50 feet of
the present center line of U.S. Route 3, thereby reserving
this easement area for future widening or similar
improvements to this corridor, may be compensated for
this action by being allowed to develop their properties
to an extent greater than that allowed by the maximum
impervious coverage requirements otherwise permitted
within this district.
[1]
Excess impervious coverage. The amount of excess
impervious coverage allowed being equal to the actual
computed area of the easement area provided for future
improvements. (See Figure 3, Incentive Bonus Formula for
Route 3 Easement.124)
[2]
(c)
(d) (Reserved)125
123. Editor's Note: Figure 4 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
124. Editor's Note: Figure 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 275-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-62
1:349
§ 275-63. Minimum landscape performance standards. [Amended
3-8-1994]
Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shown in Table 3,
Table of Performance Dimensional Standards,126 may be
reduced if all the following criteria are met:
A parcel of land, with an area greater than or equal to the
difference between the minimum required lot area from
Table 3, Table of Performance Dimensional Standards, and
the proposed lot area is deeded in fee simple to the Town
of Bedford or a nonprofit organization acceptable to the
Bedford Town Council;
[1]
Those utilizing this performance standard must offer any
land, which is not to be retained by the subdivider, to
the Bedford Town Council. In considering any such offer,
the Town Council may elect to accept the land for Town
ownership and use; reject the offer; or defer ownership
to a third party, nonprofit organization of their selection
for permanent use as public recreation, conservation, open
space, or historic preservation;
[2]
The parcel to be retained by the subdivider shall meet
applicable NHDES lot sizing criteria when public sewers
are not available at the time of subdivision. Further, the
Planning Board may elect to waive the soils and steep
slopes based lot sizing requirements contained within the
Subdivision Ordinance of the Town of Bedford;
[3]
Any parcel created under this performance standard shall
have a total area of not less than 1/2 acre.
[4]
(e)
Intent. To preserve and enhance the aesthetic qualities of the
Performance Zoning District by establishing a matrix of landscape
design and planting options which perform in relationship to the
intensity of the proposed land use. It is anticipated that through the
implementation of landscape strips and incentive bonuses, the
following objectives can be accomplished: [Amended 3-13-2012]
Diminish potentially adverse impacts of structures, lighting glare,
noise, wind velocities, and odors which could result from
permitting widely varying land uses on adjacent parcels;
(1)
Ensure that each tract of land has benefit of an adequate buffer
between neighboring parcels in order to preserve and protect
property values;
(2)
A.
125. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3)(d), Front structure setback, as amended, was
repealed 3-8-2016.
126. Editor's Note: Table 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 275-62 BEDFORD CODE § 275-63
1:350
Promote an aesthetically pleasing relationship of scale between
buildings and their natural surroundings;
(3)
Reinforce the visual image of Bedford's Performance Zoning
District as tree-lined streets, through the planting of native shade
trees along roadways, installation of underground utilities, and
design of monument or pedestal signage rather than pole signage;
and
(4)
Encourage a pedestrian-friendly environment through the inclusion
of sidewalks, barrier-free street crossings, mass transit shelters,
public benches, and bicycle racks.
(5)
General landscape provisions.
Plantings requirements. All plantings required by this article shall
be installed according to accepted horticultural standards and shall
be regularly maintained. Required plantings shall be replaced as
necessary in order to maintain compliance with these zoning
standards.
(1)
Verification of incentive bonuses provisions/waivers. Where
incentive bonuses or waivers are employed, the Bedford Planning
Department shall have the ability to verify the effectiveness, health,
size, and number of retained plantings at the completion of
construction. Any deficiencies found with regard to these items
shall be corrected and may require the installation of additional
plantings prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(2)
Waivers for public safety. None of the landscape requirements
contained within this article shall be construed so as to require
installation of improper plantings where safe site distance at drives
or along public streets may be inhibited by such plantings. The
Planning Board may waive any landscape requirements of this
article when deemed to be necessary for reasons of public safety.
(3)
B.
Landscape areas. (See Figure 5, Designated Landscape Areas.127)
(1) Open space.
(2) Street tree landscape strip.
(3) Front landscape strip.
(4) Side and rear landscape strips.
(5) Exterior pavement landscape strips.
(6) Interior pavement landscape strips.
(7) Signage landscape strip.
C.
127. Editor's Note: Figure 5 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 275-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-63
1:351
(8) Screening of unsightly features.
Incentive bonus standards.
(1) Preservation of mature trees and shrubs.
(2) Placement of parking spaces to the side and rear of buildings.
Encouragement of shared vehicle access and interconnecting
parking spaces between adjacent parcels of land
(3)
D.
Implementation.
Open space. All areas disturbed by construction shall be covered
with a minimum thickness of four inches of suitable topsoil and
be subsequently planted with grass seed, sod, or other vegetative
ground cover.
(1)
Street tree landscape strip.
Intent. The street tree landscape strip is intended to promote
the aesthetic quality of tree-lined streets within this district.
(a)
Location.128
The street tree landscape strip shall be a fifteen-foot wide
strip running parallel with the lot frontage along any
public right-of-way and shall be continuous along the
entire length of said right-of-way, excepting areas reserved
for approved curb cuts. (See Figure 5, Designated
Landscape Areas, Figure 6, Minimum Landscape
Requirements, and Figure 7, Minimum Landscape
Heights.129)
[1]
Where easements for street widening are conveyed, the
street tree landscape strip shall overlap onto the front
landscape strip, and street trees should be planted along
the inside of any such easement line, within the front
landscape strip.
[2]
The street tree landscape strip may be waived where a
side or rear landscape strip is planted instead along the
frontage of a right-of-way.
[3]
(b)
Plantings.130
The street tree strip shall be planted with a minimum of
one indigenous shade tree for every 50 feet of right-of-way
frontage. Examples of indigenous shade trees are maple,
oak, and ash. The size of the trees to be planted within this
[1]
(c)
(2)
E.
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
129. Editor's Note: Figures 5, 6 and 7 are included at the end of this chapter.
130. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 275-63 BEDFORD CODE § 275-63
1:352
area shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in caliper at the
time of planting. Branching height of street trees shall not
be less than seven feet above grade when planted. Street
trees shall be spaced at least 25 feet apart at the time of
planting.
Where overhead utility lines restrict the allowable height
of plantings, alternative tree specifications (including
evergreens) may be substituted by a waiver from the
Planning Board.
[2]
Incentive bonuses. Each healthy native tree with a caliper of
three inches or greater, which is preserved within the street
tree strip, may be substituted for one required new street tree
planting.
(d)
Front landscape strip.
Intent. The front landscape strip is intended to promote a
pleasing relationship of scale between buildings and related
site improvements and to integrate the design of the street tree
strip.
(a)
Location.131
The front landscape strip shall be a strip of variable width
(minimum 15 feet wide) between the street tree area and
the closest point of a building or impervious surface facing
a public right-of-way. (See Figure 5, Designated Landscape
Areas, Figure 6, Minimum Landscape Requirements, and
Figure 7, Minimum Landscape Heights.132)
[1]
Where easements for street widening are conveyed, the
street tree strip may be overlaid on top of the front
landscape strip.
[2]
(b)
Plantings. The front landscape strip shall be planted with a
minimum of one deciduous or evergreen tree for every 30
feet of horizontal building facing a public right-of-way. Trees
planted within this area shall have a height equal to 1/2 of the
maximum proposed building height (but not less than 12 feet
high or more than 30 feet high) at the time of planting.
(c)
Incentive bonuses. Each healthy native tree with a caliper of
three inches or greater, which is preserved within the front
landscape strip, may be substituted for one new front
landscape tree. Each healthy native tree with a caliper of four
inches or greater which is preserved within the front landscape
strip may be substituted for two new front landscape trees.
(d)
(3)
131. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
132. Editor's Note: Figures 5, 6 and 7 are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 275-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-63
1:353
Side and rear landscape strips.
Intent. The side and rear landscape strips are intended to
promote proper visual separation and adequate buffering
between adjoining properties. Parking, drives, and buildings
shall not be located within any required side and rear
landscape strip.
(a)
Location. Required side and rear landscape strips shall begin
at the inner limits of the front landscape strip and run parallel
to side and rear property lines. The required minimum width of
these side and rear landscape strips shall be a distance equal
to 1/2 the maximum proposed building height. (See Figure 5,
Designated Landscape Areas, Figure 6, Minimum Landscape
Requirements, and Figure 7, Minimum Landscape Heights.133)
However, in no case shall the required width of any side or rear
landscape strip be less than 10 feet. [Amended 3-11-1997]
(b)
Plantings. Required side and rear landscape strips shall be
constructed so as to provide a dense visual four-season screen
by using one or a combination of any of the landscape options
provided in the following Table of Side and Rear Landscape
Options (See Table 4, Table of Side and Rear Landscape Area
Options. See also Figure 8, Side and Rear Landscape
Options.134)
(c)
Incentive bonuses. Healthy woodland provides for a dense
landscape screen more effectively than new plants. Healthy
existing woodland may be retained in order to fulfill planting
requirements within side and rear landscape strips. The
minimum width of woodland retained for the purpose of
fulfilling side and rear landscape strip requirements shall be
equal to the maximum proposed building height; however, in
no case shall the required width of retained woodland be less
than 30 feet. [Amended 3-11-1997]
(d)
(4)
Exterior pavement landscape strip.
Intent. The exterior pavement landscape strip is intended to
create visual screening of automobile parking areas, create
summer shade along paved surfaces and reduce wind velocity
across open lot areas.
(a)
Location.135
The exterior pavement landscape strip shall be a fifteenfoot
wide strip running parallel to all parking and on-site
driveway pavement edges. In the case of frontage along
[1]
(b)
(5)
133. Editor's Note: Figures 5, 6 and 7 are included at the end of this chapter.
134. Editor's Note: Table 4 and Figure 8 are included at the end of this chapter.
135. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 275-63 BEDFORD CODE § 275-63
1:354
public rights-of-way, the exterior pavement landscape strip
shall be located between the required front landscape
strip or a side or rear landscape strip and the proposed
pavement edge.
Where an exterior pavement landscape strip would
immediately abut a side or rear landscape strip (not facing
a right-of-way) that section of exterior pavement landscape
strip may be waived.
[2]
Plantings. The exterior pavement landscape area shall be
constructed in accordance with one of the landscape options
outlined within the following Table of Exterior Pavement
Landscape Options. (See Table 5, Table of Exterior Landscape
Options.)136
(c)
Incentive bonuses. If any portion of a parking area or driveway
is immediately adjacent to a required side or rear landscape
strip, the provisions of this section shall not apply to that area.
(See Figure 9, Interconnected Parking Lots.137) A preserved
strip (minimum six feet wide) of healthy, dense, native
vegetation, located within a required exterior parking
landscape strip, may be substituted for the planting
requirements in this section.
(d)
Interior pavement landscape strips.
Intent. The intent of the interior pavement landscape strips
is to break up large expanses of pavement, provide summer
shade on pavement areas and reduce wind velocity across
exposed surface areas.
(a)
Location.
The required interior pavement landscape strips shall be
calculated as a minimum of 5% of the total area of paved
drives, parking areas, etc. Interior landscape strips shall
be required for all parking lots with more than 20 parking
spaces;
[1]
The required minimum interior landscape strips must be
provided within the limits of parking and/or drive
pavements. The minimum landscaped island size usable
for satisfaction of these requirements shall not be less
than 250 square feet in total area. Parking lots which have
multiple parking aisles, which are approximately parallel,
shall be required to have planting strips not less than 15
feet wide, spaced not further than 180 feet apart. (See
Figure 10, Parking Lots With Multiple Parking Aisles.138)
[2]
(b)
(6)
136. Editor's Note: Table 5 is included as the end of this chapter.
137. Editor's Note: Figure 9 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 275-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-63
1:355
Plantings. islands and planting strips shall be planted with
indigenous shade trees, evergreen shrubs, and deciduous
shrubs. The required number of shade trees shall be calculated
as one deciduous tree (minimum caliper of 2 1/2 inches) per
400 square feet of required interior landscape area. The
number of shrubs shall be equal to one shrub (minimum threefoot
high) per 130 square feet of required interior landscape
strips. Required shrubs shall be 40% deciduous and 60%
evergreen species.
(c)
Incentive bonuses. Each healthy native tree with a minimum
caliper of four inches or greater, which is preserved within
interior pavement landscape strips, may be substituted for
three new required tree plantings.
(d)
Signage landscape strip.
Intent. The intent of the signage landscape strip is to
reestablish ground cover where disturbed by sign installation
and to screen the foundation of monument or pedestal signs
without blocking the view of signage information.
(a)
Location. The signage landscape strip shall be a minimum fourfoot
wide area surrounding each monument or pedestal sign
base.
(b)
Plantings. All monument or pedestal sign bases shall be
planted with shrubs or ground cover with a minimum height
and width of 18 inches at the time of planting.
(c)
Incentive bonuses. Healthy vegetation which is preserved in
the location of the signage landscape area, may be substituted
for the required plantings.
(d)
(7)
Screening of unsightly features.
Intent. This section is intended to preserve the visual
aesthetics of the Performance District by blocking or
minimizing the view of refuse, materials storage, loading/
receiving docks, and utility installations. [Amended
3-13-2012]
(a)
Location.
Refuse storage areas, stockpiled materials for packaging
and commercial/industrial by-products, and other
materials stockpile areas shall be located so as to be out
of view from any abutting property and/or public rightsof-
way. In cases where this is not possible, these items
shall be properly located within a secured area which has
[1]
(b)
(8)
138. Editor's Note: Figure 10 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 275-63 BEDFORD CODE § 275-63
1:356
§ 275-64. Minimum standards for off-street parking areas.
[Amended 3-8-1994]
been effectively screened. As a minimum, all such areas
shall be contained within a stockade, chain link, or similar
enclosure which is at least as tall as the object(s) to be
screened. Further, the perimeter of any such enclosure
shall be subject to the landscape screening requirements
outlined herein.
Loading docks and receiving areas, as well as large
aboveground utility fixtures, shall be located so as to be
out of view from abutting properties and/or public rightsof-
way. In cases where this is not possible, these facilities
shall be effectively screened in accordance with the
minimum landscape screening requirements outlined
herein. ("Large aboveground utility fixtures" are defined
as any public or private utility component which has a total
footprint area of greater than 50 square feet, or has an
average height of more than four feet.)
[2]
Plantings. Minimum landscape screening requirements for use
in satisfying each of the above criteria shall include the
planting of one evergreen tree or shrub per 10 linear feet of
required screen length or perimeter. The height of required
trees or shrubs shall be equal to 1/2 of the maximum height of
the item requiring the screen at the time of planting. Required
plantings shall be placed at regular spacings so as to maximize
the overall density of the landscape screen.
(c)
Incentive bonuses. An enclosure either attached or detached
from a principal structure, constructed of rigid architectural
materials, which are visually compatible with those of the
principal structure, may be used to satisfy the requirements
of this section and may be substituted for the requirements
outlined above.
(d)
Intent.
In order to provide for safe and adequate parking facilities which
do not detract from the overall aesthetic quality of development
within this District, minimum standards for off-street parking areas
have been developed.
(1)
The goals and objectives related to the development of these
standards are:
To insure that suitable off-street parking areas are provided for
all future sites within this District;
(a)
(2)
A.
§ 275-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-64
1:357
§ 275-65. Performance standards for screening refuse, material
storage, loading/receiving areas, and utility installations.
To promote the concept of interconnecting parking between
adjacent businesses as a means easing demands placed on
public streets and intersections, where and when feasible;
(b)
To promote the development of interior green space within
parking lots as a means of mitigating summer heat and as a
location for winter snow disposal;
(c)
To provide trees for summer shade and as means for
diminishing excessive wind velocity; and
(d)
To create off-street parking areas which do not detract from
the overall quality of development within this District.
(e)
General performance standards for off-street parking.
All general and specific provisions of the off-street parking
requirements of the Bedford Land Development Control
Regulations shall apply to this district unless otherwise noted
within this section or modified by approval of the Planning Board.
[Amended 7-13-2011]
(1)
Neither the display of automobiles or other objects which may be
for sale nor the storage of raw or processed materials shall be
permitted within any required off-street parking spaces or their
interconnecting drives and/or aisles.
(2)
Adequate space within, or immediately adjacent to, off-street
parking lots shall be provided for the storage of winter snow.
Winter snow shall not be placed within required off-street parking
stalls, or their aisles and/or interconnecting drives. All designated
snow storage area(s) shall be located and devised such that
anticipated snow volumes will not pose a threat to vehicular and/
or pedestrian circulation. Further, snow storage areas shall have
adequate provisions made so as to avoid icing or flooding of
traveled areas during periods of snow melt.
(3)
B.
Incentive bonus standards. An incentive bonus standard is provided
which omits landscape requirements associated with side and rear
landscape strips between those portions of adjacent sites where shared
access and interconnected parking occurs. (See Figure 9,
Interconnected Parking Lots.139)
C.
General provisions.
Often, careful site planning can minimize or even eliminate adverse
visual effects associated with necessary site elements, such as
(1)
A.
139. Editor's Note: Figure 9 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 275-64 BEDFORD CODE § 275-65
1:358
refuse containers, material storage areas, loading docks/receiving
areas, and large aboveground utility fixtures.
Unfortunately, in many cases, unavoidable circumstances make it
impossible to effectively hide unsightly site elements from public
view.
(2)
For this reason, the following minimum performance standards
apply to this district.
(3)
Storage areas.
Refuse storage areas, stockpiled material packaging and
commercial/industrial by-products, material storage areas, and
stockpiles shall be located so as to be out of view from any abutting
property and/or public right-of-way.
In cases where this is not possible, these items shall be
properly located within a secured area which has been
effectively screened.
(a)
As a minimum, all such areas within view of adjoining
properties or public streets shall be contained within a
stockade, chain link, or similar enclosure which is at least as
tall as the object(s) to be screened.
(b)
(1)
Further, the perimeter of any such enclosure shall be subject to the
landscape.
(2)
B.
Loading docks/receiving areas and aboveground utility fixtures.
Loading docks and receiving areas, as well as large aboveground
utility fixtures, shall be located so as to be out of view from abutting
properties and/or public rights-of-way.
(1)
In cases where this is not possible, these facilities shall be
effectively screened in accordance with the minimum landscape
screening requirements outlined herein.
(2)
"Large aboveground utility fixtures" are defined as any public or
private utility component which has a total footprint area of greater
than 50 square feet or has an average height of more than four feet.
(3)
C.
Minimum landscape screening requirements. Minimum landscape
screening requirements for use in satisfying each of the above criteria
include:
The planting of one evergreen tree or shrub, plus one additional
evergreen tree or shrub per 10 linear feet of required screen length
or perimeter;
(1)
The height of required trees or shrubs shall be equal to 1/2 of the
maximum height of the item requiring the screen at the time of
planting; and
(2)
D.
§ 275-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-65
1:359
§ 275-66. (Reserved)140
§ 275-67. General landscape requirements.
Required plantings shall be placed at regular spacings so as to
maximize the overall density of the landscape screen.
(3)
Enclosures. An enclosure, either attached or detached from a principal
structure, constructed of rigid architectural materials which are
visually compatible with those of the principal structure, may be used
to satisfy the requirements of this section and may be substituted for
the requirements outlined above.
E.
Plantings. All plantings required by this article shall be installed
according to accepted horticultural standards and shall be regularly
maintained. Required plantings shall be replaced as necessary in order
to maintain compliance with these zoning requirements.
A.
Dimensions and terms. Tree and shrub dimensions and terms used
within this article are referenced to American Standards for Nursery
Stock, as published by the American Association of Nurserymen.
B.
Incentive bonus standards. Several incentive bonus standards related
to this article allow for the substitution of retained vegetation for
required plantings.
Verification of plantings. In situations where these various
incentives are exercised, officials of the Town of Bedford or their
representatives shall have the ability to verify the effectiveness,
health, size, and number of retained plantings at the completion of
construction.
(1)
Correction of deficiencies. Any deficiencies found with regard to
these items shall be corrected and may require the installation
of additional plantings prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for the property.
(2)
C.
Reclamation of disturbed areas. All areas disturbed by construction
shall be covered with a minimum thickness of four inches of suitable
topsoil and be subsequently planted with grass seed, sod, or other
vegetative ground cover.
D.
Waiver of landscape requirements when necessary for public safety.
None of the landscape requirements contained within this article shall
be construed so as to require installation, where proper site distance at
drives or along public streets may be inhibited by such improvements.
The Planning Board may omit any landscape requirements of this
article when deemed to be necessary, for reasons of public safety.
E.
140. Editor's Note: Former § 275-66, Minimum landscape requirements for signage, was
repealed 3-11-2014. See § 275-63E(7).
§ 275-65 BEDFORD CODE § 275-68
1:360
§ 275-68. Sign standards.
Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADDRESS SIGN — The street address shall be included as part of a
directory/monument sign.
ANIMATED OR MOVING SIGN — Any sign that has moving or rotating
components, flashing lights, or special materials to illustrate action or
create a special effect or scene.
CANOPY EAVELINE; EAVELINE — The bottom of the roof eave or the
canopy eave. An eave as defined herein does not include the parapet of
a flat-roof building. (See Figures B and C.)
Figure B Figure C
CENTER IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A freestanding sign that is either
a monument or directory type. (See Figure 11, Center Identification
Sign.141)
DIRECTORY SIGN — A separate structure supported from the sides. A
sign for identification of the business or center as a whole and for listing
the major tenants and their building numbers/address numbers. (See
Figure 11, Center Identification Sign.)
DOUBLE-FACED SIGN — A single freestanding structure designed with
the intent of providing advertising on both sides.
HEIGHT OF SIGN — The greatest vertical distance measured from the
finished ground below the middle of the sign to the highest element of
the sign.
A.
141. Editor's Note: Figure 11 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 275-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-68
1:361
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign that illustrates the name, name and
logo, type of business, or identifies a particular establishment.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign lit with either an internal or external
artificial light source.
MONUMENT SIGN — A separate structure supported from grade to
the bottom of the sign with a base or wall that is larger than the sign.
A sign for identification of the business or center as a whole and for
listing the major tenants and their building numbers/address numbers.
(See Figure 11, Center Identification Sign.)
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A legally established sign which fails to
conform to the regulations as presented or referenced herein.
SIGN — Any object, devise, display, structure, or part thereof, situated
outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct,
or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization,
business, product, service, event, or location by any means, including
words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or
projected images.
SIGN AREA — The entire face, including the surface and any molding,
framing, and projections, but not including the base, wall or column
supports. Individual letters and logos mounted on a building without
any distinguishing border, panel or background shall be measured by
the area of the smallest rectangle enclosing all of the words, symbols
and logos. If the symbol or logo is irregularly shaped or taller than the
text, the sign area shall be the area of the smallest rectangle enclosing
the text plus the area of the smallest rectangle enclosing the logo or
symbol.[Amended 3-8-2016]
WALL SIGN — A sign fastened or painted onto a wall.
General provisions.
The adopted Bedford Zoning Ordinance, revised March 9, 1993,
Article IX, Signs, § 275-73, General provisions, Subsections A
through N, and § 275-75, Political signs, shall apply to the
Performance Zoning District. (See Table 6, Table of Performance
Sign Standards.142) [Amended 3-13-2012]
(1)
A sign pertaining to the lease or sale of a lot or building on which it
is placed shall be allowed as long as such sign does not exceed 18
square feet.
(2)
Direct and indirect lighting.
Direct and indirect lighting methods are allowed, provided that
they are not unnecessarily bright.
(a)
(3)
B.
142. Editor's Note: Table 6 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 275-68 BEDFORD CODE § 275-68
1:362
Internally lit panels shall be opaque and only the lettering shall
appear to be lighted.
(b)
(c) Externally lit signs are encouraged.
Prohibited signs. Animated, moving, flashing, and noisemaking
signs are not permitted.
(4)
Lettering on a sign. The letter area, as it relates to the overall sign
background area, shall be in proportion. In general, letters shall
not appear to occupy more than 75% of the sign panel area.
(5)
Identification signs (building) are subject to the following design
standards: [Amended 3-8-2016]
Signs on a building wall or eaveline shall be compatible with the
predominant visual elements of the building, shall not obscure
architectural details or windows, and their location shall be shown
on the proposed architectural elevations.
(1)
Where there is more than one sign, all signs shall be
complementary to each other as follows:
(a) Letter size and style of text;
(b) Sign support method;
(c) Sign area configuration;
(d) Sign shape and proportion; and
(e) Construction materials (text and background surfaces).
(2)
(3) The use of backlit, individually cut, letter signs is encouraged.
Wall and eaveline sign locations. (See Figures D and E.)
Figure D, Eaveline Sign
(4)
C.
§ 275-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-68
1:363
Figure E, Wall Sign
Center identification sign (freestanding) (See Figure 11.143)
Freestanding signs shall include the identification of the business
or center as a whole and major tenant and street address range
included within the center. A freestanding sign shall be either a
monument- or directory-type sign.
(1)
A minimum of 10% of the sign area shall be devoted to the
identification of the building or center by name.
(2)
Freestanding monument signs or directory signs shall be placed
perpendicular to approaching vehicular traffic. (See Figure F
below.)
(3)
D.
143. Editor's Note: Figure 11 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 275-68 BEDFORD CODE § 275-68
1:364
§ 275-69. Minimum lighting standards.
§ 275-70. Environmental performance standards.
Figure F
General provisions. In order to facilitate vehicular and pedestrian
safety, promote property security, and enhance the overall use of
properties within this district, exterior site lighting shall be required for
all permitted uses subject to site plan review.
A.
Illumination levels for exterior site lighting. Exterior lighting levels
shall follow the recommended illumination levels found in the
Illumination Engineering Society Lighting Handbook, most current
edition.
B.
Design of external light fixtures.
In order to minimize glare and other adverse effects associated
with exterior lighting, all exterior lighting fixtures shall be of a
design that provides for full cutoff luminaires. A full cutoff
luminaire shall mean a luminaire light distribution where zero
candela intensity occurs at or above an angle of 90° above nadir
and the candela per 1,000 lamp lumens does not numerically
exceed 100 (10%) at an angle 80° above nadir. This applies to all
lateral angles around the luminaire. [Amended 3-13-2007]
(1)
Further, all fixtures shall be positioned and/or installed in such a
fashion as to prevent unwanted incidental illumination of abutting
properties and streets. (See Figure 12, Design of External Lighting
Fixtures.144)
(2)
C.
144. Editor's Note: Figure 12 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 275-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-70
1:365
General provisions.
Environmental performance standards specific to the Performance
District, enumerated herein, have been developed in order to
protect the long-term environmental quality and overall vitality of
this district. [Amended 3-13-2012]
(1)
The variety of permitted uses, taken together with often intensive
land use patterns and an inventory of environmental resources
specific to this district, necessitates this series of environmental
performance standards.
(2)
In addition to the provisions of this article, development within this
district shall also be subject to applicable local, state, and federal
land use controls and regulations. The content of this article shall
not be construed to imply relief from the requirements of state or
federal statutes.
(3)
A.
Performance standards related to noise.
Intent. These performance standards governing noise are intended
to ensure that the rights of property owners, as well as the overall
health and general welfare of the district, are not diminished by
unreasonable noise levels generated within the district.
(1)
Maximum permissible sound level. The maximum permissible
sound level produced by any continuous, regular, or frequent
source of sound or noise, produced by any permitted use or activity
within this district, shall not exceed a measurable level of 75 dB
beyond the property boundaries of the site upon which the sound
or noise is generated or originates.
(2)
Sound or noise abatement. In order to comply with these maximum
sound level requirements, sound or noise level abatement
techniques may be used to mitigate levels of site-generated sound
or noise. To this end, modern acoustical technology may be applied
to achieve compliance with these regulations.
(3)
Measurements of sound or noise. In cases where sound
measurements are required in order to ensure compliance with
these regulations, measurements shall be taken:
With a device meeting the standards of the American
Standards Institute, American Standard Specifications for
General Purpose Sound Level Meters;
(a)
At a height of four feet above prevailing grade at the property
boundary in question;
(b)
(c) With the instrument set to the A-weighted response scale; and
Recorded by an individual familiar with sound measurement
and the particular devise being used.
(d)
(4)
B.
§ 275-70 BEDFORD CODE § 275-70
1:366
Exemptions.
Activities related to public and private construction or
maintenance work, agriculture, timber harvesting, emergency
warning devices, and other similar short-term or temporary
uses may be administratively exempted from the requirements
of this section if, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator or
his/her agent, sufficient reason exists to do so.
(a)
In these special circumstances, the Zoning Administrator may
place reasonable conditions (such as time limitations and
hours of operation) on such an exemption.
(b)
(5)
Performance standards related to the protection of wetlands. All
provisions of Article IV, Wetlands Conservation, of this chapter shall
apply to all areas within the Performance Zoning District. [Amended
3-13-2012]
C.
Performance standards related to the development of steep slope areas.
Definition of steep slope areas. For the purposes of this section,
steep slope areas shall be defined as naturally existing, continuous
areas of land, with a contiguous area of 1/2 acre or more, which
have an average cross slope gradient steeper than 25%.
(1)
Restrictions in steep slope areas. In order to guard against hazards
implicit in the development of steep slope areas, construction
within these areas shall be limited to those activities which are
incidental to the use and/or development of land outside of a steep
slope area and shall be subject to the following restrictions:
No portion of a steep slope area shall be used for the
construction of leaching beds or trenches which are part of a
subsurface sewage disposal system;
(a)
No permanent structures shall be erected on a steep slope
area;
(b)
Not more than 50% of a steep slope area shall be cleared of
healthy existing vegetation;
(c)
Portions of a steep slope area affected by construction
activities shall be given special attention with regard to erosion
control; and
(d)
No portion of a steep slope area shall be subject to discharge
from a stormwater management system.
(e)
(2)
D.
Performance standards related to nuisance odors. Uses and activities
which produce continuous, regular, or frequent odors and/or emissions,
detectable beyond the boundary of the property from which the odor
originates, may be prohibited, in whole or in part, if the odor or
emission in question is a known health risk or danger or if the Zoning
E.
§ 275-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-70
1:367
§ 275-71. Merrimack River Shoreland protection performance
standards.
Administrator judges such odor or emission to be harmful to the rights
of others to enjoy their property(s).
Purpose.
Pursuant to RSA 483-B and the 1990 Bedford Master Plan, this
section establishes standards for the subdivision, use, and
development of shorelands within 250 feet of public waters, herein
identified as the Merrimack River, for the purpose of minimizing
degradation of shorelands and assuring retention of the benefits
provided by such shorelands.
(1)
These benefits include:
(a) Prevention and/or mitigation of water pollution;
(b) Protection of important fish, bird, and wildlife habitat;
(c) Reduction or elimination of flooding and accelerated erosion;
(d) Protection of wetlands;
(e) Maintenance of water quantity and related stream flows;
Protection of shoreland cover as a means of maintaining water
quality; and
(f)
The conservation of natural scenic and recreational assets of
the Town of Bedford and the State of New Hampshire.
(g)
(2)
A.
Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BASAL AREA — The cross sectional area of a tree measured at a height
of 4 1/2 feet above the ground, usually expressed in square feet per
acre for a stand of trees.
DISTURBED AREA — An area in which natural vegetation is removed,
exposing the underlying soil.
GROUND COVER — Any herbaceous plant which normally grows to a
mature height of four feet or less.
NATURAL WOODLAND BUFFER — A forested area consisting of
various species of trees, saplings, shrubs, and ground covers in any
combination and at any stage of growth.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — The line on the shore, running
parallel to the main stem of the river, established by the fluctuations
of water and indicated by physical characteristics such as a clear
impression on the immediate bank, shelving, soil characteristics,
vegetation markings, and the presence of water-deposited debris.
B.
§ 275-70 BEDFORD CODE § 275-71
1:368
Where the ordinary high-water mark is not easily discernible, the mark
shall be determined by a soil scientist certified by the State of New
Hampshire.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING SETBACK — A minimum area of 50 feet
measured in a line parallel with the public boundary line (ordinary highwater
mark of the Merrimack River) from which any principal building
on a lot must be set back.
PROTECTED SHORELAND — All land located within 250 feet of the
public boundary line (ordinary high-water mark) of the Merrimack
River.
PUBLIC BOUNDARY LINE — The ordinary high-water mark of the
Merrimack River.
PUBLIC WATERS — The Merrimack River, which is a fourth order allyear-
round flowing water.
SAPLING — Any woody plant which normally grows to a mature height
greater than 20 feet and has a diameter less than six inches at a point
4 1/2 feet above the ground.
SHORELAND FRONTAGE — The average of the distances measured
along the public boundary and along a straight line drawn between
the points at which the public boundary intersects the side lines of the
property.
SHRUB — Any multistemmed, woody plant which normally grows to a
mature height of less than 20 feet.
TREE — Any woody plant which normally grows to a mature height
greater than 20 feet and which has a diameter of six inches or more at
a point 4 1/2 feet above the ground.
WATER-DEPENDENT STRUCTURE — A dock, wharf, pier, breakwater,
swimming float, boat ramp, or other similar structure or part thereof.
Permitted uses.
Subdivision, vegetation or soil disturbance, use, and development
of land within the protected shoreland area, i.e., 250 feet of the
ordinary high-water mark of the Merrimack River, shall be
permitted according to Subsection F of this § 275-71.145
(1)
Permitted uses of this article and are subject to the following
conditions:
All new lots subdivided and new habitable structures built
within the two-hundred-fifty-foot shoreland protection
boundary shall be served by municipal water and municipal
sewer.
(a)
(2)
C.
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 275-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-71
1:369
All disturbed areas, construction, and/or development
activities shall incorporate design standards for erosion and
sedimentation control which, at a minimum, shall follow the
recommendations of the publication Stormwater Management
and Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Urban and
Developing Areas in New Hampshire, August 1992, prepared
by the Rockingham County Conservation District for the New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services.
(b)
Activities within the two-hundred-fifty-foot protected
shoreland area shall adhere to the following:
All proposed disturbance, construction, and/or
development activities within the two-hundred-fifty-foot
protected shoreland area (exempting agricultural
activities utilizing best management practices in
conformance with the New Hampshire Department of
Agriculture and development/maintenance of the New
Hampshire Heritage Trail) shall first receive approval from
the Bedford Planning Board in accordance with the
Bedford Nonresidential Site Plan Regulations.
[1]
Applications to the Bedford Planning Board shall include
a site plan, pre- and post-development drainage
calculations, a grading plan, a stormwater management
and erosion/sedimentation plan, and a landscape plan,
prepared by a professional engineer certified by the State
of New Hampshire.
[2]
(c)
Restricted uses. The following uses shall require a review or permit
from the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services, the
New Hampshire Wetlands Board, the United States Army Corps of
Engineers, and/or the United States Environmental Protection Agency,
in addition to site plan approval from the Bedford Planning Board:
(1) Water-dependent structures;
(2) Public water supply facilities;
(3) Public water and sewage treatment facilities;
(4) Public utility lines and structures; and
(5) Hydroelectric facilities, including dams, dikes, and powerhouses.
D.
Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses shall include the following:
(1) Salt storage sheds;
(2) Automobile junkyards;
(3) Solid or hazardous waste facilities;
E.
§ 275-71 BEDFORD CODE § 275-71
1:370
§ 275-72. Standards for adult entertainment businesses.
Use of any fertilizers (exempting fertilizers used as part of
agricultural operations in conformance with best management
practices of the New Hampshire Department of Agriculture) other
than lime and/or wood ash; and
(4)
The dumping of snow and ice collected from roadways or parking
areas outside the Performance Zoning District. [Amended
3-13-2012]
(5)
Natural woodlands buffer.
Where existing, a natural woodland buffer shall be maintained
within 250 feet of the public boundary line, i.e., the ordinary highwater
mark of the Merrimack River, excluding existing and ongoing
agricultural activities and development/maintenance activities
related to the New Hampshire Heritage Trail.
(1)
Within the natural woodland buffer, the following shall apply:
Not more than a maximum of 50% of the basal area of trees,
a maximum of 50% of the total number of saplings, and a
maximum of 50% of the total area of ground cover shall be
removed for any purpose within a twenty-year period.
(a)
Replacement planting with native or naturalized species may
be permitted to maintain the fifty-percent level, subject to
Bedford Planning Board approval.
(b)
Vegetation which is removed to clear an opening for building
construction, sewer, water, other utility line extension, or the
New Hampshire Heritage Trail shall be excluded when
computing the percentage limitations.
(c)
Stumps and their root systems which are located within 50 feet
of the public boundary line shall be left intact, in the ground.
(d)
(2)
F.
Setbacks. No principal or accessory structure, excluding waterdependent
structures, shall be located within 50 feet of the pubic
boundary line, i.e., the ordinary high-water mark of the Merrimack
River.
G.
Relationship between state and local requirements. See § 275-5 of this
chapter.
H.
Administration and enforcement. See Article XI of this chapter. All
development activities within the two-hundred-fifty-foot protected
shoreland area (exclusive of agricultural activities and development/
maintenance of the New Hampshire Heritage Trail) shall be required
to submit an as-built building and site plan prepared by a professional
engineer certified by the State of New Hampshire prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy by the Bedford Building Code Official.
I.
§ 275-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-72
1:371
Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the Town of Bedford.
A.
Intent.
It is the intent to promote the health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens of the Town of Bedford; and it is the intent of this
section that the regulations be utilized to prevent problems of
blight and deterioration which accompany and are brought about
by the concentration of sexually oriented businesses; and the
provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor the effect
of imposing limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials;
(1)
It is not the intent nor the effect of this section to restrict or
deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected
by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors
and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended
market; and neither is it the intent nor the effect of this section to
condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
(2)
B.
Allowed locations and location restrictions of adult entertainment
businesses.
Allowed locations. Adult entertainment businesses, defined in
§ 275-60, are permitted only in the PZ District, provided that all
other regulations, requirements, and restrictions for the zone in
which the adult entertainment business is to be located are met;
and no entertainment business shall be permitted within 1,000 feet
of another existing adult entertainment business or one for which a
building permit has been applied for; and
(1)
Location restrictions.
No adult entertainment business shall be permitted within
1,000 feet of any other zoning boundary, except when the
boundary is bordered by a four-lane highway;
(a)
No adult entertainment business shall be permitted within
1,000 feet of any church, place of worship, parish house,
convent, public, parochial, or private school, kindergarten,
state-approved day-care center or public sports/recreation
parks; and no adult entertainment business shall be permitted
within 1,000 feet of the Town boundaries;
(b)
No adult entertainment business shall be permitted within 500
feet of an existing residence; and
(c)
No adult entertainment business shall be permitted within
1,000 feet of another existing adult entertainment business
on the date of the passage of this section, and no adult
(d)
(2)
C.
§ 275-72 BEDFORD CODE § 275-72
1:372
entertainment business shall be permitted within a building,
premises, structure or other facility that contains a sexually
oriented business as defined in the definitions § 275-60 of the
Performance Zone.
Measure of distance. The distance between any adult entertainment
business and a church, school, residence, etc., or another adult
entertainment business shall be measured in a straight line, from
property boundary to property boundary, without regard to intervening
structures.
D.
Additional reasonable regulations. The Planning Board is empowered
hereunder to review and approve permit applications for adult
entertainment businesses and impose reasonable restrictions for
buffering, outdoor lighting, parking, adequate ingress and egress from
the site off of and onto public roads, pedestrian movement, and to
provide for appropriate landscaping and building aesthetics in the
Nonresidential Site Plan Review Regulations of the Town of Bedford,
New Hampshire, and to avoid site development layout which may result
in negative environmental impacts.146
E.
146. Editor's Note: Original Article 45-10, Off-Street Parking Requirements, which immediately
followed this section, was moved to the Bedford Land Development Control Regulations,
which are on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 275-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-72
1:373

ARTICLE IX
Signs
[Added 3-13-1984]
§ 275-73. General provisions.
Purposes. [Added 3-10-2015147]
(1) Encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication;
Prevent hazards to vehicular and pedestrian safety by regulating
the type, number, location, size and illumination of signs;
(2)
(3) Protect the public from hazardous and distracting displays;
Maintain and enhance the aesthetic character and scenic quality
of the Town's residential and commercial neighborhoods and limit
visual clutter along corridors;
(4)
Minimize potential adverse effects of signs on nearby public and
private property;
(5)
Support businesses and community vitality by informing the public
of goods, services and activities; and
(6)
(7) Enable fair and consistent enforcement of the sign regulations.
A.
Conditional use permit. [Added 3-10-2015]
The Planning Board may grant a conditional use permit to modify
the requirements of Article IX, Signs, provided the Planning Board
finds that all of the following criteria are met:
The modification complies with the purposes of the sign
regulations as noted in § 275-73A;
(a)
The applicant's particular situation, taking into account the
overall site plan, including, but not limited to, the use on
the property, existing signs, and visibility of the businesses,
justifies a modification to the requirements;
(b)
(c) The site is suitable for the proposed modifications;
The modification will not alter the essential character of the
locality;
(d)
The modifications will complement the design of the building
or site where the sign is located;
(e)
The modification will not materially impair traffic or pedestrian
safety;
(f)
(1)
B.
147. Editor's Note: This article also redesignated former Subsections A through Q as
Subsections C through S, respectively.
§ 275-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-73
1:375
The aesthetic character of the site and the surrounding area
will not be adversely affected; and
(g)
The modification will be consistent with the spirit and intent of
the Zoning Ordinance and Town of Bedford Master Plan.
(h)
An application for a conditional use permit shall provide adequate
documentation in order for the Planning Board to make a finding
that the modification meets the criteria listed above. The Planning
Board may, in its discretion, decline to grant a conditional use
permit if the Board determines such permit is not justified or
warranted.
(2)
This section shall not apply to signs in the Performance Zone, under
§ 275-68, and that are subject to the waiver provisions in § 275-56.
(3)
This provision is adopted as an innovative land use control
pursuant to RSA 674:21 and the Planning Board is vested with the
sole authority to administer and grant the conditional use permit.
Any decision made by the Planning Board under this innovative
land use control ordinance may be appealed directly to Superior
Court in the same manner provided by statute for appeals from the
Planning Board, as set forth in RSA 676:5 III and RSA 677:15.
(4)
In all districts, except the Performance Zone, no advertising sign shall
be located less than 50 feet from any side or rear property line nor
less than 10 feet from the edge of any street right-of-way. In the
Performance Zone, no freestanding advertising sign shall be located
less than 30 feet from any side or rear property line nor less than 10
feet from the edge of any street right-of-way. No freestanding sign,
including its structural supports, shall exceed a height of 10 feet above
the finished grade where the support is mounted or 10 feet above
the roadway adjacent to the location where the support is mounted,
whichever is higher. [Amended 3-12-2001; 3-14-2006; 3-13-2012]
C.
In all districts, each sign must be provided with its own support. Posting
of signs on trees, utility poles, vehicular control standards (stop signs,
etc.), or fences is expressly prohibited.
D.
In all districts, directional signs which do not exceed four square feet
and bear no advertising or site identifying information may be approved
by the Planning Director. All other types of directional or other
necessary functional signs not specified elsewhere in this chapter shall
be subject to approval of the Planning Board. [Amended 3-12-1996]
E.
Advertising signs indicating the coming of a development and
permanent subdivision identification signs shall not be allowed until
final approval of the project by the Planning Board. [Amended
3-9-1999; 3-8-2016]
F.
Portable signs shall not be allowed in any district except as noted in
Subsection N below. [Amended 3-9-1999]
G.
§ 275-73 BEDFORD CODE § 275-73
1:376
Permanent and temporary off-premises signs shall not be allowed in any
district, except as noted in Subsection P below. [Amended 3-9-1999;
3-12-2013; 3-14-2017]
H.
One unlighted sign offering premises for sale or lease for each parcel in
one ownership shall be allowed, provided it shall not exceed four square
feet in surface area unless otherwise specified herein. Said sign shall
set back at least 10 feet from the edge of the right-of-way.
I.
One unlighted temporary sign of a painter or other artisan, erected
during the period such person is performing work on the premises
on which such sign is erected, shall be allowed, provided it shall not
exceed four square feet in surface area and it shall set back at least 10
feet from the edge of the right-of-way.
J.
A sign shall not be so placed as to cast reflection upon any dwelling
unit.
K.
In the Commercial, Commercial-2, Office, Service Industrial, Highway
Commercial, Neighborhood Commercial and Performance Zoning
Districts, internally lighted permanent sign panels are permitted;
however, externally lighted signs are encouraged. Internally lighted
sign panels are prohibited in all residential zones and in the Historic
District overlay zone. Internally lighted panels shall be opaque, and
only the lettering and graphics shall appear to be lighted. Externally
lighted signs shall have the light source directed downward onto the
sign. Animated, moving, flashing, and noisemaking signs are
prohibited. Changeable readerboard signs, whether manual or
electronic, are prohibited in all zoning districts. [Amended 3-8-2005;
3-10-2009; 3-13-2012]
L.
Double-faced signs shall be considered as a single sign for spacing
requirements.
M.
N. Rooftop signs shall not be allowed in any district.
Where specific requirements are not indicated above, the Planning
Board may establish signage requirements on an individual basis.
O.
Temporary banners or temporary signs for events shall be regulated by
Chapter 216, Signs and Banners. [Amended 3-9-1999; 7-13-2011]
P.
When a sign panel is refaced the new panel must comply with the
opacity regulations of Subsection J. [Added 3-10-2009]
Q.
In the Commercial, Commercial-2, Office, Service Industrial, Highway
Commercial, Neighborhood Commercial and Performance Zoning
Districts, vehicles, trailers or equipment with commercial signage that
are routinely parked or stored on a property must be shown on a site
plan and approved by the Planning Board and shall be located in a
parking spot or approved area where its visual impacts to abutting
property and rights-of-way are limited, or can be reduced or screened.
R.
§ 275-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-73
1:377
§ 275-74. District regulations for signage.
These vehicles, trailers and equipment shall not be located within
required parking spaces or travel ways unless approved by the Planning
Board. This requirement shall not apply to uses allowed under § 275-18
or to individuals who drive a company vehicle and park it at their place
of residence while not at work. [Added 3-12-2013]
Open signs and flags. [Added 3-11-2014]
In the Commercial, Commercial-2, Office, Service Industrial,
Highway Commercial, Neighborhood Commercial and Performance
Zoning Districts, in addition to other signage allowed by this
chapter or otherwise, businesses are permitted to display signage
and flags signifying that a business is "open" in the following
manner:
One "open" sign on or within the building, not to exceed 2.5
square feet. This sign may be illuminated but must not be
animated or flashing in any manner and must be turned off
when the business is closed.
(a)
One "open" flag not to exceed 15 square feet. This flag may
be displayed on or within the building, or on the site provided
that it meets all the signage height and setback requirements
for the zoning district. This flag must be removed when the
business is closed.
(b)
(1)
Open signs and flags are limited to identifying that the business is
"open" and shall not display the business name, hours of operation,
or any other information. This section shall not apply to uses
allowed under § 275-21F(1), Home occupations.
(2)
S.
In all zones, allowable sign area for a building sign may be split into two
signs and may be located on the same or different walls as the initial
sign. [Added 3-8-2016]
T.
In all nonresidential districts, freestanding signs shall be a monument
or directory-type sign. (See Figure 11, Center Identification Signs.148)
[Added 3-13-2018]
U.
Residential. General Residential and Residential and Agricultural
Districts.
Allowable businesses, professions, or service enterprises, and
residential subdivisions or developments approved by the Planning
Board, shall be permitted one outdoor advertising sign on the
premises. This sign shall not total over eight square feet for said
sign. [Amended 3-8-2016]
(1)
A.
148. Editor's Note: Figure 11 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 275-73 BEDFORD CODE § 275-74
1:378
The sign pertaining to the lease or sale of lot or building, on
which placed shall be allowed so long as such sign does not exceed
four square feet for said sign. [Added 3-14-1989; amended
3-14-2017]
(2)
No other outdoor advertising media shall be allowed. [Added
3-14-1989]
(3)
Civic and Institutional District. Permitted signs shall be not more than
50 square feet in surface area.
B.
Commercial and Office Districts. [Amended 3-14-1989; 3-9-1999;
3-14-2006; 3-13-2012; 3-12-2013]
Allowable businesses, professions or service enterprises shall be
permitted outdoor advertising media on the premises advertising
goods or services sold on the premises.
(1)
One freestanding sign not to exceed 32 square feet, one projecting
sign, and a sign painted on or attached to one wall of a building
not to exceed 10% of the square footage of the wall on which it is
displayed shall be allowed, not to exceed 32 square feet.
(2)
In the case of a shopping center or professional park, there shall be
allowed one lot sign identifying the shopping center or professional
park sharing a common group name which shall not exceed 50
square feet. For each individual tenant, a sign painted on or
attached to one wall of the building not to exceed 10% of the square
footage of the wall on which it is displayed shall be allowed, not to
exceed 32 square feet. The sign pertaining to the lease or sale of
a lot or building on which placed shall be allowed so long as such
sign does not exceed 18 square feet.
(3)
Any wall sign or freestanding sign located 150 feet or more from
the edge of any street right-of-way providing frontage to a lot may
increase the sign area by utilizing a formula of: distance in feet/
4.25 = allowable area of sign. The distance shall be measured in
a straight line from the sign location to the center point of the
driveway curb cut on the lot line providing frontage for the lot. In
the case of multiple driveways, the driveway entry that is used to
determine the street address shall be the point of reference.
(4)
Structures with multiple tenants within the Office District shall
have no more than four wall signs. Multiple tenants may be located
on the permitted wall signage, provided no tenant is listed more
than once. [Added 3-12-2013]
(5)
C.
D. (Reserved)149
E. Service Industrial District.
149. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, Office District, as amended, was repealed 3-12-2013.
§ 275-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-74
1:379
Signs are permitted if not over 50 square feet in surface area set
back at least 50 feet from any side or rear property line and at least
10 feet from any front lot line and limited to use as a business sign.
[Amended 3-14-1995]
(1)
The sign pertaining to the lease or sale of a lot or building on which
placed shall be allowed so long as such sign does not exceed 18
square feet. [Added 3-14-1989]
(2)
Any wall sign or freestanding sign located 150 feet or more from
the edge of any street right-of-way providing frontage to a lot may
increase the sign area by utilizing a formula of: distance in feet/
4.25 = allowable area of sign.150 [Added 3-9-1999]
(3)
Each tenant space is permitted one projecting sign. [Added
3-13-2012]
(4)
Neighborhood Commercial District.
The following business signs are allowed: one projecting sign, one
monument sign not to exceed 32 square feet in surface area, and
one wall sign not to exceed 32 square feet in surface area.
[Amended 3-13-2012; 3-13-2018]
(1)
The sign pertaining to the lease or sale of a lot or building on which
placed shall be allowed so long as such sign does not exceed 18
square feet. [Added 3-14-1989]
(2)
F.
Highway Commercial District.
The following business signs are allowed: [Amended 3-13-2012]
One ground or pole sign not to exceed 32 square feet in surface
area;
(a)
One flat sign to a business unit not to exceed 32 square feet in
surface area; and
(b)
(c) Projecting sign.
(1)
The sign pertaining to the lease or sale of a lot or building on which
placed shall be allowed so long as such sign does not exceed 18
square feet. [Added 3-14-1989]
(2)
Any wall sign or freestanding sign located 150 square feet or more
from the edge of any street right-of-way providing frontage to a lot
may increase the sign area by utilizing a formula of: distance in
feet/4.25 = allowable area of sign. [Added 3-9-1999]
(3)
G.
Performance Zoning District. [Added 3-14-1989; amended
3-13-2012]
H.
150. Editor's Note: Original Subsection (f), Industrial Park District, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 3-9-1993.
§ 275-74 BEDFORD CODE § 275-74
1:380
§ 275-75. Political signs. [Amended 3-9-1999; 7-13-2011]
Political signs shall conform to all New Hampshire state statutes, including
RSA 664:14 et seq. and as may be amended, and enforcement shall be
through the office of the New Hampshire Attorney General.
All signs shall be set back from the side and rear property lines
at least 30 feet and from the front property line at least 10 feet.
[Amended 3-11-2008]
(1)
Refer to § 275-68 for specific signage standards in the Performance
Zoning District (PZ).
(2)
Any wall sign or freestanding sign located 150 square feet or more
from the edge of any street right-of-way providing frontage to a lot
may increase the sign area by utilizing a formula of: distance in
feet/4.25 = allowable area of sign. [Added 3-9-1999]
(3)
§ 275-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-75
1:381

ARTICLE X
Floodplain Development
§ 275-76. General provisions.
§ 275-77. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply only to this article and shall not be
affected by the provisions of any other ordinance of the Town of Bedford:
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within the
Town of Bedford subject to a one-percent or greater possibility of flooding
in any given year. The area is designated on the FIRM as Zones A and
AE.[Amended 3-13-2007]
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent possibility of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of a building having its floor subgrade on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operation or storage
of equipment or materials.[Amended 3-13-2007]
FEMA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
This article, adopted pursuant to the authority of RSA 674:16, shall be
known as the "Town of Bedford Floodplain Development Ordinance."
The regulations in this article shall overlay and supplement the
regulations in the Town of Bedford Zoning Ordinance, and shall be
considered part of the Zoning Ordinance for purposes of administration
and appeals under state law.
A.
If any provision of this article differs or appears to conflict with any
provision of the Zoning Ordinance or other ordinance or regulation, the
provision imposing the greater restriction or more stringent standard
shall be controlling.
B.
The following regulations in this article shall apply to all lands
designated as special flood hazard areas by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study for the
County of Hillsborough, N.H., dated September 25, 2009, or as
amended, together with the associated Flood Insurance Rate Maps
dated September 25, 2009, or as amended, which are declared to
be a part of this article and are hereby incorporated by reference.
[Amended 3-8-1994; 7-22-2009]
C.
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and
§ 275-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-77
1:383
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — An examination, evaluation, and
determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations, or an examination and determination of mudslide or
flood-related erosion hazards.[Amended 3-13-2007]
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map incorporated
with this article, on which FEMA has delineated both the special flood
hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the Town of Bedford.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — An official report incorporated with this
article in which FEMA has delineated both the special flood hazard areas
and the risk premium zones applicable to the Town of Bedford.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source. (See definition of "flooding.")
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.[Added 3-8-1994]
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — See "regulatory floodway."
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.[Added 3-8-1994]
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water. The term includes only docking and port facilities that are necessary
for the loading/unloading of cargo or passengers and ship building/repair
facilities but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
A.
§ 275-77 BEDFORD CODE § 275-77
1:384
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this article.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured
home" includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles
placed on site for greater than 180 days.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — The National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of
1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For the purposes of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of the initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever
is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for
which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of
a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures.[Added 3-13-2007]
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — See "base flood."
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered Historic
District or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered Historic District;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
A. Built on a single chassis;
§ 275-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-77
1:385
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without increasing the water surface elevation. These areas are
designated as floodways on the FIRM.[Amended 3-13-2007]
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — See "area of special flood
hazard."[Amended 3-13-2007]
START OF CONSTRUCTION —
STRUCTURE — For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT —
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or seasonal use.
[Added 3-8-1994]
D.
Includes substantial improvements and means the date the building
permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days
of the permit date.
A.
The "actual start" means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any
work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of manufactured
home on a foundation.
B.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds, not occupied as dwelling units or part of the
main structure.
C.
Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or
improvements to a structure in which the cumulative cost equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure. The market value of
the structure should equal:
A.
§ 275-77 BEDFORD CODE § 275-77
1:386
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development after the
adoption of the initial FIRM to be fully compliant with the community's
floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development
without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of
compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2),
(e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided. The sections of this article that correspond
to the sections of the CFR are §§ 275-79C, 275-81B(2), 275-80D and
275-80C(1).[Added 3-13-2007]
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION — The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, where specified,
of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains.
§ 275-78. Applicability.
All proposed development in any special flood hazard areas shall require a
permit.
§ 275-79. General requirements. [Amended 3-13-2007]
The appraised value prior to the start of the initial repair or
improvement; or
(1)
In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the
damage occurring.
(2)
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor,
or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. This
term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage,
regardless of actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include any project for improvement of a structure required
to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or any
alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
B.
The Building Code Official shall review all building permit applications
for new construction or substantial improvements to determine
whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.
If a proposed building site is located in a special flood hazard area, all
new construction or substantial improvements shall be:
Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy;
(1)
(2) Constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
A.
§ 275-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-79
1:387
§ 275-80. Alteration or relocation of watercourses.
Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damages; and
(3)
Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and
air-conditioning equipment, and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
(4)
Where new or replacement water and sewer systems (including on-site
systems) are proposed in a special flood hazard area, the applicant shall
provide the Building Code Official with assurance that these systems
will be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into
the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters, and onsite
waste disposal systems will be located to avoid impairment to them
or contamination from them during periods of flooding.
B.
For all new or substantially improved structures located in Zones A
and AE, the applicant shall furnish the following information to the
Building Code Official: the as-built elevation (in relation to NGVD) of
the lowest floor (including basement) including whether or not such
structures contain a basement; if the structure has been floodproofed,
the as-built elevation (in relation to NGVD) to which the structure
was floodproofed; any certification of floodproofing. The Building Code
Official shall maintain these records for public inspection, and shall
furnish such information upon request.
C.
The Building Code Official shall not grant a building permit until the
applicant certifies that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334.
D.
Riverine situations.
Prior to the alteration or relocation of a watercourse, the applicant
for such authorization shall notify the Wetlands Bureau of the New
Hampshire Environmental Services Department and submit copies
of such notification to the Building Code Official, in addition to
the copies required by the RSA 482-A:3. [Amended 3-8-1994;
3-13-2007]
(1)
Further, the applicant shall be required to submit copies of said
notification to those adjacent communities as determined by the
Building Code Official, including notice of all scheduled hearings
before the Wetlands Bureau. [Amended 3-13-2007]
(2)
A.
Certification of maintenance of flood-carrying capability. The applicant
shall submit to the Building Code Official, certification provided by
a registered professional engineer, assuring that the flood-carrying
B.
§ 275-79 BEDFORD CODE § 275-80
1:388
§ 275-81. Flood hazard areas defined.
capacity of an altered or relocated watercourse can and will be
maintained.
Watercourses with a designated regulatory floodway.
Along watercourses with a designated regulatory floodway, no
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development are allowed within the
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard
engineering practices that the proposed encroachment would not
result in any increase in flood levels within the community during
the base flood discharge. [Amended 3-13-2007]
(1)
In Zone A, the Building Code Official shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any floodway data available from federal, state,
or other sources as criteria for requiring that development meet
the floodway requirements of this section.
(2)
C.
Watercourses without a designated regulatory floodway. Along
watercourses that have not had a regulatory floodway designated, no
new construction, substantial improvements, or other development
(including fill) shall be permitted within Zone AE on the FIRM, unless
it is demonstrated by the applicant that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation
of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.
[Amended 3-13-2007]
D.
In special flood hazard areas the Building Code Official shall determine
the one-hundred-year flood elevation in the following order of
precedence according to the data available:
In Zone AE, refer to the elevation data provided in the community's
Flood Insurance Study and accompanying FIRM.
(1)
In Zone A, the Building Code Official shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any one-hundred-year flood elevation data
available from any federal, state or other sources including data
submitted for development proposals submitted to the community
(i.e. subdivisions, site approvals).
(2)
In Zone AO, the flood elevation is determined by adding the
elevation of the highest adjacent grade to the depth number
specified on the FIRM or, if no depth number is specified on the
FIRM, at least two feet. [Amended 3-13-2007]
(3)
A.
The Building Code Official's one-hundred-year flood elevation
determination will be used as criteria for requiring in Zones A and AE
that: [Amended 3-8-1994; 3-13-2007]
B.
§ 275-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-81
1:389
All new construction or substantial improvement of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to
or above the hundred-year flood elevation; and
(1)
That all new construction or substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to or above the one-hundred-year flood level,
or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall:
Be floodproofed so that below the one-hundred-year flood
elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;
(a)
Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and
(b)
Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions
of this section.
(c)
(2)
All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within special flood hazard areas shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
at or above the base flood level and be securely anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(3)
Recreational vehicles placed on sites within zone AE shall either:
[Amended 3-13-2007]
(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
Meet all standards of Section 60.3(b)(1) of the National Flood
Insurance Program Regulations and the elevation and
anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Paragraph
(c)(6) of Section 60.3.
(c)
(4)
For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding
are permitted, provided they meet the following requirements:
The enclosed area is unfinished or flood-resistant, usable solely
for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage;
(a)
(b) The area is not a basement; and
(5)
§ 275-81 BEDFORD CODE § 275-81
1:390
§ 275-82. Variances and appeals.
The area shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwater; and
(c)
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or must
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: [Amended
3-13-2007]
A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding shall be provided.
[1]
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, or other coverings or devices, provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.
[2]
(d)
Any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Building Code
Official made under this article may be appealed to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment as set forth in RSA 676:5.
A.
If the applicant, upon appeal, requests a variance as authorized by RSA
674:33, 1(b), the applicant shall have the burden of showing in addition
to the usual variance standards under state law that:
The variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense;
(1)
If the requested variance is for activity within a designated
regulatory floodway, no increase in flood levels during the base
flood discharge will result; and
(2)
The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
(3)
B.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall notify the applicant in writing
that the issuance of a variance to construct below the base flood
level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage, and such
construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and
property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all
variance actions.
C.
The community shall: [Added 3-13-1990]
Maintain a record of all variance actions, including their
justification for their issuance; and
(1)
Report such variances issued in its annual or biennial report
submitted to FEMA's Federal Insurance Administrator.
(2)
D.
§ 275-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-82
1:391

ARTICLE XI
Administration and Enforcement
§ 275-83. Zoning Administrator; appointment; duties.
For the purposes of this chapter, the Bedford Town Manager as specified
in the Town Charter is hereby given the power to appoint a Zoning
Administrator who shall perform the duties of the office as designated in
the various provisions of this chapter and shall report all violations of this
chapter to the Town Manager.
§ 275-84. Administrative officer.
This chapter shall be administered by the Zoning Administrator who shall
have the authority to make inspections necessary to carry out his/her duties
in the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 275-85. Building permit procedure.
Code compliance. All structures shall be constructed in accordance
with the most current applicable residential and nonresidential building
codes as referenced in Chapter 92, § 92-9, of the Town of Bedford Code.
[Added 3-8-1994; amended 3-14-2000; 3-9-2010]
A.
Applicability. No building or structure shall be constructed,
reconstructed, altered, or relocated nor shall any excavation be
commenced without a duly authorized building permit issued by such
Building Code Official.
B.
Prerequisite approvals. [Amended 3-11-1997; 3-9-2010]
An applicant for building permit approval shall be responsible for
providing certified verification of all requisite local, state, and
federal approvals prior to the issuance of said building permit.
(1)
Prior to the start of construction, all wetlands shall be identified
and flagged on the lot by a New Hampshire certified wetlands
scientist. Flagging must be maintained during the construction and
until a certificate of occupancy is issued by the Building Code
Official or his agent. Flagging shall be installed with a maximum of
no more than 25 feet between flags.
(2)
C.
Application.
Application for a building permit shall be made on standard forms
provided by the Building Code Official which are available at the
Town offices during normal business hours.
(1)
Footings/foundations for all new building construction will be
certified by a State of New Hampshire licensed land surveyor prior
to any further construction. The Building Code Official or his agent
(2)
D.
§ 275-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-85
1:393
§ 275-86. Certificate of occupancy.
§ 275-87. Violations and penalties.
may waive this requirement if in his opinion it is obvious there are
no setback encroachments. [Amended 3-10-1992]
Pending changes in Zoning Ordinance. The Building Code Official shall
not issue a building permit where application for such permit is made
after the first legal notice of proposed changes in the Zoning Ordinance
has been posted pursuant to the provisions of RSA 675:7 if the proposed
changes in the ordinance would, if adopted, justify refusal of such
permit. After final action has been taken on the proposed changes in
the Zoning Ordinance, the Building Code Official shall issue or refuse
to issue a permit which has been held in abeyance under this section
pursuant to a final action taken by the Town Meeting. [Amended
3-9-2010]
E.
Purpose. The purpose of a certificate of occupancy is to give the
Building Code Official a mechanism by which he/she can verify
conformance to provisions of this chapter, the building permit, and
other requisite approvals related thereto.
A.
Applicability.
No person shall use or permit the use of any building, structure,
or premises or part thereof hereafter erected, relocated, altered,
repaired, converted, or extended until a certificate of occupancy is
issued by the Building Code Official.
(1)
Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any building
or addition, a plat plan locating all buildings, utilities, and
easements on a given lot must be certified by a State of New
Hampshire licensed land surveyor. The Building Code Official may
waive the requirement for a certified plat plan for good cause
shown. [Amended 3-8-2005]
(2)
B.
Violations. The Zoning Administrator shall serve a notice of violation
and order to cease activity to any person, company, corporation, or
other association responsible for violating any provision of this chapter.
Any person, company, corporation, or other association who has been
served with a notice and ceases any work or other activity shall not
leave any structure or lot in such a condition as to be a hazard or
menace to the public safety, health, or general welfare.
A.
Prosecution of violations. If the notice of violation and order to cease
activity is not complied with, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the
Town Council which may, in addition to other remedies provided by law,
institute injunction, mandamus, abatement, or any other appropriate
action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove such unlawful
violation. [RSA 676:15]
B.
§ 275-85 BEDFORD CODE § 275-87
1:394
Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor if a
natural person, or a felony if any other person, and shall be subject
to a civil penalty not to exceed $275 for the first offense and
$550 for subsequent offenses for each day that such violation is
found to continue after the conviction date or after the date on
which the violator receives written notice from the Town that he
is in violation, whichever is earlier. [RSA 676:17, I] [Amended
3-19-1998]
(1)
In addition, if any successful legal action is brought by the Town to
enforce by way of injunctive relief or otherwise any local ordinance,
code or regulation, or to enforce any Planning Board, Zoning Board
of Adjustment or Building Code Board of Appeals decision or to
seek the payment of any fine levied pursuant to RSA 676:17, the
Town shall attempt to recover its out-of-pocket costs and
reasonable attorney's fees actually expended in pursuing the legal
action. [RSA 676:17, II]
(2)
§ 275-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-87
1:395

ARTICLE XII
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 275-88. Statutory authority.
In accordance with the requirements of RSA 673:1, IV, a Zoning Board of
Adjustment is hereby established as part of this chapter.
§ 275-89. Membership.
§ 275-90. Adoption of rules; recordkeeping.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules and regulations
governing meetings, hearings, application procedures, fees, and other
matter for the proper functioning of the Board. The Board shall adopt
its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings
showing the vote, indicating such facts used in making decisions, and
shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions. Every
rule or regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof, and every order,
requirement, decision, or determination of the Board shall immediately be
filed in the office of the Board and become a matter of public record.
§ 275-91. Powers and duties.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers:
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall consist of five regular members,
one of whom may be a member of the Planning Board.
A.
The terms of the initial members appointed by the Town Council shall
be staggered such that two shall serve three-year terms, two members
shall serve two-year terms, and one member shall serve a one-year
term. Thereafter, their successors when appointed by the Town Council
shall each serve three-year terms.
B.
The Town Council shall also appoint three alternate members of the
Board of Adjustment with each alternate to serve a term of three years.
C.
All regular and alternate Board members shall be appointed by the
Town Council and shall be residents of the Town in order to be
appointed.
D.
Administrative appeals. Hear and decide appeals if it is alleged there is
error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an
administrative official in the enforcement of any zoning ordinance.
In exercising these powers, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may
reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may
make such order or decision as ought to be made and, to that end,
shall have all the powers of the administrative official from whom
the appeal is taken.
(1)
A.
§ 275-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-91
1:397
The concurring vote of three members of the Board shall be
necessary to reverse any action of the administrative official or
to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter on which it is
required to pass.
(2)
Variances. Authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from
the terms of the zoning ordinance as provided for in RSA 674:33, I(b).
B.
Special exceptions.
Authorize special exceptions to the terms of the ordinance for
uses specifically identified in the Table of Uses.151 The Board may
grant such special exceptions in appropriate cases and subject to
appropriate conditions so as to be in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of the Zoning Ordinance. In granting a special
exception, the Board's shall apply the following standards:
No detriment to property values in the vicinity of the proposed
development will result on account of the location or scale
of buildings, structures, parking areas, or other accessways;
the emission of odors, smoke, gas, dust, noise, glare, heat,
vibration, or other pollutants; or the unsightly outdoor storage
of equipment, vehicles, or other materials.
(a)
No hazard will be caused to the public or adjacent property
on account of potential fire, explosion, or release of toxic
materials.
(b)
No creation of a traffic safety hazard or substantial traffic
congestion in the vicinity of the proposed development.
(c)
No excessive demand on municipal services and facilities,
including but not limited to waste disposal, police and fire
protection, and schools.
(d)
The proposed use will not result in the degradation of existing
surface and groundwater quality standards, nor will it have
adverse effects on the natural functions of wetlands on the site
which would result in the loss of significant habitat or flood
control protection.
(e)
Adequate and appropriate facilities will be provided for the
intended use.
(f)
(1)
In addition to the guiding principles specified above, the Zoning
Board of Adjustment may condition the granting of a special
exception upon more stringent standards if the Board determines
that such conditions are necessary to protect the health and
welfare of the Town and its residents. Such conditions may include
the following:
(2)
C.
151. Editor's Note: The Table of Uses (Table 2) is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 275-91 BEDFORD CODE § 275-91
1:398
Front, side, or rear yards in excess of the minimum
requirements of this chapter;
(a)
Screening of the premises from the street or adjacent property
by walls, fences, or other devices;
(b)
Limitations on the size of buildings and other structures more
stringent than minimum or maximum requirements of this
chapter;
(c)
Limitations on the number of occupants and methods and
times of operation;
(d)
Regulation of the design and location of access drives,
sidewalks, and other traffic features;
(e)
Location and amount of parking and loading spaces in excess
of existing standards; and
(f)
Regulation of the number, size, and lighting of signs in excess
of existing standards.
(g)
Special conditions and safeguards for certain special exceptions.
In addition to the guiding principles and standards specified in
§ 275-90, the following additional conditions and safeguards for
certain uses shall apply:
(1)
The Board shall not grant a special exception for a membership
club in any district which permits such a use unless the Board shall
first determine that such membership club will:
(a) Serve a purely social, athletic, or community service purpose;
Be operated on a membership basis and not conducted as a
business; and
(b)
The nature of such club will not cause or create a nuisance to
adjoining properties or to its general neighborhood.
(c)
(2)
D.
Waivers of dimensional requirements. Authorize upon appeal in specific
cases equitable waivers of dimensional requirements as provided for in
RSA 674:33-a. [Added 3-10-1998]
E.
Variances for persons with disabilities. The Zoning Board of Adjustment
may grant a variance from the terms of the Zoning Ordinance pursuant
to RSA 674:33, V, without finding a hardship arising from the condition
of a premises subject to the ordinance, when reasonable
accommodations are necessary to allow a person with a recognized
physical disability to reside in or regularly use the premises. In granting
a variance pursuant to RSA 674:33, V, the Zoning Board may provide
that the variance shall survive only so long as the particular person has
a continuing need to use the premises. [Added 3-14-2000]
F.
§ 275-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-92
1:399
§ 275-92. Time limits on approvals. [Added 3-9-1993; amended
3-9-2010; 3-11-2014; 3-12-2019]
Any variance, special exception, or administrative appeal granted by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be rendered null and void two years from
the date of approval unless the applicant files a complete application for
a building permit, site plan, or subdivision plan for the subject parcel at
which point the Zoning Board of Adjustment approval will run with the
administrative timeline of the building permit or Planning Board decision.
Variances and special exceptions approved before August 19, 2013, shall
be rendered null and void unless exercised by April 1, 2021, or as further
extended by the Zoning Board of Adjustment for good cause.
§ 275-92 BEDFORD CODE § 275-92
1:400
ARTICLE XIII
Small Wind Energy Systems
[Added 3-10-2009]
§ 275-93. Purpose.
This small wind energy systems article is enacted in accordance with RSA
674:62 to 674:66 and the purposes outlined in RSA 672:1, III-a. The purpose
of this article is to accommodate small wind energy systems in appropriate
locations, while protecting the public's health, safety and welfare. In
addition, this article provides a permitting process for small wind energy
systems to ensure compliance with the provisions of the requirements and
standards established herein.
§ 275-94. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
METEOROLOGICAL TOWER (MET TOWER) — Includes the tower, base
plate, anchors, guy wires and hardware, anemometers (wind speed
indicators), wind direction vanes, booms to hold equipment for
anemometers and vanes, data loggers, instrument wiring, and any
telemetry devices that are used to monitor or transmit wind speed and wind
flow characteristics over a period of time for either instantaneous wind
information or to characterize the wind resource at a given location. For the
purpose of this chapter, met towers shall refer only to those whose purpose
is to analyze the environmental factors needed to assess the potential to
install, construct or erect a small wind energy system.
MODIFICATION — Any change to the small wind energy system that
materially alters the size, type or location of the small wind energy system.
Like-kind replacements shall not be construed to be a modification.
NET METERING — The difference between the electricity supplied to a
customer over the electric distribution system and the electricity generated
by the customer's small wind energy system that is fed back into the electric
distribution system over a billing period.
POWER GRID — The transmission system, managed by ISO New England,
created to balance the supply and demand of electricity for consumers in
New England.
SHADOW FLICKER — The visible flicker effect when rotating blades of the
wind generator cast shadows on the ground and nearby structures causing
a repeating pattern of light and shadow.
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy conversion system
consisting of a wind generator, a tower, and associated control or
conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of 100 kilowatts or less
and will be used primarily for on-site consumption.
§ 275-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-94
1:401
SYSTEM HEIGHT — The vertical distance from ground level to the tip of the
wind generator blade when it is at its highest point.
TOWER — The monopole, guyed monopole or lattice structure that supports
a wind generator.
TOWER HEIGHT — The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower,
excluding the wind generator.
WIND GENERATOR — The blades and associated mechanical and electrical
conversion components mounted on top of the tower whose purpose is to
convert kinetic energy of the wind into rotational energy used to generate
electricity.
§ 275-95. Procedure for review.
Location. Small wind energy systems and met towers are an accessory
use permitted in all zoning districts where structures of any sort are
allowed. Only one small wind energy system shall be permitted per lot.
A.
§ 275-94 BEDFORD CODE § 275-95
1:402
Building permit. A permit for the construction, alteration, enlargement,
moving, demolition or use of a small wind energy system shall not
be issued by the Building Code Official unless it complies with the
provision of this section and/or has been granted a waiver by the
Planning Board for projects located in the Performance Zone or a
variance by the Zoning Board of Adjustment in all other zones. Met
towers that receive a building permit shall be permitted on a temporary
basis not to exceed three years from the date the building permit was
issued.
B.
Application. Applications submitted to the Building Code Official shall
contain a plan stamped by a State of New Hampshire certified
professional engineer and or licensed land surveyor with the following
information:
(1) Property lines and physical dimensions of the applicant's property.
Location, dimensions, and types of existing major structures on the
property.
(2)
Location of the proposed small wind energy system, foundations,
guy anchors and associated equipment.
(3)
(4) Tower foundation blueprints or drawings.
(5) Tower blueprints or drawings.
(6) Setback requirements as outlined in this chapter.
The right-of-way of any public road that is contiguous with the
property.
(7)
(8) Any overhead utility lines.
Small wind energy system specifications, including manufacturer,
model, rotor diameter, tower height, tower type, nameplate
generation capacity.
(9)
Small wind energy systems that will be connected to the power grid
shall include a copy of the application for interconnection with their
electric utility provider.
(10)
Sound level analysis prepared by the wind generator manufacturer
or qualified engineer which indicates that the system will be
compliant with the sound level required in § 275-96C.
(11)
Electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a
determination that the manner of installation conforms to the New
Hampshire State Building Code.152
(12)
Evidence of compliance or nonapplicability with Federal Aviation
Administration requirements.
(13)
C.
152. Editor's Note: See Ch. 92, Building Construction.
§ 275-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-95
1:403
§ 275-96. Standards.
(14)List of abutters to the applicant's property.
Abutter and regional notification. In accordance with RSA 674:66, the
Building Code Official shall notify all abutters and the local governing
body by certified mail upon application for a building permit to
construct a small wind energy system. The public will be afforded 30
days to submit comments to the Building Code Official prior to the
issuance of the building permit. The Building Code Official shall review
the application for regional impacts per RSA 36:55. If the proposal
is determined to have potential regional impacts, the Building Code
Official shall follow the procedures set forth in RSA 36:57, IV.
D.
The Building Code Official shall evaluate the application for compliance
with the following standards;
Setbacks. The setback shall be calculated by multiplying the
minimum setback requirement number by the system height and
measured from the center of the tower base to property line, public
roads, or nearest point on the foundation of an occupied building.
Minimum Setback Requirements
Occupied
Buildings on
Participating
Landowner
Property
Occupied
Buildings on
Abutting
Property
Property
Lines of
Abutting
Property and
Utility Lines Public Roads
0 1.5 1.1 1.5
(1)
Small wind energy systems must meet all setbacks for principal
structures for the zoning district in which the system is located.
(2)
Guy wires used to support the tower are exempt from the small
wind energy system setback requirements.
(3)
A.
Tower. The maximum tower height shall be restricted to 35 feet above
the tree canopy within 300 feet of the small wind energy system. In no
situation shall the tower height exceed 120 feet.
B.
Sound level. The small wind energy system shall not exceed the noise
limit specified by the New Hampshire Site Evaluation Committee. The
applicant shall be required to prove that the system meets the soundlevel
requirement prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued.
[Amended 3-12-2019]
C.
Shadow flicker. Small wind energy systems shall be sited in a manner
that does not result in significant shadow flicker impacts. Significant
shadow flicker is defined as more than 30 hours per year on abutting
occupied buildings. The applicant has the burden of proving that the
shadow flicker will not have significant adverse impact on neighboring
D.
§ 275-95 BEDFORD CODE § 275-96
1:404
or adjacent uses. Potential shadow flicker will be addressed either
through siting or mitigation measures.
Signs. All signs, including flags streamers and decorative items, both
temporary and permanent, are prohibited on the small wind energy
system, except for manufacturer identification or appropriate warning
signs.
E.
Code compliance. The small wind energy system shall comply with all
applicable sections of the New Hampshire State Building Code.
F.
Aviation. The small wind energy system shall be built to comply with all
applicable Federal Aviation Administration regulations, including but
not limited to 14 CFR Part 77, Subpart B, regarding installations close
to airports, and the New Hampshire Aviation regulations, including but
not limited to RSA 422-B and RSA 424.
G.
Visual impacts. It is inherent that small wind energy systems may pose
some visual impacts due to the tower height needed to access wind
resources. The purpose of this section is to reduce the visual impacts,
without restricting the owner's access to the optimal wind resources on
the property.
The applicant shall demonstrate through project site planning and
proposed mitigation that the small wind energy system's visual
impacts will be minimized for surrounding neighbors and the
community. This may include, but not be limited to information
regarding site selection, wind generator design or appearance,
buffering, and screening of ground-mounted electrical and control
equipment. All electrical conduits shall be underground, except
when the financial costs are prohibitive.
(1)
The color of the small wind energy system shall either be the
stock color from the manufacturer or painted with a nonreflective,
unobtrusive color that blends in with the surrounding environment.
Approved colors include but are not limited to white, off-white or
gray.
(2)
A small wind energy system shall not be artificially lit unless such
lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). If
lighting is required, the applicant shall provide a copy of the FAA
determination to establish the required markings and/or lights for
the small wind energy system.
(3)
H.
Approved wind generators. The manufacturer and model of the wind
generator to be used in the proposed small wind energy system must
have been approved by the California Energy Commission or the New
York State Energy Research and Development Authority, or a similar list
approved by the State of New Hampshire, if available.
I.
§ 275-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-96
1:405
§ 275-97. Abandonment.
Utility connection. If the proposed small wind energy system is to be
connected to the power grid through net metering, it shall adhere to
RSA 362-A:9.
J.
Access. The tower shall be designed and installed so as not to provide
step bolts or a ladder readily accessible to the public for a minimum
height of eight feet above the ground. All ground-mounted electrical
and control equipment shall be labeled and secured to prevent
unauthorized access.
K.
Clearing. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to that which is
necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the small
wind energy system and as otherwise prescribed by applicable laws,
regulations, and ordinances.
L.
At such time that a small wind energy system is scheduled to be
abandoned or discontinued, the applicant will notify the Building Code
Official by certified United States mail of the proposed date of
abandonment or discontinuation of operations.
A.
Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the owner shall
physically remove the small wind energy system within 90 days from
the date of abandonment or discontinuation of use. This period may
be extended at the request of the owner and at the discretion of the
Building Code Official. "Physically remove" shall include, but not be
limited to:
Removal of the wind generator and tower and related above-grade
structures.
(1)
Restoration of the location of the small wind energy system to its
natural condition, except that any landscaping, grading or belowgrade
foundation may remain in its same condition at initiation of
abandonment.
(2)
B.
In the event that an applicant fails to give such notice, the system
shall be considered abandoned or discontinued if the system is out
of service for a continuous twelve-month period. After the 12 months
of inoperability, the Building Code Official may issue a notice of
abandonment to the owner of the small wind energy system. The owner
shall have the right to respond to the notice of abandonment within 30
days from notice receipt date. After review of the information provided
by the owner, the Building Code Official shall determine if the small
wind energy system has been abandoned. If it is determined that the
small wind energy system has not been abandoned, the Building Code
Official shall withdraw the notice of abandonment and notify the owner
of the withdrawal.
C.
If the owner fails to respond to the notice of abandonment or if, after
review by the Building Code Official, it is determined that the small
D.
§ 275-96 BEDFORD CODE § 275-97
1:406
§ 275-98. Compliance required; existing systems.
It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate a small wind
energy system that is not in compliance with this article. Small wind energy
systems installed prior to the adoption of this article are exempt from this
article except when modifications are proposed to the small wind energy
system.
§ 275-99. Violations and penalties.
Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this article or a
building permit issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to
enforcement and penalties as allowed by New Hampshire Revised Statutes
Annotated Chapter 676:17.
wind energy system has been abandoned or discontinued, the owner
of the small wind energy system shall remove the wind generator and
tower at the owner's sole expense within three months of receipt of the
notice of abandonment. If the owner fails to physically remove the small
wind energy system after the notice of abandonment procedure, the
Building Code Official may pursue legal action to have the small wind
energy system removed at the owner's expense.
§ 275-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-99
1:407

ARTICLE XIV
Adoption and Amendment Procedures
[Added 3-31-1984]
§ 275-100. Procedure.
As authorized by RSA 675:2, this chapter shall be adopted and amended
by a majority vote of any legal Town Meeting when such amendment is
published in the warrant calling for the meeting, and when such amendment
has received at least one public hearing notice of which has been duly given
at least 10 calendar days before said hearing, not including the day the
notice is posted and the day of said hearing, in the manner provided by RSA
675:7.
§ 275-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-100
1:409

ARTICLE XV
River Corridor (RC) Smart Growth District
[Added 3-13-2012]
§ 275-101. Statutory authority.
§ 275-102. Intent.
This article is enacted by the Town of Bedford pursuant to RSA 674:21.
This innovative land use control ordinance shall provide for all
approvals, including the granting of conditional or special use permits,
by the Planning Board. Any decision made by the Planning Board under
this innovative land use control ordinance may b1e appealed directly
to Superior Court in the same manner provided by statute for appeals
from the Planning Board, as set forth in RSA 676:5, III, and RSA
677:15. A waiver process from particular requirements set forth in this
article may be employed by the Planning Board where the applicant
demonstrates substantial compliance with the standards set forth in
Article VIII, § 275-58, Purpose, Subsections A through E; provided,
however, that said Subsection D is hereby modified to obligate the
applicant to mitigate traffic impacts, not minimize them.
A.
The applicant shall have the option of applying for plan approval
pursuant to the zoning controls set forth in this article or complying
with all applicable zoning controls set forth in the zoning ordinances
of the Town of Bedford for the underlying district or for other overlay
zoning that may be therein defined. Smart Growth development
projects proceeding under this article shall be governed solely by the
provisions of this article and the RC Projects Design Review Guidelines
and shall be deemed exempt from all other standards and/or
procedures of the underlying zoning district and other overlay
provisions.
B.
The Town of Bedford (the "Town") recognizes that:
Land is a nonrenewable resource, and it and other natural
resources of this planet are limited, and parcels of land within
the Performance Zoning District (the "Performance Zone") which
have no development have diminished, and there is potential for
redevelopment and further development of currently developed
parcels;
(1)
Many societal needs, particularly those of senior citizens and young
adults, may be best served by zoning which will vary from most
current types of real estate development which, in conformance
with currently conventional zoning ordinances, excessively
separate land uses and result in the requirement of vehicular
travel;
(2)
A.
§ 275-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-102
1:411
It should promote forms of development which facilitate the
provision and maintenance of adequate public services and
infrastructure;
(3)
It should promote forms of development which facilitate all modes
of transportation (including foot traffic) and which regulate the
design of public space -- streets, squares, plazas, greens, parks --
for the use and enjoyment of its citizens;
(4)
It should seek to ensure an adequate supply of housing which is
affordable to households of all income levels;
(5)
It should promote forms of development which foster a strong
sense of community identity based on a shared, coherent,
functionally efficient physical environment and a shared economic,
legal, political, social, and cultural environment;
(6)
It should adopt policies and ordinances designed to alleviate traffic
congestion, conserve energy, provide an alternative means of
developing land and otherwise promote public health, safety, and
welfare; and
(7)
It adopted the following goals and objectives, among others, in the
adoption of the 2010 Master Plan:
Encourage innovative, higher density mixed-use development
and redevelopment in the South River Road, U.S. Route 3, area
(the "River Corridor");
(a)
Promote growth that is environmentally sustainable and
capable of withstanding economic downturns;
(b)
Support and stabilize the existing businesses and employment
base to the greatest extent possible;
(c)
Ensure that the remaining vacant land and redevelopment
along the River Corridor is utilized to the highest and best use
for achieving the Town's economic objectives;
(d)
Encourage higher density, innovative mixed-use development
along the River Corridor that creates housing opportunities
for all age groups and all income levels, in combination with
nonresidential uses, in order to promote efficient land use;
(e)
Encourage higher density of existing commercial areas, and
the potential for innovative mixed use, along the River
Corridor. Develop a strategy for improving the mix of
businesses and residences along the River Corridor to better
serve the needs of the community; and
(f)
Maintain the New England-style architectural character of
uses along this corridor and improve pedestrian, bicycle and
vehicular access.
(g)
(8)
§ 275-102 BEDFORD CODE § 275-102
1:412
The Town further recognizes that many American cities and towns
established between 1690 and 1940 continue to be desirable places
for today's population to live, work, shop and recreate. Such places,
developed prior to the intensive use of the automobile and the creation
of the interstate highway system, accommodate pedestrians as well as
vehicles within their built-up fabric. Essential characteristics of these
traditional neighborhoods include:
Dwellings, shops, and workplaces generally located in close
proximity to each other;
(1)
Appropriately sized buildings fronting on, and aligned with, streets
in a disciplined manner, generally uninterrupted by parking lots;
(2)
Generally regular geometric patterns of streets and blocks
arranged to provide comprehensible and interesting routes of
travel;
(3)
A hierarchy of streets, some narrow and convenient for a balanced
mix of both pedestrians and automobiles, while others wider to
carry greater traffic and perhaps serve as the major ceremonial
avenue, boulevard, or commercial main street;
(4)
Well configured squares, greens, gardens and parks woven into
street and block patterns and dedicated to collective social activity,
recreation and visual enjoyment;
(5)
A recognizable, functionally diverse, visually unified neighborhood
or town center, often focused on a major civic space such as a
village green or square, frequently also linked to a traditionally
important crossroads or waterfront; and
(6)
A built-up neighborhood area with an overall size small enough
to permit residents and workers, if they so choose, to walk or
ride bicycles comfortably rather than being required to drive
throughout much of the neighborhood.
(7)
B.
The Town recognizes, for the purposes of this section of the Zoning
Ordinance, the desirability of promoting an ordinance and a review
process designed to recognize all of that cited above and to explicitly
promote:
A reduction in the number and length of automobile trips and,
consequently, traffic congestion, within the River Corridor Smart
Growth District (the "RC Smart Growth District");
(1)
Increased pedestrian travel to increase citizen security, interaction,
neighborliness, and community bonding;
(2)
The physical and social integration of citizens diverse in age,
lifestyle and economic status;
(3)
C.
§ 275-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-102
1:413
§ 275-103. Purposes.
The purposes of the RC Smart Growth District are:
A diversity in types of housing, shopping, commercial trade, civic
facilities, recreation and employment; and
(4)
The orderly patterns of streets and blocks, subdivision lots, open
space, automobile parking, pedestrian pathways, building mass
and height and lot occupancy, based partly on the natural site
conditions of the RC Smart Growth District as well as the existing
constructed conditions adjacent to the RC Smart Growth District.
(5)
It is additionally intended that this section of the Zoning Ordinance
will allow for and encourage the expansion of opportunities for the
development of land in the Town consistent with the goals and
objectives of the adopted Master Plan and other requirements of law.
D.
This section of the RC Smart Growth District shall be construed as the
constitution of the RC Smart Growth District, and any interpretation
of the RC Smart Growth District shall be made in accordance with the
principles cited herein.
E.
To provide an opportunity for higher density commercial development,
to permit residential development together with commercial
development and to especially encourage mixed-use development,
including both new construction and renovation of existing buildings,
within a distinctive, attractive and livable environment that supports
the commercial revitalization of the River Corridor.
A.
To promote continuing development and redevelopment in the River
Corridor that is pedestrian friendly and consistent with the Town's
history and architecture.
B.
To ensure high quality site planning, architecture and landscape design
that enhances the distinct visual character and identity of the River
Corridor and provides an environment with safety, convenience and
amenity.
C.
To provide for a diversified housing stock at a variety of costs within
walking distance of services and public transportation, including
workforce housing and other housing types that meet the needs of the
Town's population.
D.
To generate positive tax revenue for the Town, while providing the
opportunity for new business growth and additional local jobs.
E.
To encourage preservation and rehabilitation of historic structures and
buildings.
F.
To promote efficient use of land and existing parking supply and limit
expansion within the district by encouraging shared parking.
G.
§ 275-102 BEDFORD CODE § 275-103
1:414
§ 275-104. Boundaries.
The boundaries and extent of the River Corridor Smart Growth District are
the same as the Performance Zoning District, which are as delineated and
depicted on the map entitled "Official Zone Map, July 15, 2009, Town of
Bedford, NH," and as afterwards amended. The boundaries are delineated
as the "River Corridor Smart Growth District" on the Official Zoning Map
of the Town of Bedford on file in the office of the Town Clerk, said map
hereby made a part of the Bedford Zoning Ordinance. The River Corridor
Smart Growth District is an overlay district that is superimposed over the
underlying district.
§ 275-105. Definitions.
The general definitions of the Zoning Ordinance shall pertain to the RC
Smart Growth District unless otherwise defined herein. Except where
specifically defined or otherwise referenced within this article, words and
terms used within the RC Smart Growth District shall have their customary
definitions and meanings. The following words and terms are specifically
defined as follows:
ACTIVE PEDESTRIAN WAY — Land area or areas developed for immediate
use by pedestrians, including sidewalks, bicycle paths and jogging trails.
BUILDING COVERAGE — For the RC Smart Growth District as a whole,
the ratio of the total of all building footprints, excluding civic buildings'
footprints, divided by the total land area in the RC Smart Growth District.
For a single lot, the total building(s) footprint(s) on the lot divided by the
lot's area.
CIVIC BUILDING — A building operated by a governmental entity or by
a not-for-profit organization dedicated to arts, culture, education or
transportation, including municipal parking.
CIVIC USE AREA(S) — Land areas designated on the plan, upon which
publicly or privately owned structures may be erected, and intended for the
use, enjoyment and benefit of the community.
COMMUNITY — The property owners in the RC Smart Growth District.
DWELLING UNIT — A structure or a portion of a structure containing in
a self-sufficient and exclusive manner facilities for sleeping, bathing, and
cooking, including one full kitchen and full bathroom facilities as defined by
the State Building Code.
FOOTPRINT — The horizontal land area occupied by a building at finished
grade, including enclosed projections and overhangs.
To encourage adoption of energy-efficient building practices and
sustainable construction methods.
H.
To ensure compliance with the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services stormwater management policies and
practices.
I.
§ 275-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-105
1:415
FRONTAGE — That lot dimension along a local service, neighborhood or
through street.
INSTITUTIONAL USE — Those uses identified as public/institutional in
Table 2, Table of Uses, in the Zoning Ordinance.153
LIGHT MANUFACTURING — Uses serving the needs of the community
for industrial activity which are not offensive to nearby commercial or
residential uses. Light manufacturing includes manufacturing or assembly
processes carried on completely inside a Building. Light manufacturing
shall not produce any of the following adverse impacts, as determined by
the Planning Board based on evidence presented, at the boundary of the lot:
MASTER DEVELOPER — The proponent "developer(s)" named within the
submission documents as the developer of record at the time of submission
of an RC project to the Planning Board for review, and any successors and
assigns.
OPEN SPACE AREAS — Land area or areas within the RC Smart Growth
District, so designated on the plan upon which no structures may be either
erected or placed.
OUTDOOR STORAGE — Placement on a lot not within a building or
structure of supplies, materials, goods, products or surplus materials for
more than five consecutive days or more than 30 days in any year if not fully
screened from public view; if fully screened from public (but not necessarily
from aerial) view, then not more than 10 consecutive days nor more than 60
days in any year.
PEDESTRIAN — Travel on foot or in a nonmotorized vehicle for five or fewer
persons.
PLANNING BOARD — The Town of Bedford Planning Board.
RESIDENTIAL USE — A building or part of a building containing dwelling
units as defined herein and any uses accessory to the dwelling units.
RC PROJECT — Any mixed-use development submitted and approved under
this article.
RC PROJECT PLAN — A plan depicting a proposed RC Smart Growth
development project which is submitted to the Planning Board for its review
and approval in accordance with the provisions of this article. The lot or lots
comprising an RC project shall be identified on any plan submitted to the
Planning Board for review.
A. Noise at a level greater than typical street or traffic noise;
B. Hazardous solids, liquids, or gases for emission to the environment;
C. Offensive odors or glare; or
D. Any other adverse impact.
153. Editor's Note: Table 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 275-105 BEDFORD CODE § 275-105
1:416
RC PROJECTS DESIGN REVIEW GUIDELINES (GUIDELINES) — The
additional design criteria, administrative rules and regulations adopted by
the Planning Board. These guidelines shall be applicable to all RC projects.
RIVER CORRIDOR (RC) — The portion of Bedford which is zoned PZ as
delineated and depicted on the map entitled "Official Zone Map, July 15,
2009, Town of Bedford, NH," and as amended.
RIVER CORRIDOR (RC) SMART GROWTH DISTRICT — The area of the
Town of Bedford to which the RC Smart Growth Ordinance applies.
RIVER CORRIDOR (RC) SMART GROWTH ZONING ORDINANCE — The
provisions of Article XV of the Bedford Zoning Ordinance.
SHARED PARKING — The use of the same parking space by two or more
uses, where vehicles occupying the parking stall are unlikely to need the
stall at the same time of day or day of the week.
UNDERLYING ZONING — The zoning requirements adopted for the
Performance Zoning District in Article VIII, as said requirements may be
amended from time to time.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main or primary purpose for which a structure,
building, or lot is designed, arranged, licensed, or intended, or for which it
may be used, occupied, or maintained under this article.
VISTA TERMINATION — A lot, building or monument site generally located
at an intersection, or an end, of streets or active pedestrian ways, which
is prominently visible from one or more streets, or ways, approaching said
site.
§ 275-106. Dedication and location.
§ 275-107. Design requirements and general provisions.
In interpreting the RC Smart Growth District, a specific requirement shall
control over a general requirement.
The RC Smart Growth District Ordinance is available for the
development, redevelopment or further development of parcels into a
RC project or RC projects located in the Performance Zoning District
where serviced by public sewer and water systems.
A.
B. Minimum lot area. There is no minimum lot size.
Dedication. Because of the special objectives of the RC Smart Growth
District and the special considerations allowed under this section of the
Bedford Zoning Ordinance, lots, once approved by the Planning Board
as a part of a RC project, may not be removed from the RC project
without a new approval from the Planning Board.
C.
Land use mix. The RC Smart Growth District shall be a mix of
commercial uses or commercial and residential uses. All RC projects
shall have a mix of uses and may be comprised of one or more lots. The
A.
§ 275-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-107
1:417
intent is for most residential uses in the district to be on upper floors of
mixed-use buildings.
Permitted uses.
Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the underlying Performance
Zoning District are allowed, except where specifically prohibited in
§ 275-107B(3), plus:
Multifamily residential units, if located within a structure also
containing a commercial floor or located in separate buildings
if located on a lot also with commercial uses or otherwise
a part of an integrated RC project with commercial and
residential uses;
(a)
(b) Parking lots for one building as an accessory use;
(c) Shared parking lots;
(d) Parking garages containing shared parking; and
(e) Helicopter operation as an accessory use.
(1)
Waiver. An application for a waiver within the RC Smart Growth
District shall be considered by the Planning Board. Such
application for a waiver within the RC Smart Growth District shall
be approved upon a finding that the following standards have been
met:
(a) The specific site is an appropriate one for the proposed use;
No factual evidence is presented to show that the proposed use
will adversely affect the value of adjacent properties;
(b)
From the perspectives of land use and development impacts,
the proposed use is similar to or of lesser impacts than one or
more specifically enumerated allowed uses;
(c)
The proposed use shall not create any undue nuisance or
hazard, either to the community or pedestrian and vehicular
flow;
(d)
The applicant demonstrates substantial compliance with the
standards set forth in Article VIII, § 275-58, Purpose,
Subsections A through E, provided, however, that said
Subsection D is modified to obligate the applicant to mitigate
traffic impacts, not minimize them; and
(e)
The applicant demonstrates that the proposed use conforms
with the intent and purposes sections of this article.
(f)
(2)
Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited in the RC Smart
Growth District:
(3)
B.
§ 275-107 BEDFORD CODE § 275-107
1:418
Chemical manufacturing, storage or distribution, as a principal
use;
(a)
Any commercial use which is primarily directed to patrons
who are encouraged by the site layout, or buildings, to remain
in their automobile while receiving goods or services except
automobile service stations;
(b)
Enameling, plating or painting except artist studios as a
primary use;
(c)
Foundries, carting, express, moving or hauling terminal or
yard, except delivery or pickup of goods or merchandise solely
to service businesses in the RC Smart Growth District;
(d)
Prisons, detention centers or "half-way houses" associated with
prisons or penitentiaries;
(e)
(f) The disposal of hazardous waste materials;
The manufacture of hazardous waste not wholly incidental to a
process otherwise contained within a building or portion of a
building;
(g)
(h) The manufacture or disposal of radioactive waste;
Agricultural uses, other than home gardens or community
gardens and landscaping;
(i)
(j) Scrap yards;
(k) Manufactured housing units;
(l) Outdoor storage;
Any use which produces any of the adverse impacts listed
under the definition of "light manufacturing";
(m)
Any use which regularly emits strong odors, or dust particles,
or smoke, or poses danger, such as manufacture of acids,
gases, fertilizers and glue, petroleum refining, reduction of
animal matter, and manufacture of cement, gypsum, or
explosives;
(n)
Any other use dangerous to persons within or outside the
district by reason of emission of odor, fumes, gases, particulate
matter, smoke, noise, vibration, glare, radiation, electrical
interference, threat of fire or explosion, or any other reason;
and
(o)
Excavation as defined in § 275-6, except as a temporary use
of not more than one year, the processing of primarily on-site
materials for on-site use.
(p)
§ 275-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-107
1:419
§ 275-108. Lot requirements.
Signs.
The sign standards of the Performance Zoning District
(§ 275-68) shall apply to the RC Smart Growth District. The
provision of kiosks, or other directional/informational clusters
of signs, with each sign of 1.5 square feet or less and which
pertains exclusively to lots within the RC Smart Growth
District is encouraged. These kiosks, where provided, shall
generally be located on civic lots and in other areas designed
for pedestrian gatherings.
(a)
No internally illuminated, flashing, moving or portable signs
are permitted within the RC Smart Growth District.
(b)
(4)
Property ownership and control within RC projects may include fee
simple lots; condominiums; and zero-lot lines, as well as portions of
buildings in fee simple, buildings apart from the land they are on and
leaseholds involving buildings, structures and land. Boundaries will
therefore include interior and exterior building walls, ceilings, roofs,
and conventional lot lines. "Lots," however, in a more conventional
sense, are not intended to be a large part of any RC project, as it is
the configuration of the streets and blocks formed by streets and the
placement of the buildings that determine the character of each RC
project.
A.
For the above reasons, lots may have almost any configuration, as is
described in more detail in the RC Projects Design Review Guidelines;
provided, however, that lot lines shall be regularly configured in logical
arrangements related to the RC project, or portion thereof, as they
relate to. Lot lines may not be designed to subvert the intents of this
article, for example, by creating "flag" lots in an attempt to separate
commercial from adjacent non-RC project residential property.
B.
No less than 50% of the perimeter of an open space area lot shall abut
either a street or an active pedestrian way.
C.
Applications for plan approval shall be governed by this section and the
RC Projects Design Review Guidelines.
Minimum lot area None
Maximum building frontage None
Minimum front setback From Route 3: 50 feet; otherwise: 0
feet
Maximum front setback From Route 3: None; otherwise: 10
feet
Minimum side/rear setback
abutting a residential zone
1:1 where setback is equal to building
height
D.
§ 275-107 BEDFORD CODE § 275-108
1:420
§ 275-109. Building requirements.
Minimum side/rear setback in
RCSGD or abutting business
0 feet
Interior setback (between
buildings on same lot)
0 feet
Bedford RC Project Standards
Size of RC Project
Standard Up to 6 Acres More than 6 Acres
Minimum frontage for a
lot within a RC project
50 feet None
Maximum lot coverage
for lots within a RC
project
85% 100%
Minimum area for lot
within a RC project
None None
Number of buildings per
lot within a RC project
No limit No limit
Maximum building
coverage for a lot within a
RC project
100% 100%
Maximum RC project
impervious cover
75% 75%
Maximum building height 80 feet 100 feet with residential
containing 33%
workforce housing units
See the RC Projects Design Review Guidelines for front façade setback
guidelines and treatments and building placement guidelines.
Impervious coverage. Impervious coverage shall not exceed 75% for the
entire RC Smart Growth Development District. Individual lots within
the RC Smart Growth development project may exceed 75%. Individual
RC projects may satisfy this requirement by permanent dedication
to pervious cover of sufficient other land in the district to meet the
seventy-five-percent criterion.
E.
Subdivision. Existing lots located in the RC Smart Growth District may
be subdivided and adjusted to form all or a part of a RC project.
F.
Building height. All building heights shall be subject to applicable
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) requirements. A maximum
building height of 100 feet is allowed for projects in excess of six acres
as an incentive bonus for developments which include a workforce or
housing component, provided that the Fire Department agrees it has
the apparatus necessary to adequately respond to emergencies in a
A.
§ 275-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-109
1:421
§ 275-110. Street types and uses.
building of the height proposed or the applicant agrees to supply the
necessary apparatus at his or her cost.
Location of main entrances. The primary building entrances for
commercial establishments shall generally open to the front sidewalk.
B.
Civic/community buildings. Buildings located in civic use areas shall
be located adjacent to village greens, parks, squares or at a vista
termination.
C.
Waterfront development.
No buildings may be placed within 125 feet of the mean high
water line of the Merrimack River, unless an active pedestrian way
is provided across the lot on which the private building is sited
between the building and the river; and at least 35% of the length
of said active pedestrian way provides direct access to the river.
(1)
No private lot may extend to within 100 feet of the mean high water
line of the Merrimack River unless an active pedestrian way is
provided across the lot, between the lot and the river; and at least
35% of the length of said active pedestrian way provides direct
access to the river.
(2)
For the purposes of this section, "direct access to the river" is
provided if no buildings or non-water-dependent structures lie
between the active pedestrian way and the river.
(3)
D.
Building codes. All buildings and structures within the RC Smart
Growth District shall comply with all applicable Town, state and federal
building and safety codes as may be adopted by the Town or as may
otherwise be in effect in the Town.
E.
Streets shall be designed to ensure the safety of motorists and
pedestrians and shall generally:
Improve the view of and the view from buildings and other
prominent vistas;
(1)
(2) Minimize the area devoted to motor vehicle traffic;
Promote active pedestrian way design so that it is generally more
convenient and pleasant for most of the community to walk short
distances than to drive;
(3)
(4) Promote the creation of vista terminations;
Provide for connection of streets within a lot to abutting lots so that
each of the lots within the RC Smart Growth District will provide
continuous pedestrian and vehicular flow of traffic on foot and by
vehicle, bicycle and other means without reliance on Route 3; and
(5)
A.
§ 275-109 BEDFORD CODE § 275-110
1:422
Create safe vehicular and pedestrian passage within the RC Smart
Growth District.
(6)
Identification. The applicant shall depict on the plan which street
sections are proposed for all thoroughfares as a part of the Preliminary
Hearing Phase of the plan review.
B.
Property lines coincident with right-of-way. All property lines of each
lot shall be coincident with the public right-of-way for that street which
serves as primary access to the lot.
C.
Sidewalk sizes and requirements. Sidewalks at least 10 feet in width
shall be provided adjacent to all commercial uses, and sidewalks no less
than five feet in width shall generally be provided along one or both
sides of all streets within the RC Smart Growth District. Sidewalks shall
generally be parallel with the streets they adjoin and may be either
within the street right-of-way or within an individual lot. The sidewalk's
use and maintenance shall be ensured by permanent easement. In the
event of mixed commercial/residential uses within 150 feet of each
other, the commercial sidewalk standard width of 10 feet shall control.
D.
Lighting. Streetlights shall be provided along all active pedestrian ways
at not less than one-hundred-foot intervals.
E.
Crossings. Street and active pedestrian way design shall be done to
minimize pedestrian crossings at through streets.
F.
Access. Lot layout and active pedestrian ways shall be designed to
ensure pedestrian access to all lots.
G.
Street sections. Street sections proposed for use within the RC Smart
Growth District shall be a part of the RC Projects Design Review
Guidelines. Street sections are intended to provide the Planning Board
with sufficient detailed information in both plan and cross section view
to enable the Planning Board to determine how parked and moving
vehicles will interact with each other and with pedestrians, bicyclists
and other users of the street so that the safety of the street section may
be evaluated. The file of street sections may be added to from time to
time either by the Planning Board or by parties submitting new street
sections for review and approval by the Planning Board. The primary
review criteria of the street sections shall be based upon the intent and
purposes of the RC Smart Growth District.
H.
Layout. The maximum perimeter of any block formed by streets is 1,800
feet. The minimum perimeter of any block formed by streets is 600 feet.
Perimeters of blocks formed by streets are encouraged to be in the
range of 800 to 1,500 feet. Street layouts shall be generally rectilinear
with "deformations" as may be physically proper to adapt streets to
topographic or other natural conditions and to generally ensure vista
terminations at street intersections.
I.
§ 275-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-110
1:423
§ 275-111. Parking requirements.
§ 275-112. Utility requirements.
Construction requirements. Streets constructed within all RC projects
shall be constructed in accordance with the structural aspects of the
Bedford Road Standards in effect at the time of construction. This
provision specifically shall not, however, apply to any horizontal
dimension of any part of a street in a RC project.
J.
All parking requirements and guidelines are contained in the RC
Projects Design Review Guidelines. In general, parking both on street
and off street is to be treated as a shared resource in the RC Smart
Growth District. A goal is to achieve mixed-use "park-once" areas where
multiple destinations are served by parking once. The reverse, or
conventional development, provides parking for each use at each use,
thereby generating more traffic, more paved areas and an aesthetically
less pleasing walking environment. Both are schematically diagrammed
below.
A.
Snow emergency. The master developer shall provide a snow
emergency plan for the Planning Board's review and consideration
prior to final approval of a RC project. The snow emergency plan shall
show where vehicles will be stored during snow emergency periods;
how and by what methods snow will be removed from the streets and
sidewalks; and generally how the development project will function
during and after a snowstorm. The snow emergency plan shall not
require the Town to remove snow from private streets, sidewalks or
other private property, unless prior responsibility therefor has been
assumed by the Town.
B.
Utilities and location. All utilities shall be located underground where
permitted by applicable codes and shall also generally be located within
street rights-of-way or within alleys. All utility outlets, service
entrances, transformers and the like shall generally be clustered in
a neat and orderly fashion and shall be screened from view where
permitted by building and electrical codes.
A.
§ 275-110 BEDFORD CODE § 275-112
1:424
§ 275-113. Compliance required.
Local standards. All RC projects shall comply with all applicable provisions
of this article, the Land Development Control Regulations, the RC Projects
Design Review Guidelines and other pertinent ordinances, regulations and
policies of the Town; provided, however, that in the event of any conflict
between such ordinances, regulations or policies, the provisions of the RC
Smart Growth District and RC Projects Design Review Guidelines shall
control.
§ 275-114. Management.
§ 275-115. Procedures and submission requirements.
Local, state and federal standards. Water and sewerage facilities shall
be designed and installed in accordance with applicable Town, state
and federal standards.
B.
Property owners' association(s).
Membership in a property owners' association (POA) or
associations established by a master developer shall be required
for all property owners within the RC Smart Growth Development
and shall be made a required covenant in all deeds issued or
passed.
(1)
The master developer shall prepare POA documents for the POA(s).
POA documents shall provide, at a minimum, that the POA shall
accept title to any open space areas which may be deeded by
the master developer to the POA, and shall provide for the
maintenance of any common area improvements, private streets,
private sidewalks, rights-of-way, utilities and open space areas
owned by the POA. The POA documents shall provide voting and
use rights, shall provide the POA with the authority to acquire a
lien upon the property of any of its members in order to secure
collection of any amounts due to the POA from its members, and
may also provide for the charge of dues, levies or assessments to
cover expenses which include, but are not limited to, tax liabilities,
maintenance and municipal or state assessments.
(2)
Any open space area may be deemed desirable to the Town or other
governmental agency during the approvals process. Any such area
will be so designated on the plan of the RC project and will be
offered to the Town or governmental agency for up to five years
from the approval of the RC project. Any such area not transferred
to a governmental entity shall then be transferred to the POA
initially designed by the master developer to receive ownership of
such open space area in the association documents.
(3)
A.
All general and specific provisions of the review procedures and
submission requirements of the River Corridor Smart Growth District
A.
§ 275-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-115
1:425
§ 275-116. Applicable Performance Zoning District provisions.
To the extent not otherwise provided in this River Corridor Smart Growth
District Zoning, the provisions of the Performance Zoning District set forth
in Article VIII of the Town of Bedford Zoning Ordinances shall apply.
§ 275-117. When effective.
This River Corridor Smart Growth District Zoning shall not be effective
until the RC Projects Design Review Guidelines have been adopted by the
Planning Board.
Design Standards and Guidelines shall apply to this district unless
otherwise noted within this section or modified by approval of the
Planning Board.
The Planning Board may adopt review procedures and submission
requirements for the RC Smart Growth District which differ from those
for other subdivision and site plan criteria. No application for the
RC Smart Growth District submitted to the Planning Board will be
considered "complete," as defined by statute (RSA 676:4), until the
Planning Board either adopts such RC Smart Growth District specific
criteria or until a period of 120 days has elapsed from the effective date
of the ordinance, whichever first occurs.
B.
Due to the unique nature of this district and its intent and purposes,
the Planning Board may consider an application for a RC project that
alone does not comport with the requirements herein but which may
otherwise qualify if other properties are effectively connected through
reciprocal cross easements or otherwise legally connected to create
areas that together satisfy the requirements, intent and purposes
herein.
C.
§ 275-115 BEDFORD CODE § 275-117
1:426
Part III: Regulations
Chapter 285
HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic District — See Ch. 153, Ch. 275, Art.
VII.
§ 275-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-117
1:427

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 285-1. Purpose.
The purpose of the Historic District Commission Regulations is to promote
within the Historic District of the Town of Bedford educational, cultural,
economic and general welfare of the public by the protection, enhancement,
perpetuation and preservation of the District and to guide the character of
the development so as to be consistent with the desired character of that
portion of the Town.
§ 285-2. Authority and adoption.
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Bedford Historic District
Commission (HDC) by the voters of the Town of Bedford on March 10, 1970,
in accordance with the provision of RSA Chapter 31, Section 89a and b, of
the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, 1963, as amended,154 the
Bedford Historic District Commission adopts the following rules governing
the review of sites, buildings and signs for the Historic District of the Town
of Bedford as depicted on the official Zoning Map.
§ 285-3. Applicability.
The purpose of these articles is to provide activities requiring approval by
the Historic District Commission.
§ 285-4. Amendments.
Amendments to these regulations may be initiated by the Commission
or members of the public. In order to be adopted, the Commission may
accept or reject such change after a public hearing. The Chairperson shall
thereafter transmit a record of any changes so authorized to the Building
Code Official, Town Council, Town Clerk, Planning Board, and Board of
Adjustment, and copies of the amendments certified by a majority of the
Commission shall be filed with the Building Code Official, Town Clerk, Town
Council, and Planning Board.
§ 285-5. Separability.
If any section, article, provision, portion or paragraph of these regulations
shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect, impair or invalidate any other
section, article, provision, portion or paragraph.
§ 285-6. Applicability of other regulations, ordinances and statutes.
In addition to complying with the regulations established herein, any person
or persons owning, renting, or leasing real estate and/or buildings within
154. Editor's Note: Repealed 1983, effective 1-1-1984. See now RSA 674:45 and 674-46.
§ 285-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-6
1:429
the Historic District shall comply with all other applicable regulations,
ordinances and statutes of the Town, State of New Hampshire and the
United States government.
§ 285-7. Relaxation of requirements.
Where the Commission finds that strict conformity to these regulations
would cause undue hardship or injustice to the applicant or to the Town;
that the spirit of the regulations and the public's convenience, safety and
welfare will not be adversely affected; and that additional expense will
not be incurred by the Town as a result, the Commission may approve
an application or plan which is substantially, although not exactly, in
conformance with these regulations.
§ 285-8. When effective.
These regulations shall be effective upon adoption by a majority of the
Historic District Commission and shall determine the status of any building
or tract of land within the Historic District.
§ 285-9. Definitions.155
Definitions contained in the Town of Bedford Zoning Ordinance, Historic
District Ordinance,156 Land Development Control Regulations and in RSA
674:45 et seq. and 676:8 et seq., where applicable, shall apply to these
Historic District Commission regulations.
ABUTTER — Any person whose property adjoins or is directly across the
street or stream from the site under consideration.
APPLICANT — Any person or group of persons interested in performing any
activities regulated within this document.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES — Landscape architectural
features and exterior of any structure, including kind and texture of building
material, type of walls, windows, doors, lights, signs or other fixtures
appurtenant to such portion.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area or areas within the Town of Bedford
specifically so designated by a majority of the voters.
§ 285-10. Delineation of District.
That area enclosed by an outer boundary beginning at a point in the center
line of Wallace Road, 400 feet north of the center line of Church Road;
thence in an easterly direction along a line 400 feet north of the parallel
to the center line of Church Road with a line 400 feet west of and parallel
to Ministerial Road; thence in a northerly direction along said line to the
intersection with a line 400 feet north of and parallel to Chandler Road;
155. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (upon enactment, adoption information will be
inserted here).
156. Editor's Note: See Ch. 275, Zoning, and Ch. 153, Historic District, respectively.
§ 285-6 BEDFORD CODE § 285-10
1:430
thence in an easterly direction along said line to the intersection with a
line 400 feet northwest of and parallel to Bedford Center Road; thence
in a northeasterly direction along said line to the intersection with a line
400 feet easterly of and parallel to Liberty Hill Road; thence in a southerly
direction along said line to the intersection with a line 400 feet southerly
of and parallel to Meetinghouse Road; thence in a westerly direction along
said line to the intersection with a line 400 feet southeasterly of and parallel
to Route 101; thence in a southwesterly direction along said line to the
intersection with the easterly edge of the power line right-of-way to the west
of Wallace Road; thence in a northerly direction along said right-of-way to
the intersection with a line 400 feet north of and parallel to Church Road;
thence in an easterly direction to the point of beginning.
§ 285-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-10
1:431

ARTICLE II
Procedure
§ 285-11. Application deadline; required information.
Applications for the agenda of a regular meeting of the Historic District
Commission shall be closed at 4:30 p.m. 14 calendar days before the date
of the scheduled meeting. An applicant must file an application with all
pertinent data as required in Article III.
§ 285-12. Review by subcommittee; Commission deadline for
approval of certificate; disapproval.
§ 285-13. Site preservation; restriction on building changes
permitted.
All existing features of a building or site not directly involved in the
building, renovation or change shall be maintained in their original
condition except as required in the course of normal maintenance. All
building renovation and change shall be constructed so as not to change the
historic look or value.
§ 285-14. Commencement of construction within two years of
issuance of certificate required.
Unless the applicant commences construction, renovation or change within
two years after the issuance of the certificate of approval by the
Commission, the approval shall be null and void; provided, however, that
no other commission, board, the Building Code Official or a court has
intervened with cause.
Before taking any action on the application, the Commission may
delegate a subcommittee or one of its members, agents or employees
to meet with the applicant. The Commission may also meet with other
interested parties whose interests may be affected by the proposed
building, renovation or change.
A.
Pursuant to RSA 676:9 and Article 9 of the HDC Rules of Procedures,
the Historic District Commission shall file a certificate of approval or a
notice of disapproval within 45 days after the filing of the application
for the certificate, unless the applicant agrees to a longer period of
time.
B.
In the event of disapproval, the Commission shall state in writing within
10 calendar days the reason for its disapproval, and may, if appropriate,
state what changes, if any, would render the application acceptable to
the Commission.
C.
§ 285-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-15
1:433
§ 285-15. Approval voiding.
Any deviation from the approval in the actual construction, renovation or
change in a building or site after approval of the Commission shall render
such approval null and void.
§ 285-16. Deadline for completion of exterior work; fines.
The exterior work of the approved application must be completed within
two years of the issuance of the certificate of approval. The exterior work
is defined as construction of the building, painting, landscaping, driveways
and retaining walls. Failure to complete the exterior work within this time
frame will result in a civil fine in accordance to Chapter 275, Zoning,
§ 275-87, of the Bedford Town Code for each day that the exterior work is
not completed.
§ 285-17. Commission meetings.
Regular public meetings shall be held at least once in each month and
may be held at the call of the Chairperson at such other times as the
Commission may determine. Meetings will normally be held on the first
Tuesday of the month at 7:00 p.m. in the Bedford Meeting Room or as
otherwise posted. If no applications are received or there is no business
to conduct, the meeting shall be cancelled and members notified by the
Chairperson or his/her designee.
A.
In the event of an emergency or holiday falling on the scheduled
meeting date, the Chairperson or his/her designee shall notify all
members and scheduled applicants of the alternate date at least 24
hours ahead of time.
B.
Notice to abutters shall be made by mail to the owner of record,
applicant, and all abutters not less than 10 calendar days prior to the
date of the Historic District Commission meeting.
C.
Three voting members shall constitute a quorum, including alternate
members sitting in place of regular members, and for approval an
application must have received a majority vote of those present. A
lesser number of members may meet but may not vote on any matter
before the Commission. If only three regular and/or alternate members
are sitting on an application for a public hearing, the applicant may
elect to postpone the public hearing to a future date when at least four
regular and/or alternate members are seated to vote.
D.
§ 285-15 BEDFORD CODE § 285-17
1:434
ARTICLE III
Specifications for Applications
§ 285-18. Documentation required.
The following documentation is required for application:
General information describing or outlining the existing conditions
including buildings and landscaping of the existing site as well as a list
of abutters.
A.
The application shall include a record set, to be retained by the
Commission, of drawings, sketches and other pertinent documents as
necessary to adequately describe the building, renovation, addition or
other changes to structures or sites. Documents shall include:
A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the relationship of new work
to existing proposed plantings, walks, drives, structures, public
ways, property lines and major landscape features and other items
included but not limited to those in § 285-26.
(1)
Plans and all elevations, drawn to scale, showing the architectural
features of the proposed new building, addition or alteration as
well as the relationship of the new work to any existing structure;
drawings to call out the exterior finish materials, dimensions and
accurately depict doors, windows, rooflines, exterior lighting and
fixtures and other architectural features and elements.
(2)
For signs, location to be indicated on a plan or photograph showing
relationship to existing or proposed structures, roadways and
property lines; a scale drawing of the sign accurately depicting the
size and proportions of the sign, showing dimensions, height from
grade, colors, text, materials of its visible surfaces, and method of
erection or installation, and illumination of sign.
(3)
Dated photographs showing property before new work commences
shall be presented to the Commission. Photographs showing
completed work are also required after work has been finished.
These photographs will become part of a permanent record of each
property in the Historic District and will be added to the Historic
District Building Inventory.
(4)
Photographs used to depict existing conditions shall:
(a) Be dated as to when taken.
(b) Labeled as to location.
(c) Keyed to a sketch showing location of shot and view taken.
Will be retained by the Commission as part of the
application.157
(d)
(5)
B.
§ 285-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-19
1:435
§ 285-19. Additional requirements.
All construction, renovation or changes to a building or site shall meet
the requirements of Chapter 275, Zoning, Land Development Control
Regulations and any applicable state statutes. The design of the building,
renovation or change shall complement the natural and man-made
environments within the Historic District with the least amount of conflict.
§ 285-20. Materials submission.
§ 285-21. Historic District certificate of approval required.159
Activities requiring approval include but are not limited to activities such
as:
The Commission will require submittals (i.e., product literature,
technical information) of exterior finish materials before final
approval.158
A.
B. Color samples of actual exterior finish materials are requested.
A. Changing the architectural detail of external walls;
Replacement or modification of window and door openings, or
replacement or modification of windows and doors;
B.
C. Installation or removal of porches or fire escapes;
D. Modification of roof plane or chimney;
Alteration of a site, paving, installation or removal of signage, on-site
lighting, commercial-style trash receptacles, satellite dishes and other
radio receiving antennas or similar activities;
E.
F. A change of siding materials;
Construction, alteration of any stone wall or fencing as required in
Article IV;
G.
H. Grading, excavation, or removal of stone walls, fences, and trees;
Construction or reconstruction, removal, moving, demolition, sand
blasting or abrasive cleaning of any structure within the Historic
District.
I.
157. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (upon enactment, adoption information will be
inserted here).
158. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (upon enactment, adoption information will be
inserted here).
159. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (upon enactment, adoption information will be
inserted here).
§ 285-19 BEDFORD CODE § 285-22
1:436
§ 285-22. Historic District certificate of approval not required.160
The following activities do not require approval:
§ 285-23. Use of reference materials encouraged.
Applicants are strongly encouraged to consult the Historic District
reference materials located at the Town office building and architectural
texts at the Bedford Public Library to discover what is most appropriate
to the era and style of their property before planning construction,
renovations, changes and painting.
A. Interior change or renovation.
Ordinary maintenance and repair of any architectural feature which
does not involve removal or change in design.
B.
Roofing or reroofing existing structures, provided that material remains
the same (e.g., changing three-tab to architectural shingles).
C.
Screen and storm windows and screen and storm doors, provided that
the existing architectural features are not removed, destroyed, or
concealed.
D.
Painting or repainting of buildings or structures:
Colors employed shall be consistent with that of the balance of the
District and shall be presented in a conventional manner.
(1)
Unconventional designs, colors, or color combinations are
prohibited.
(2)
E.
160. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (upon enactment, adoption information will be
inserted here).
§ 285-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-23
1:437

ARTICLE IV
Design and Construction Requirements
§ 285-24. Conformity with Town and state regulations required;
removal of demolition debris.
All building construction, renovation or change of a residential or
commercial building or site shall be in general conformance to applicable
Town and state regulations and statutes and shall, in addition, conform to
the design and material utilized in other buildings and sites in the Historic
District. Any demolition or construction residue must be removed from
the site within 30 days except in unusual circumstances, including but not
limited to hurricanes, fires, insurance investigations, etc.
§ 285-25. Building materials.
§ 285-26. Landscaping and other site work.
The Historic District Commission is concerned with the exterior
architecture design and construction of a building or site.
A.
That portion of a building, as to facade, windows, doors, chimneys,
etc., shall be designed and constructed so as to complement the main
architectural style of the structure and/or other buildings within the
District. Renovations may deviate from the main style in the event
a secondary feature is of more historic significance, or upon
determination of the District/owner that secondary features should
be preserved. Exterior materials which will create an appearance
consistent with the structure's architectural style are encouraged.
Windows shall be constructed of wood or a simulation of wood
and may be covered with storm or combination windows or similar
permanent insulating material.
(1)
Chimneys shall be constructed of brick or fieldstone and be
constructed in conformance with existing fire regulations.
(2)
Driveways shall be constructed so as to conform to the
neighborhood of the District and shall be in proportion to the size
of the lot.
(3)
B.
General. Activities requiring changes to the external site of any
property requiring an appearance before the Historic District
Commission by the applicant are delineated in Article III.
A.
Excavation.
Excavations may be made only in conformance with Town of
Bedford Excavation Regulations161 pursuant to RSA 155-E.
(1)
B.
161. Editor's Note: See Ch. 239, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. II, Street Openings.
§ 285-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-26
1:439
Within the Historic District, excavations shall be restored to
original topography within 10 feet of a building, structure or
parking area.
(2)
Flora.
Clear cutting to 1/30 acre or more, or cutting down any single
tree in excess of 15 inches in diameter, measured at a point three
feet above existing grade, shall not be allowed without Commission
approval unless an imminent hazard or diseased beyond repair and
a danger to buildings, automobiles or people, evidence of which
shall be the responsibility of the property owner and to be provided
to the Town prior to cutting.
(1)
Ordinary maintenance, replacement or additions of bushes, trees
or herbs may be made if they enhance the look or value of the
property and do not require Historic District Commission approval.
(2)
C.
Other landscape features.
Fences and other obstructions to view must not detract from the
character of the District.
Granite posts with wooden rails, picket fencing, and post-andrail
fences 48 inches or less in height are accepted styles and
do not require an application to the Commission. Other styles
shall require approval. Chain link fences are discouraged.162
(a)
A variety of connecting fence along a property line is
discouraged. Any fence along the front of a building should
always continue with the same style of fencing on the property
sides (lines) as far as visible.
(b)
In choosing the proper fence the following should be
considered:
[1] Architectural period of the house;
[2] Neighboring properties;
[3] Existing fences in the neighborhood;
[4] Height and style in relation to the house;
[5] Fences should not restrict the view of the neighbors;
[6] Plantings along flat fences are encouraged.
(c)
(1)
Landscape structures such as arbors and pergolas must be
complimentary to the predominant architectural style of the
property.
(2)
D.
162. Editor's Note: Amended during codification (upon enactment, adoption information will be
inserted here).
§ 285-26 BEDFORD CODE § 285-26
1:440
§ 285-27. Signs.
Visibility of the following may be required to be mitigated where
the condition is found not to be in character with the Historic
District: man-made decorative objects, large or obtrusive personal
property, equipment and machinery such as earth moving and/or
other heavy equipment, storage sheds or outbuildings, landscaping
features, and swimming pools, tennis courts, antennas and satellite
dishes, and trash receptacles.
(3)
Stockpiling. Stockpiling of fill, rubble, stone, building materials, logs or
other material, unless permitted as part of a business use, in excess of
that to be used in or on a site as part of the proposed work is prohibited.
E.
The purpose of these sign regulations is to preserve the rural and
historic nature and unique character of the District and to foster civic
beauty. Although it is understood that the Route 101 section of the
Historic District is primarily a business district, it is also an
introduction to the Town of Bedford for persons traveling through the
Town.
A.
It is the desire of this Commission to strengthen Bedford's economy
by protecting and enhancing the attractiveness of the community to
residents, tourists and visitors by carefully reviewing proposed signs
to ensure that said signs, in design, size, lighting, color, materials
and visual impact, are consistent with the goals and standards of the
Historic District as a whole.
B.
All signs within the Historic District shall conform to the requirements
of the Bedford Zoning Ordinance (Articles VII and IX) and the additional
regulations listed below:
Location. Roof signs are prohibited. Freestanding signs on
permanent posts must meet Zoning Board regulations.
(1)
Materials. Materials appropriate to the Historic District such as
wood, simulated wood, stone, brick, metals such as copper, and
glass are permitted. Plastic is discouraged except when it simulates
wood.
(2)
Trademark and product names. Such signs shall be discouraged
in favor of names of proprietors, business owners and business
names. If trademark and product names are desired, the Historic
District Commission shall review them to ensure that said signs in
design, size, colors, materials and visual impact are consistent with
the goals and standards of the Historic District.
(3)
Illumination. Signs shall be illuminated only externally by steady,
stationary, shielded light sources directed solely on the sign
without causing glare for motorists, pedestrians, or neighboring
premises. Wires shall be buried underground. Neon shall not be
permitted on any exterior sign within the Historic District.
(4)
C.
§ 285-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-27
1:441
Illuminated signs within a building shall not be positioned for
display onto any sidewalk, parking lot or roadway. Interior neon
signs may not be visible from outside the building.
Color. Reflective, fluorescent or similar paints shall not be
permitted. Simply designed and rendered signs are encouraged.
Sign shall consist of no more than four colors.
(5)
Temporary signs and banners. Refer to Chapter 275, Zoning, and
Chapter 216, Signs and Banners, of the Bedford Town Code.
(6)
General provisions.
No off-premises signs shall be permitted within the Historic
District;
(1)
Any property owner, whether a person, persons, firm, or
corporation, who erects or resurfaces a sign within the Historic
District without a certificate of approval from the Historic District
Commission and a sign permit from the Bedford Building
Department shall be subject to the enforcement actions and civil
penalties of the Chapter 275, Zoning (Article XI, Administration
and Enforcement).
(2)
D.
§ 285-27 BEDFORD CODE § 285-27
1:442
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. 7-13-2011 General provisions:
adoption of Code
Ch. 1, Art. I
ATM, Art. 2 3-13-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
Ord. 3-25-2012 Signs and banners
amendment
Ch. 216
Ord. 3-25-2012 Pawnbrokers and
secondhand dealers
Ch. 188
Special
Election
9-11-2012 Charter amendment §§ C3-5, C4-2, C5-11
Ord. 12-12-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 262
ATM, Art. II 3-12-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
Ord. 1-8-2014 Sunday sales amendment Ch. 243
Ord. 5-22-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 262
ATM, Art. 2 3-11-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
Ord. 6-11-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 262
Ord. 9-10-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 262
Ord. 9-10-2014 Taxation: elderly exemption
amendment
Ch. 251, Art. IV
Ord. 1-14-2015 Signs and banners
amendment
Ch. 216
ATM, Art. 3 3-10-2015 Charter amendment §§ C3-15, C5-4,
C5-12, C6-3, C7-2,
C7-4, C8-6, C9-2,
C11-1, Art. XII
(reference only)
ATM, Art. 2 3-10-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
Ord. 5-13-2015 Sewer use amendment Ch. 212
Ord. 11-18-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 262
§ 285-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:443
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. 11-18-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 262
Ord. 11-18-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 262
ATM, Art. 2 3-8-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
ATM, Art. 3 3-8-2016 Charter amendment § C4-2
Ord. 7-20-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 262
Ord. 7-20-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 262
Ord. 7-27-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 262
Ord. 9-14-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 262
Ord. 10-26-2016 Sewer use amendment Ch. 212
ATM, Art. 2 3-14-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
ATM, Art. 3 3-14-2017 Charter amendment § C6-3
3-23-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 262
Ord. 7-19-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 262
3-13-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 275
Ord. 4-18-2018 Sewer District Map
Amendment
See Ch. 212
Ord. 5-9-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 262
Ord. 5-9-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 262
Ord. 5-9-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 262
Ord. 12-12-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 262
3-12-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 275
3-12-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 275
3-12-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 275
3-12-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 275
3-12-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 275
3-12-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 275
§ DL-1 BEDFORD CODE § DL-1
1:444