GENERAL PROVISIONS
101
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
[History: Adopted by the Annual Town Meeting of the Town of Bow 3-13-2014 as Art. 25.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
The Town adopts the ordinances and regulations, together with a change of numbering,
formatting and stylizing thereof, the entire texts of which are as published in the new Code of the
Town of Bow, on file with the Town Clerk, effective on passage. This vote shall supersede and
replace by reference to said Code the ordinances and regulations heretofore adopted by the Town
of Bow.
BOARD OF SELECTMEN
301
Chapter 3
BOARD OF SELECTMEN
§ 3-1. Number of members.
[History: Adopted by the Annual Town Meeting 3-12-2002 as Art. 4.]
§ 3-1. Number of members.
The Town voted, pursuant to RSA 41:8-b, to increase the Board of Selectmen from 3 members to
5 members.
BUDGET COMMITTEE
601
Chapter 6
BUDGET COMMITTEE
§ 6-1. Establishment.
§ 6-2. Membership.
[History: Adopted by the Annual Town Meeting 3-13-1951 as Art. 15. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
§ 6-1. Establishment.
The Town voted to adopt the provisions of the Municipal Budget Law.
§ 6-2. Membership.
The Budget Committee is comprised of one (1) representative from the Board of Selectmen, one
(1) representative from the School Board, and six (6) members at large.
BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
901
Chapter 9
BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
§ 9-1. Establishment.
§ 9-2. Membership.
[History: Adopted by the Annual Town Meeting 3-14-1978 as Art. 10. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
§ 9-1. Establishment.
The Town voted to authorize the Selectmen to appoint an industrial development committee to
foster and encourage orderly industrial development within the town, to consult with the
planning board, and assist and advise the selectmen with respect to industrial development
matters.
§ 9-2. Membership. [Amended by the Annual Town Meeting 3-24-2014 as Art. 25]
The commission will consist of nine (9) members who will serve without compensation. No
more than two (2) members may be non-resident owners, or their designees, of businesses or
properties located in Bow. The term of each member shall be three years.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM COMMITTEE
1201
Chapter 12
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM COMMITTEE
§ 12-1. Establishment.
§ 12-2. Membership.
[History: Adopted by the Annual Town Meeting 3-13-2013 as Art. 22. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
§ 12-1. Establishment.
The Town voted to authorize the Board of Selectmen, per the provisions of RSA 674:5-8 as
amended, to appoint a capital improvement program committee.
§ 12-2. Membership.
The committee will include three members from the general public appointed by the Board of
Selectmen and four ex-officio members consisting of one member of the Board of Selectmen,
one member of the Planning Board, one member of the Budget Committee, and one member of
the School Board. The Chair of the Board of Selectmen shall request, on an annual basis, the
designation of the ex-officio members of the Planning Board, Budget Committee and School
Board.
CONSERVATION COMMISSION
1501
Chapter 15
CONSERVATION COMMISSION
§ 15-1. Establishment.
[History: Adopted by the Annual Town Meeting 3-14-1967 as Art. 22. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
§ 15-1. Establishment.
The Town voted to establish a town conservation commission as set forth in RSA 36A.
HERITAGE COMMISSION
2101
Chapter 21
HERITAGE COMMISSION
§ 21-1. Establishment.
§ 21-2. Purpose.
§ 21-3. Membership.
[History: Adopted by the Annual Town Meeting 3-9-2005 as Art. 36. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
§ 21-1. Establishment.
The Town voted to discontinue the Historical Commission and establish a Heritage Commission
pursuant to RSA 637:1 and RSA 674:44-b.
§ 21-2. Purpose.
The role of the Commission is to manage the proper recognition, use, and protection of
resources, tangible or intangible, primarily man-made, that are valued for their historic, cultural,
aesthetic, or community significance within their natural, built, or cultural contexts.
§ 21-3. Membership.
The commission will consist of six (6) members appointed by the Board of Selectmen, one (1)
representative from the Board of Selectmen and up to three (3) alternates.
PLANNING BOARD
2401
Chapter 24
PLANNING BOARD
Article I
Establishment; Membership
§ 24-1. Established.
§ 24-2. Alternate members.
Article II
Platting Jurisdiction
§ 24-3. Authorization.
Article III
Site Plan Review
§ 24-4. Authorization.
Article I
Establishment; Membership
[History: Adopted by the Annual Town Meeting of the Town 3-10-1953 as Art. 12.
Amendments note where applicable.]
§ 24-1. Established.
The Town votes to establish a Planning Board in accordance with NH RSA 53 “to make a study
of the town’s development and report to the town appropriate recommendations for the
promotion and maintenance of the town’s best development.”
§ 24-2. Members. [Amended by the Annual Town Meeting 3-12-1963 as Art. 11.]
The Town voted to increase the size of the planning board from five to seven members. The
board shall consist of one selectman and six other citizens appointed by the selectmen.
§ 24-2. Alternate members.
The Town voted to increase the number of alternates from two to five, as authorized by RSA
637:6.
TOWN OF BOW
2402
Article II
Platting Jurisdiction
[History: Adopted by the Annual Town Meeting of the Town 3-14-1967 as Art. 8.]
§ 24-3. Authorization.
The Town voted to authorize and empower the Planning Board to approve, or disapprove, in its
discretion, subdivision plats showing streets, or the widening thereof, or parks, in accordance
with the provisions of RSA 36:19, as amended.
Article III
Site Plan Review
[History: Adopted by the Annual Town Meeting of the Town 3-11-1986 as Art. 11.]
§ 24-4. Authorization.
The Town voted to authorize and empower the Planning Board to approve and disapprove site
plans for the development of tracts for non-residential uses and multi-family dwelling units.
TOWN CLERK/TAX COLLECTOR
2701
Chapter 27
TOWN CLERK/TAX COLLECTOR
§ 27-1. Combined position.
§ 27-2. Term of office.
[History: Adopted by the Annual Town Meeting 3-8-1983 as Art. 3. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
§ 27-1. Combined position.
The Town voted to combine the position of Tax Collector with that of Town Clerk creating a
new position of Town Clerk-Tax Collector to be held by one individual.
§ 27-2. Term of office. [Amended by Annual Town Meeting of the Town 3-12-1996 as
Art. 3.]
The Town voted to change the term of office from one year to three years.
TOWN MANAGER
3001
Chapter 30
TOWN MANAGER
§ 30-1. Adoption.
[History: Adopted by the Annual Town Meeting 3-14-1987 as Art. 9.]
§ 30-1. Adoption.
The Town voted to adopt the town manager plan as provided in Chapter 37 of the revised
statutes annotated.
TOWN TREASURER
3301
Chapter 33
TOWN TREASURER
§ 33-1. Term of office.
[History: Adopted by the Annual Town Meeting 3-8-2005 as Art. 13.]
§ 33-1. Term of office.
The Town voted to change the term of the town treasurer from one year to three years.
VOTING
3601
Chapter 36
VOTING
Article I
Non-Partisan Ballot System
§ 36-1. Adoption of system.
Article I
Non-Partisan Ballot System
[History: Adopted by the Annual Town Meeting 3-8-1960 as Art. 25.]
§ 36-1. Adoption of system.
The Town voted to adopt the nonpartisan ballot system for the election of town officers and for
the decision of matters of policy that do not require appropriations of money.
AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND AMUSEMENT CENTERS
4301
Chapter 43
AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND AMUSEMENT CENTERS
§ 43-1. Purpose.
§ 43-2. Definitions.
§ 43-3. Gambling devices not permitted.
§ 43-4. Prohibited practices.
§ 43-5. License required.
§ 43-6. License fee.
§ 43-7. Amusement Center management plan.
§ 43-8. Penalty.
§ 43-9. Separability.
§ 43-10. Transfer of license.
§ 43-11. Conditions and restrictions.
§ 43-12. Amusement Center hours.
[HISTORY: Adopted by Annual Town Meeting March 9, 1983 as Article 5.]
§ 43-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this ordinance, pursuant to RSA 31:41-d, to regulate and to license
amusement devices and amusement centers as defined herein, and to provide for the management
of amusement centers in the public interest.
TOWN OF BOW
4302
§ 43-2. Definitions.
AMUSEMENT DEVICE - The term "amusement device" shall mean any machine which, upon
the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be operated by the public generally for use
as a game, entertainment, or amusement, whether or not registering a score, and whether or not
skill is used in its operation. It shall include but not be limited to such devices as electronic
games, pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, and all games, operations, or
transactions, similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated. The term does not
include vending machines in which are not incorporated gaming or amusement features, nor does
the term include any coin-operated rides or devices which solely produce music.
AMUSEMENT CENTER - The term "amusement center" shall mean any premises having
thereon available for use by the general public two (2) or more amusement devices as defined
above.
PERSON, FIRM CORPORATION OF ASSOCIATION - The terms person, firm, corporation,
or association shall include any of these entities or combinations thereof owning an amusement
device, or maintaining an establishment where one or more amusement devices are available for
general use by the public, or having control over such an establishment.
§ 43-3. Gambling devices not permitted.
Nothing in this ordinance shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or permit any
gambling devices whatsoever prohibited or regulated by New Hampshire law.
§ 43-4. Prohibited practices.
A. No person under the age of 16 years shall be allowed to operate any amusement device
unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. It shall be the duty of the manager and
employees of an establishment where amusement devices are present to ascertain the age
of each person operating or wishing to operate an amusement device.
B. No amusement center shall serve alcoholic beverages on the premises.
C. No prizes of material value may be given away or sold at nominal fee for any reason
whatsoever pertaining to a high score, matching number, or any other outcome of an
amusement device game.
D. No amusement center shall be erected, opened, added to, altered, changed or operated in
violation of this Ordinance, the Town of Bow Building Code, the Town of Bow Zoning
Ordinance, the Fire Prevention Code or any other legally adopted Code or ordinance forthe
Town of Bow, the State, or the Federal Government or subsidiaries thereof. In any
case the operation shall at all times be in conformance with all applications, permits and
Planning Board and Zoning Board actions.
AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND AMUSEMENT CENTERS
4303
§ 43-5. License required.
A. No person, firm, corporation, or association may operate an amusement center or
amusement device without first obtaining a license from the Bow Selectmen or their
designee.
B. The Selectmen or their designee may establish from time to time reasonable licensing
requirements, but in no event shall those requirements contain less than the following:
(1) That the applicant or applicants are eighteen years of age and of good moral
character, as reasonably determined by the Chief of Police;
(2) That a full description of the premises is submitted, with a statement that such
premises will be operated in accordance with all applicable local ordinances;
(3) That the applicant will report the number of proposed amusement devices, and that
should such number exceed the original number, an additional fee shall be paid for
each such device.
(4) No license to operate an amusement center or device shall be issued by the
Selectmen until all other required Town approvals have been obtained. A renewal
of an amusement center license shall be subject to the conditions of this section.
(5) Duration. Licenses shall be effective from the date granted until December 31 of
the year granted. Any amusement center now in operation must pay all fees and
apply for a license within 30 days of the effective date of this ordinance. Owners
of establishments with fewer than two devices now in operation must file in a like
manner and pay all fees.
(6) Renewal. License will be reviewed annually by the Selectmen and renewed upon
payment of fees if the person, firm, corporation, or association applying for
renewal has been found to comply with the provisions of this ordinance.
(7) Revocation or Suspension. Such license may be suspended upon a determination
that a violation of this ordinance, or any other local, state, or federal ordinance, law
or regulation has been committed by the license holder, his agent, employee, or
patron. Such suspension shall take effect immediately upon notice of violation and
shall remain in effect until such time as a Public Hearing can be scheduled, posted
and held, at which time the permit can be revoked. Said hearing shall be conducted
by the Selectmen and notice thereof shall be posted on the Town web site and in a
newspaper of local circulation at least twice prior to said hearing. It is hereby
ordained that the Board of Selectmen, Police Chief, Fire Chief, Building Inspector,
Zoning Officer, Health Officer or their designated representatives have the
authority to enter into or onto the premises at any reasonable time to inspect for
compliance or investigate any alleged violations.
TOWN OF BOW
4304
§ 43-6. License fee.
The applicant shall pay an annual fee for the Amusement Center license and also an annual fee
per device or any part thereof, provided that the applicant may at his discretion remove and
replace any device at will without further payment of a fee. Fees are established by the Board of
Selectmen. The license fee shall be determined by the maximum number of devices present on
any day of the year, and not by the total number of different machines present during the entire
year.
§ 43-7. Amusement Center management plan.
Any application for an amusement center license shall contain a management plan containing at
least the following:
(1) The number .of qualified employees to be present at all times;
(2) Procedures for determining the ages of patrons;
(3) A plan to control loitering and bicycle parking in the vicinity of the amusement
center;
(4) A description of proposed operations to show proper control of noise, glare, and
overcrowding.
§ 43-8. Penalty.
Any person, firm, corporation, or association found to have violated this ordinance shall be
guilty of a violation, and subject to a fine as established by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 43-9. Separability.
Each separate provision of this ordinance shall be deemed independent of all other provisions
herein, and it is further ordained that if any provisions of this ordinance are found to be invalid
by a court of competent jurisdiction, all other provisions thereof shall remain valid and
enforceable.
§ 43-10. Transfer of license.
A license shall not be transferable from person to person nor place to place, and shall be useable
only at the place and by the person designated on the license.
§ 43-11. Conditions and restrictions.
All licenses shall be subject to such conditions and restrictions as the Selectmen deem it proper
to impose.
AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND AMUSEMENT CENTERS
4305
§ 43-12. Amusement Center hours.
Every amusement center shall be permitted to stay open for the reception of patrons from 9:00
o'clock in the morning until 10:00 o'clock in the evening of the same day, except on Saturdays,
when said amusement center shall be cleared of patrons and closed at 11:00 o'clock in the
evening, and on Sundays, when the said amusement center shall not be permitted to open until
1:00 o'clock in the afternoon.
ANIMALS
4401
Chapter 44
ANIMALS
ARTICLE I
Dogs Running at Large
[HISTORY. Adopted by Annual Town Meeting as Article 7 on March 14, 1987.]
§ 44-1. Adoption of statutory provisions.
The Town voted to adopt the provisions of RSA 466:30-a which makes it unlawful for any
dog to run at large, except when accompanied by the owner or custodian, and when the dog
is used for hunting, herding, supervised competition and exhibition or training for such.
BLASTING AND/OR EXPLOSIVE DEMOLITION
4701 12/22/2015
Chapter 47
BLASTING AND/OR EXPLOSIVE DEMOLITION
§ 47-1. Purpose.
§ 41-2. Authority.
§ 47-3. Title.
§ 47-4. Definitions
§ 47-5. Administrative responsibility.
§ 47-6. Permit.
§ 47-7. Fee.
§ 47-8. Application form.
§ 47-9. Authority to issue.
§ 47-10. Minimum standards of conduct.
§ 47-11. Local requirements.
§ 47-12. Prohibitions.
§ 47-13. Revocation of permit.
§ 47-14. Appeal.
§ 47-15. Penalty.
§ 47-16. Emergency conditions.
§ 47-17. Interpretation.
§ 47-18. Construction.
§ 47-19. Severability.
Appendix A, Blasting Application-Permit
[HISTORY: Adopted by Annual Town Meeting May 14, 2008 as Article 27.]
TOWN OF BOW
4702 12/22/2015
§ 47-1. Purpose.
It is hereby found and declared that the preservation and promotion of the public safety
and the preservation of community peace and quiet requires that the Town of Bow
(hereinafter “Bow” or “Town”) act to assure that blasting within the Town is conducted
in a safe, responsible and proper manner.
§ 47-2. Authority.
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority of state law, currently codified as
New Hampshire RSA 31:39(e) and (n), RSA 154:18, RSA 153:5 and RSA 158:9-f II.
§ 47-3. Title.
This ordinance shall be known as, and may be cited as, the Bow Blasting Ordinance.
§ 47-4. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following words and phrases when used herein
shall be construed as follows:
BLASTING - The detonation of an explosive device as defined by National Fire
Protection Act (NFPA) 495.
CHIEF OR FIRE CHIEF - The Chief of the Bow Fire Department or a designee.
FIRE DEPARTMENT - Town of Bow Fire Department
SELECTMEN OR BOS - Town of Bow Board of Selectmen
§ 47-5. Administrative responsibility.
The Fire Department, by its Fire Chief, shall administer this ordinance, conduct
appropriate oversight of all blasting and, in cooperation with other officials, departments
and agencies, enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
§ 47-6. Permit.
No person shall engage in blasting or detonation of explosive materials within the Town
of Bow without first obtaining a permit to conduct such operations from the Fire Chief or
the designated representative of the Town. Permits in the Town of Bow shall be valid
for no more than ninety (90) days. A permanent record of all permits issued under this
ordinance will be kept in the Fire Department.
BLASTING AND/OR EXPLOSIVE DEMOLITION
4703 12/22/2015
§ 47-7. Fee.
No permit shall be issued unless the fee has been paid. This non-refundable fee shall be
established by the Board of Selectmen and shall be collected at the time of application.
§ 47-8. Application form.
A. A properly executed application form shall be submitted to and approved by the Fire
Chief for all blasting permits, prior to commencement of any blasting or detonation.
Applications shall be made to Fire Department headquarters, during customary
office hours, on a form to be prescribed by the Department. All applications shall
be viewed and signature required by the Town of Bow Building Department prior to
any submission to the Fire Department. The Building Department shall inform the
Fire Department of any particular topography requirements established by the
Planning Board for this application.
B. Approval of the blasting permit will not relieve the applicant of full and
complete responsibility for the results of the blasting operations. The applicant
also has full responsibility for the accuracy and adequacy of the blasting plan
when implemented in the field.
C. The application form shall require the following information:
(1) Name, address, and daytime phone number of the applicant.
(2) A copy of license issued by the State Police to the applicant along with
proof of identification, under RSA 158:9-b.
(3) Name, address and daytime phone number of blasting supervisor.
(4) A copy of blasting supervisor’s Certificate of Competency issued by the
State
(5) Police pursuant to RSA 158:9-h
(6) The tax map, lot number and physical locations where blasting is to be
conducted, as well as the date(s) of detonation.
(7) A map or plan at a scale not greater than 1”=200’ depicting the
approximate location of the proposed blasting/detonation, and all
properties within one thousand (1000’) feet thereof.
(8) List of all owners of all such properties within one thousand (1000’)
feet thereof, and the type of occupancy (i.e., residential, commercial,
industrial).
(9) Letter of permission from the property owner of the blasting site.
TOWN OF BOW
4704 12/22/2015
(10) Signature from the Town of Bow Building Department.
(11) Evidence of liability insurance in an amount of not less than One Million
($1,000,000) dollars combined single limit per occurrence by a carrier
authorized by the State of New Hampshire Insurance Commissioner to
do business in New Hampshire.
D. The Applicant shall submit the following information to the Fire chief or an
authorized representative, at least two weeks prior to commencing drilling and
blasting operations:
(1) Sequence and schedule of production blast rounds, including the
general method of developing the excavation, lift heights, starting
locations, estimated starting dates, estimated rates of progress, etc.
(2) Written evidence of the licensing, experience, and qualifications of the
blaster who shall be directly responsible for the loading and firing of each
shot.
(3) Name of the person responsible for designing and directing the
applicant’s blasting operations.
(4) Name of the person to be used to conduct pre-blast survey.
(5) Name of the person to be used in monitoring blast vibration.
§ 47-9. Authority to issue.
Permit applications shall be received, reviewed and the information contained therein
verified as necessary by the Fire Chief or a designee. Prior to issuing any permit the chief
may consult with such federal, state and/or Town officials and employees whose area(s)
of responsibility are, or may be, affected by the proposed blasting operation. After review
and verification the Chief shall approve the application and issue the permit, issue the
permit with condition(s) necessary to achieve the purpose of this ordinance or deny
application. Any denial, along with reason(s) therefore, shall be provided in writing to the
applicant.
§ 47-10. Minimum standards of conduct.
Unless more stringent provisions are contained herein, the conduct of all blasting or
explosive detonations shall be governed by the standards in New Hampshire Code of
Administrative Rules, Saf-C Section 1600, et seq., as it may be amended or superseded
by other similar regulations from time to time.
BLASTING AND/OR EXPLOSIVE DEMOLITION
4705 12/22/2015
§ 47-11. Local requirements.
In addition to any other requirements of State law, the following additional requirements
shall apply to blasting activity within the Town of Bow:
A. General. All blasting operations, including the storage and handling of
explosives and blasting agents, shall be performed in accordance with the
applicable provisions of this ordinance and all other pertinent federal, state, and
local regulations to include NFPA 1 Fire Prevention Code, NFPA 495
Explosive Materials Code, New Hampshire State Building Code, and New
Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules Saf-C1600 (State Police Regulations),
all as may be amended or superseded by similar regulations from time to time.
Whenever explosives are used, they shall be of such character and in such amount
as are permitted by the state and local laws and ordinances, and all respective
agencies having jurisdiction over them.
B. Site monitoring. The Fire Chief reserves the right to visit any blasting sites to
monitor the operation. The Chief may also confer with other Town departments or
private blasting consultants for advice or assistance in the review or monitoring of
a blasting site. The Chief may require a Fire Department work detail to standby a
site for safety or monitoring duties. The cost of a Fire Department work detail or
any other private consultants necessary for enforcement of these regulations will be
at the applicant’s expense.
C. Pre-blast condition survey. Prior to conducting any blasting, the applicant or their
agent shall conduct a pre-blast structural condition survey of all existing structures
and conditions on the site, adjacent to the site or in the vicinity of the site. This
survey shall extend to such structures or conditions as may be affected by the
applicant’s construction operations. As a minimum, pre-blast structural
inspection condition surveys shall be performed on all structures, including homes,
foundations, driveways, roadbeds, swimming pools, wells and mobile homes,
within 500’ of the anticipated blasting areas. The applicant as well as the owner of
the property being surveyed shall sign all such surveys once completed. If an
owner refuses to allow for the conducting of a pre-blast survey or sign a pre-blast
survey form for whatever reasons the applicant shall note this on the form. The
applicant shall make at least three attempts to notify the owner of the need for such
surveys, the last such attempt shall include a written notification by certified mail
and individual to contact.
(1) The pre-blast structural inspection condition survey shall consist of a
written description of the interior and exterior condition of each of the
structures examined. Descriptions shall locate any existing cracks,
damage, or other defects, and shall include such information so as to
make it possible to determine the effect, if any, of the construction
operations on the defect. Where significant cracks or damage exist, or
for defects too complicated to describe in words, photographs shall be
taken. A good quality videotape survey with appropriate audio
TOWN OF BOW
4706 12/22/2015
description of locations, conditions, and defects can be used in lieu of
a written form. This survey shall be kept for a minimum of seven (7)
years and filed with the Town of Bow Fire Department.
(2) The individual person conducting the survey shall give written notice,
not less than 10 days in advance, to the owner of the property concerned
and tenants of the property. The notice shall state the dates on which
surveys are to be made. Copies of all notices shall be provided to the fire
chief.
(3) Upon completion of all earth/rock excavation and blasting work, the
applicant shall conduct a post-blast survey of any properties, structures
and conditions for which complaints of damage have been received or
damage claims have been filed. Notice shall be given to all interested
parties so they may be present during the final examination. Records of
the final examination shall be distributed the same as the original
pre-blast survey.
(4) All costs associated with condition surveys shall be borne by the
applicant.
D. Seismic measuring devices. Prior to conducting any blasting, seismic
measuring equipment shall be placed adjacent to the two closest structures to
the blasting site not owned by the owner. The fire chief or their authorized
representative may require additional measuring devices when necessary to
protect property. If an owner refuses to allow for or waives the placement of a
device at their property, the applicant shall note this on the form. All costs
associated with the analysis and monitoring shall be borne by the applicant.
E. Map of operations. The applicant shall provide a vicinity map or plan,
locating the blast site, and the locations of all measuring devices required
hereunder.
F. Additional surveys/seismic devices. The Town reserves the right to require
additional condition surveys and/or placement of seismic measuring equipment
on properties further away than 500’ should the need arise due to complaints or
other causes. Further, the Town reserves the right to require geological surveys
of the area around the blasting location should conditions warrant such analysis.
Such additional requirements may be prerequisites to attaining any permit
renewals.
G. Timing of blasting operations. Drilling is to take place between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., and shall not be permitted on Sundays or observed
holidays. Blasting and/or detonation shall be conducted only between the hours
of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. and shall not be permitted on Saturdays, Sundays or
observed holidays.
BLASTING AND/OR EXPLOSIVE DEMOLITION
4707 12/22/2015
H. Blast vibration control and monitoring. The applicant shall be required to
comply with the blasting vibration limits established by the applicable State of
New Hampshire rules and regulations.
I. Report of monitoring results. If required by the Fire Chief or their authorized
representative, the applicant shall provide within twenty-four (24) hours, in
writing, the following items:
(1) Details of the round as shot.
(2) Results of the blast monitoring at each instrument location, including
PPV in millimeters per second (inches per second), as well as a copy
of the strip chart recording for each monitoring location, marked with
the date, time, location of the equipment, and signature of the
seismograph operator.
(3) If the seismic ground vibration or air concussions, or both ground
vibration and air concussions caused by the applicant’s blasting
operation attain or surpass the State of New Hampshire established
limits, the operations shall cease and the permit revoked.
J. Warning signals. Adequate warnings shall be given to all personnel in the
proximity to the blast site at least three minutes in advance of each blast. The
applicant shall use sirens or horns or both sirens and horns with sufficient
intensity such that they can be heard for a minimum distance of 1,000 feet. The
applicant shall notify the Bow Fire Department and the Bow Police Department
Communications Center not less than one (1) hour before the scheduled time of
blast or explosion.
K. Fly rock control. Before the firing of any blast in areas where flying rock or
debris may result in personal injury or damage to property, the rock to be blasted
shall be covered with approved blasting mats, soil, or other equally serviceable
material to prevent fly rock.
L. Responsibility for blasting operations. Review of the applicant’s blasting
submittals by the Town of Bow, the Fire Chief or an authorized representative
will not relieve the applicant of his/her responsibility for the accuracy,
adequacy, and safety of the blasting; for exercising proper supervision and
field judgment; for preventing damage to structures; and for producing results
in accordance with the state of New Hampshire regulations and NHDOT
Specifications. The applicant shall be solely and completely responsible for
the safety of all persons and property during the performance of his/her works.
The applicant shall take whatever measures it deems necessary, in addition to
the requirements herein, to protect the safety of persons and property, both at
the construction site and away from the site. The applicant shall have full and
complete responsibility for the handling, discharging, or settling of any and all
TOWN OF BOW
4708 12/22/2015
damage or annoyance claims resulting from the blasting activities on the
project. Any monitoring and/or review of the applicant’s procedures and
performance conducted by the Town of Bow, the fire chief or their authorized
representative shall not relieve the applicant of his/her responsibility for safety
at and away from the site, or for preventing damage to adjacent structures or
property.
§ 47-12. Prohibitions.
A. No blasting shall be conducted without a valid permit having first been
obtained.
B. No blasting shall be conducted on weekends or on state or national holidays.
C. No drilling shall be conducted on Sundays or state or national holidays.
D. No blasting shall be conducted after an order to cease blasting has been issued
by the fire chief and communicated to the permit holder.
E. The overnight storage of explosives or blasting agents, whether supervised or not,
is not allowed. Loaded explosives shall have twenty-four (24) hour supervision
and guarded overnight when conditions or circumstances delayed the blast and
the fire chief approved the overnight delay in blasting.
F. No drilling shall take place within fifty feet (50’) of any loaded hole(s).
§ 47-13. Revocation of permit.
A permit issued hereunder may be revoked by the Fire Chief or the Town Manager for
just cause including but not limited to: failure to conduct operations in accordance with
the standards herein resulting in property damage that does or has the potential to exceed
the amount of liability insurance held by the applicant; lapse or revocation of the state
license, or the institution of proceedings (civil, criminal, or administrative) by the state
for violation of applicable state law or regulations. The Fire Chief or Town Manager
may restore any permit that has been revoked upon showing that the condition(s) leading
to the revocation has (have) been corrected.
§ 47-14. Appeal.
Any permit denial, revocation or suspension may be appealed, within ten (10) working
days and not thereafter, to the Board of Selectmen. Any such appeal shall be in writing
and shall clearly specify the facts and circumstances warranting issue or reinstatement of
the permit. The BOS shall order such issuance or reinstatement only on the appellant’s
showing that the denial, revocation or suspension complained of was erroneous. The
BOS may also order that appropriate conditions be attached to any permit that it finds
should be issued or reinstated.
BLASTING AND/OR EXPLOSIVE DEMOLITION
4709 12/22/2015
§ 47-15. Penalty.
Any person found to have violated any provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a
violation and shall be punished by a maximum fine as provided by applicable state law,
which is currently one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each violation and/or each day of
violation shall be regarded as a separate offense.
§ 47-16. Emergency conditions.
In situations that pose an imminent danger to public safety, the Chief may, for a limited
time, waive such provisions of this ordinance as may be necessary to avoid and/or lesson
that danger. The details of any waiver granted under the authority of this section shall, as
soon as practicable, be reported to the Town Manager and in turn to the Board of
Selectmen.
§ 47-17. Interpretation.
This ordinance is intended to complement and supplement, and not conflict with, federal
and state regulation of blasting operations and explosives and shall be interpreted in
accord with that intent. To that end, should the requirements of this ordinance differ
from any requirement or regulation prescribed by any law, statute, ordinance, rule or
other regulation governing blasting operations and explosives, the provisions that impose
the higher standard shall govern.
§ 47-18. Construction.
Whenever a word appears in singular form such word shall also include the plural form
and vice versa, wherever and whenever the facts and context so permit or require.
Whenever masculine, feminine or neuter pronouns appear, each such pronoun shall
include all genders.
§ 47-19. Severability.
If any provision of this ordinance, or its application to any person or circumstance, is held
to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect any
other provision or application of this ordinance that can be given effect without the
invalid provision or application and, to this end, the provisions of this ordinance shall be
severable.
Appendix A, Blasting Application-Permit
APPENDIX A
Chap. 47, Appendix A
A-1
4710
Town of Bow, New Hampshire
BLASTING APPLICATION-PERMIT
(Please Type or Print Legibly)
Applicant:
(Name) (Daytime Phone)
(Address) (City) (State) (Zip)
NH State License #: Expiration Date:
Blasting Supervisor:
(Name) (Daytime Phone)
(Address) (City) (State) (Zip)
Cert. of Competency #: Expiration Date:
In accordance with the rules and regulations of the State of New Hampshire, and the
Town of Bow, the above named Applicant hereby requests permission to conduct
BLASTING OPERATIONS at the following location:
(Tax Map & Lot Number) (Dates of Detonation)
Applicant hereby agrees to notify the Bow Fire and Bow Police Department one (1) hour prior to
each scheduled blast. Applicant, by signing, hereby attests that the following documents,
required by the Town of Bow’s Ordinance Governing Blasting and/or Explosive Demolition have
been properly submitted with this application, and that all information contained herein or
attached hereto is true and correct to the best of his/her knowledge.
1. Copy of Applicant’s license, issued by State Police pursuant to RSA 158:9-b.
2. Map depicting location of blasting, monitors and all properties within 1000’ feet thereof.
3. A listing of owners of all properties identified.
4. A letter of permission from the property owner.
5. Evidence of liability insurance.
Approval of the blasting permit will not relieve the applicant of full and complete
responsibility for the results of the blasting operations. The applicant has full
responsibility for the accuracy and adequacy of the blasting plan when implemented
in the field.
(Applicant’s Signature) (Date)
For Municipality Use Only
Permit No.:
Issue Date: Expiration Date:
Building Department Fire Chief or designee
12/22/2015
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
5001
Chapter 50
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
AND REVITALIZATION DISTRICTS
§ 50-1. Adoption of enabling statute.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Annual Meeting 3-12-2002 as Art. 31.]
§ 50-1. Adoption of enabling statute.
The Town voted to adopt the provisions of NH RSA 162-K establishing the authority to establish
one or more development districts. For each district, the Town shall establish a development
program and a tax increment financing plan.
CODE OF ETHICS
5301
Chapter 53
CODE OF ETHICS
§ 53-1. Declaration of policy.
§ 53-2. Code of ethics committee.
§ 53-3. Purpose.
§ 53-4. Investigatory power.
§ 53-5. Definitions.
§ 53-6. Prohibited conduct.
§ 53-7. Exclusions.
§ 53-8. Procedures for inquiries and alleged violations.
§ 53-9. Financial Interest Disclosure form.
§ 53-10. Enforcement of FIDF requirements.
§ 53-11. Disposition of FIDF.
§ 53-12. Distribution of Code of Ethics.
[HISTORY: Adopted by Annual Town Meeting 3-13-2019 as Art. 16.]
§ 53-1. Declaration of policy.
The proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials and employees be
independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that government decisions and policy be
made through the proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used
for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In
recognition of these goals, a Code of Ethics for all town officials and employees is adopted in
accordance with RSA 31:39-a.
5-1-19
TOWN OF BOW
5302
§ 53-2. Code of Ethics committee.
The Board of Selectmen shall be the Code of Ethics Committee for the Town of Bow. In the
event a Selectman is the subject of a petition for a determination, the Selectman shall be recused
from hearing the petition.
§ 53-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this code is to establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all officials
and employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests
of the town and by directing disclosure by such officials and employees of private financial or
other interests in matters affecting the town.
§ 53-4. Investigatory power.
The Code of Ethics Committee may require of any member of town government to appear before
it and give such information as it may require in relation to this office, its function and
performance. The Code of Ethics Committee shall give at least 48 hours' written notice of the
general scope of the inquiry which is to be made to any person it shall require to appear before it
under this section. The Code of Ethics Committee, for this purpose, may administer oaths and
require the production of evidence.
§ 53-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BOARD - Any board, committee or commission, permanent or special, established by the
Selectmen or New Hampshire law.
COMPENSATION - Any money, gift, thing of value or economic / pecuniary benefit conferred
on or received by any person in return for services rendered or to be rendered by himself or
another.
FAMILY - Includes his or her spouse, parents, grandparents, children, grandchildren, brothers,
sisters or similar step relations and the parents, grandparents, children, grandchildren, brothers,
sisters or similar step relations of the member's spouse.
INTEREST -
A. Any legal or equitable interest, whether or not subject to an encumbrance or a condition,
which is owned or held, in whole or in part, jointly or severally, directly or indirectly, at
any time during the calendar year.
5-1-19
CODE OF ETHICS
5303
B. Any interest in any stock or similar security, preorganization certificate or subscription,
investment contract, voting trust certificate, limited or general partnership or joint venture,
business trust or certificate of interest or participation in a joint profit-sharing agreement or
in an oil, water, gas or other mineral royalty or lease or any other equity or beneficial
interest, however evidenced, which entitles the owner or holder thereof to receive or direct
any part of the profits from or to exercise any part of the control over a business entity, as
well as any interest which, conditionally or unconditionally, with or without consideration,
is convertible thereto.
C. Any interest in a note, bond, debenture or any other evidence of creditor interest.
D. Ownership of land within 200 feet of any land being discussed.
E. Acting as an agent or holding fiduciary interest.
F. Any present or past [within the previous twelve-month period] employer/employee
relationship.
MEMBER OF TOWN GOVERNMENT - (Also referred to as "member") Any elected or
appointed official, board member or town employee, whether full- or part-time, permanent or
temporary, including those employed by the Town and paid by federal or state assistance
programs and including but not limited to all town employees, Selectmen, the Town Manager,
Budget Committee members, Checklist Supervisors, Conservation Commission members,
Planning Board members, the Town Clerk/Tax Collector, the Town Moderator, the Treasurer,
the Trustees of the Trust Funds, Zoning Board of Adjustment members and members of any
other town boards, including those yet to be established.
RESPONDENT - A member of town government named in a petition submitted to the Code of
Ethics Committee as an inquiry or alleging a violation of the Code of Ethics.
§ 53-6. Prohibited conduct.
A. It is in violation of this chapter for any member to:
(1) In his or her official capacity, introduce, discuss, deliberate, approve or vote upon any
matter in which he or she or any member of his or her family has an interest known to
said member.
(2) Knowingly enter into any discussion, testimony or deliberation without first, publicly
and for the record, stating all dealings, interests, relationships and possible conflicts
that may exist between said member and his or her family, the principals and the issue
under deliberation, as may be known by the member.
5-1-19
TOWN OF BOW
5304
(3) Knowingly participate in the conduct of business of the town without disclosing all
conflict of interest questions.
(4) Knowingly use town property or labor for personal use.
(5) Knowingly use town property or labor to influence the political cause of any
candidate for public office or any political party. Nothing in the foregoing sentence
shall prevent political candidates or parties from holding public meetings on townowned
property in town-owned buildings or prevent a member from exercising and
carrying out the responsibilities and obligations of his or her office or position of
employment.
(6) Use any information acquired through or by virtue of his or her official position for
his or her pecuniary benefit or for the pecuniary benefit of any other person or
business. The foregoing does not apply to information available to the general public.
(7) Otherwise than as provided by law for the proper discharge of his or her official
duties, directly or indirectly request or receive any compensation from anyone other
than the town in relation to any particular matter in which the town is a party or has a
direct and substantial interest.
(8) Otherwise than as provided by law for the proper discharge of his official duties,
directly or indirectly promise or offer such compensation as referred to in this
chapter.
(9) Knowingly accept a gift with a value in excess of $25, or allow acceptance of such a
gift by a family member from any individual, group or corporation knowingly dealing
with an area of town government in which the member has an interest or jurisdiction.
The foregoing does not apply to gifts from family members.
(10) Knowingly give false information concerning dealings, interests, relationships and
possible conflicts to the various supervisors, boards, commissions and committees
and the Selectmen.
(11) Knowingly fail to cooperate with the Code of Ethics Committee or other investigating
authority in the investigation of any complaint alleging a violation of the tenets of this
chapter.
B. No elected or appointed officer or employee, whose salary is paid in whole or in part from
the town treasury shall appear in his official capacity on behalf of a private interest before
any town board. Selectmen, however, may appear without compensation on behalf of
constituents or in the performance of public or civic obligations.
5-1-19
CODE OF ETHICS
5305
C. No elected or appointed official or employee whose salary is paid in whole or in part from
the town treasury shall represent private interests, other than his or her own, in any action
or proceedings against the interest of the town in any litigation to which the town is a party.
D. No town official or employee shall claim to act on behalf of the Selectmen, boards or
departments without prior authorization from said body or department.
E. No elected or appointed official shall voluntarily participate with any person(s) initiating
claims or lawsuits against the Town of Bow or any of its departments. The foregoing does
not apply to personal or family-related lawsuits.
§ 53-7. Exclusions.
A. The prohibition against gifts or favors shall not apply to an occasional nonpecuniary gift,
insignificant in value, or an award publicly presented in recognition of public service or
any gift which would have been offered or given to him or her if he or she was not a
member.
B. It shall not be a violation for elected members to accept donations for the express purpose
of financing a political campaign, provided that such contributions are reported in
accordance with all local, state and federal laws pertaining to such donations or services
and/or financial value.
C. The mere purchase of goods or nonprofessional services (services from other than
attorneys, engineers, architects and surveyors) from a person or business in the ordinary
course of that person's or business's retail or service business shall not prevent a member
from introducing, discussing, approving or voting upon a matter which relates to that
person or business.
D. Those actions taken as part of the legislative process are exempt from the provisions stated
herein. Legislative actions concerning the granting of specific contract awards and/or
actions designed to benefit one identified or identifiable individual or specific group of
individuals are not exempt.
§ 53-8. Procedures for inquiries and alleged violations.
A. Any resident of Bow may petition the Code of Ethics Committee to make a ruling on a
situation which may or may not constitute a violation.
B. A petition must be in writing, signed and dated and include the name and address of each
petitioner. Business owners submitting a petition must also include the name and address of
the business. The petition must be filed with the Town Clerk, who shall promptly forward a
copy to the Code of Ethics Committee. The original petition shall remain on file in the
Town Clerk's office.
5-1-19
TOWN OF BOW
5306
C. The person submitting the petition to the Town Clerk must complete a Petitioner
Information Form. This person shall be notified of the date the Code of Ethics Committee
will address the petition and shall be requested to attend this meeting.
D. After appropriate investigation, the Code of Ethics Committee shall, within 30 days of the
petition having been taken up by the Committee, make a finding on the inquiry or alleged
violation. If necessary, the Code of Ethics Committee may vote to extend its investigatory
period up to a maximum of 90 days from when the matter is first presented to the
Committee as an agenda item.
E. Pursuant to RSA 31:39a, knowingly violating this chapter shall be grounds for disciplinary
action if founded by a majority vote of the Code of Ethics Committee.
F. Findings as to employees shall be forwarded to the respondent. Selectmen shall take
appropriate action in accordance with applicable personnel policies and procedures and
union contract requirements. Findings shall include supporting arguments.
G. Findings as to elected and appointed members (excluding town employees) shall be
forwarded to the respondent. Selectmen shall determine whether to recommend removal or
censure, as appropriate.
H. The Selectmen shall have 45 days from the date a finding is submitted to the appropriate
office to act on the Code of Ethics Committee decision.
I. If the Selectmen determine, by a majority vote, that removal is warranted, the elected or
appointed member will be given the opportunity to resign. If said member chooses not to
resign, a petition to remove shall be filed with the Superior Court.
J. Any member alleged to have violated this chapter is entitled to a public hearing, with
notice posted in two public places seven days prior thereto. When appearing before the
Code of Ethics Committee, said member may call witnesses on his or her behalf and may
retain representation by legal counsel at his or her own expense if he or she so chooses.
K. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any person from petitioning the
Superior Court to remove a member of government on the ground that the violation in
question warrants removal.
L. A respondent may request that the Code of Ethics Committee make a ruling on any petition
that is withdrawn or invalidated. If such a request is made, the Code of Ethics Committee
shall complete an investigation pursuant to the procedures described herein.
5-1-19
CODE OF ETHICS
5307
§ 53-9. Financial Interest Disclosure form.
A. In accordance with RSA 31:39A, any appointed or elected official, the Town Manager,
Assessor, Finance Director, Fire Chief, Police Chief, Town Planner, and any other town
employee with authorization to sign purchase orders shall complete a financial interest
disclosure form (“FIDF”) within 30 days of assuming office.
B. Completed forms shall be filed with the Town Clerk. Members are required to update the
form on file as changes occur.
C. Failure to disclose information as required on the FIDF shall be a violation of this chapter.
D. Forms shall be available for public inspection in the Town Clerk's office. The Town Clerk
shall record and verify who is requesting the information, the date of the request and for
what purpose the information is required.
E. The Town Clerk shall provide a status report to the Code of Ethics Committee identifying
each member and the dates the forms and updates are submitted.
F. The form presented and prescribed herein RSA 15A shall be used for financial disclosure.
§ 53-10. Enforcement of FIDF requirements.
The Code of Ethics Committee shall be responsible for verifying that forms have been filed with
the Town Clerk and, in accordance with the procedures outlined in this chapter, shall schedule
hearings for individuals alleged to have violated this chapter.
§ 53-11. Disposition of FIDF.
Ninety days following the termination of office of an elected or appointed official, and provided
that no petition has been filed citing possible conflict of interest, the Town Clerk shall return the
respective FIDF to the originator and inform the Code of Ethics Committee of this matter.
§ 53-12. Distribution of Code of Ethics.
Each member and employee elected, appointed or engaged shall be furnished a copy of this Code
of Ethics before entering upon the duties of office or employment. Failure to be furnished a copy
of this chapter shall not be grounds for relief from observing the requirements of this chapter.
5-1-19
SCENIC ROADS
7301
Chapter 73
SCENIC ROADS
§ 73-1. Scenic road designation.
§ 73-2. Schedule of scenic roads.
[HISTORY. Adopted by the Annual Meeting 3-4-1975 as Art. 25.]
§ 73-1. Scenic road designation.
Per the provisions of RSA 231:157 (formerly RSA 253:17), the roads, or sections of roads,
described in §73-2., are hereby designated as scenic roads.
§ 73-2. Schedule of scenic roads.
In accordance with the provisions of §73-1., the following roads, or sections of roads, have
been designated as scenic roads:
Name of Street Location
Woodhill-Hooksett Road From Allen Road to Bow Bog Road
Putney Road (added 3-15-89, Art. 20) From Brown Hill Road to Dunbarton line
SOLID WASTE
7501
Chapter 75
SOLID WASTE
§ 75-1. Authority.
§ 75-2. Authority to establish rules and regulations.
§ 75-3. Definitions.
§ 75-4. Residential household waste pickup.
§ 75-5. Recyclables pickup.
§ 75-6. Commercial waste and recyclables pickup.
§ 75-7. Commercial waste hauler licensing.
§ 75-8. Illegal disposal.
§ 75-9. Penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by Annual Town Meeting March 13, 2014 as Art. 25. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
§ 75-1. Authority.
RSA 31:39, I (f) provides the authority to regulate the collection, removal and destruction of
garbage, and other materials
§ 75-2. Authority to establish rules and regulations.
The Board of Selectmen shall have the authority and be responsible for establishing, amending
and revising such rules, regulations and procedures as are necessary for the implementation and
execution of this Chapter and the effective operation of the curbside pickup and recyclables
program.
§ 75-3. Definitions. (Amended by Board of Selectmen 3-24-2015 Ord. No. 15-05)
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ADDRESS - The location or place where one lives or works and generally the location or
place to which mail can be sent.
April 1, 2015
TOWN OF BOW
7502
COMMERCIAL WASTE - All solid waste emanating from business establishments
including, but not limited to, solid waste originating in stores, markets, office buildings,
industrial complexes, restaurants, shopping centers and multi-family structures or
complexes containing three or more dwelling units, structures or complexes containing a
mixed use of a residential dwelling or dwelling and premises utilized for commercial
purposes, or manufactured housing parks.
OWNER - A property owner is the person or entity who has lawful title or legal right of
possession of the property. An owner of a dumpster is the person or entity who has lawful
title or the right of possession of the container/dumpster.
PROHIBITED COLLECTION MATERIALS - The following materials shall not be
placed in the solid waste or recycling carts: any type of liquid waste, animal carcasses,
manure and renderings, flammable liquids, pesticides, septage, asbestos materials,
medical and dental waste, grease, cooking oil, leaves, yard waste, brush, ammunition and
explosives, nuclear or atomic waste, computer monitors, televisions, or other electronic
equipment and any materials containing hazardous waste as defined by state and federal
agencies, refrigerators, air conditioners or any appliance containing CFCs, building
demolition, wood, bricks, stone or metal barrels.
RECYCLABLES - Products intended for reuse generated by residential households
(excludes commercial and industrial units). Recyclables shall include newspaper,
magazines, paperback books, egg cartons, cup travel trays., mixed and/or shredded office
paper, junk mail (plastic window okay), corrugated cardboard, boxboard/paperboard (i.e.
cereal boxes, free of plastic and wax lining), All plastic containers #1-#7 (i.e. beverage
containers, tubs, laundry detergent containers, etc.), Glass containers used for foods and
beverages any color), aluminum, tin, and steel cans, metal lids to jars or bottles, and
aluminum foil, disposable pie tins, & aluminum baking trays.
RECYCLING CART - Shall be the cart provided by the Town with “Town of Bow”
imprinted on the side.
RESIDENTIAL HOUSEHOLD - A dwelling unit in a single-family or duplex; or a
manufactured (mobile home) where the property associated with the unit which is owned
by the homeowner and not part of a housing park.
RESIDENTIAL HOUSEHOLD WASTE - Solid waste comprised of garbage and rubbish
normally originating in residential households.
TRASH CART - The trash cart provided by the Town of Bow.
April 1, 2015
SOLID WASTE
7503
§ 75-4. Residential household waste pickup. (Amended by Board of Selectmen 1-13-2015,
Ord. No. 15-01, Amended by Board of Selectmen 3-24-2015 Ord. No. 15-05)
A. Town service will be limited to one Town issued trash cart, per address, per pick-up for
residential households within the geographic boundaries of the Town of Bow. Residents
will be required to contain residential household waste solely in plastic bags inside the
existing Town issued trash cart. Residents may leave two (2) tires per week, per
household, next to the trash cart, as long as the disposal contract with the hauler permits.
B. For those residents with greater household waste disposal needs, the Town’s contract
service provider will provide extra waste hauling service for an annual subscription fee of
$150. The subscription period will run May 1 through April 30 each year, and will be
pro-rated for those subscribing after the start date. Subscription customers will receive a
second cart, with a yellow lid, which can be placed curbside along with the cart provided
by the Town.
C. Curbside collection shall be restricted to residential homes located on municipally
accepted roads or roads that have been conditionally accepted.
D. Trash carts must be left upright, with the handle facing the house, and out of the paved
road right of way so that they are not in the way of cars, trucks, or plows. All collection
sites shall be left clear of trash.
E. Collections start at 7:00 a.m. each day, in each collection zone.
F. There will be no return trips for pick-up service unless a service area has been missed by
the Town’s contracted hauler.
G. All residential household waste picked up shall be only those materials generated within
the geographic boundaries of the Town of Bow.
§ 75-5. Recyclables pickup.
A. The Town will supply each residential household with one recycling cart to be used for
the placement of recyclables within the public right-of-way. All recyclables may be
placed in the recyling cart at curbside next to the trash cart on the day of collection. There
is no limit to the volume of recyclables as long as individual carts weigh less than 50
pounds.
B. For those residents with greater recyclable disposal needs, the Town’s contract service
provider will provide an additional cart for recyclable disposal for a one-time fee. This
fee is for the purchase of the cart, not an annual subacription.
C. Curbside collection shall be restricted to residential homes located on municipally
accepted roads or roads that have been conditionally accepted.
April 1, 2015
TOWN OF BOW
7504
D. Recycling carts must be left upright, with the handle facing the house, and out of the
paved road right of way so that they are not in the way of cars, trucks, or plows. All
collection sites shall be left clear of trash.
E. Collections start at 7:00 a.m. each day, in each collection zone.
F. There will be no return trips for pick-up service unless a service area has been missed by
the Town’s contracted hauler.
G. Upon placement at the curbside, all materials placed and contained in such bins shall not
be removed, except by persons authorized by the Town or the person(s) responsible for
placing the recyclables in the bin.
§ 75-6. Commercial waste and recyclables pickup.
A. Multi-family dwellings of three units or more, manufactured housing parks and
commercial properties or structures or complexes containing a mixed use of residential
dwellings, homes on private roads and premises utilized for commercial purposes shall be
responsible for arranging for the disposal and removal of waste and recyclables.
B. Contractors hired to remove commercial waste must be licensed by the Town.
§ 75-7. Commercial waste hauler licensing.
A. No person, firm, business or corporation shall haul, carry or collect commercial waste
unless issued a permit in accordance with this Section.
B. The Town Manager shall establish a process for the issuance of commercial waste
disposal permit to eligible contractors who haul solid waste generated and collected
within the geographic boundaries of the Town of Bow.
C. The Board of Selectmen shall establish a fee for the administration of the permitting
process.
D. The Town Manager shall require that haulers permitted to haul waste from multi-family
developments also provide for the collection of recyclables, if applicable.
§ 75-8. Illegal disposal.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any refuse or waste, upon the right-of-way of
accepted roadways within the Town of Bow, except that refuse or waste which may be deposited
for collection under the provisions of this Chapter.
April 1, 2015
SOLID WASTE
7505
§ 75-9. Penalties.
A. The Town of Bow or its agent, reserve the right to refuse to collect garbage, rubbish,
recyclables or other refuse which does not comply with the requirements of this Chapter.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this Section shall be guilty of a violation and,
upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000. Each day that a
violation of this Chapter exists shall be considered to be a separate violation.
C. The Chief of Police and/or the Director of Public Works, or their designee, are hereby
authorized to order the removal of any materials deposited in violation of this Chapter
and any person who shall fail to comply with such order shall be responsible for
reimbursing the Town of Bow for any and all costs associated with said removal and
subject to a fine as specified herein.
April 1, 2015
TAXATION
8001 3/17/2016
Chapter 80
TAXATION
Article I
Exemption for the Blind
§ 80-1. Grant of exemption.
§ 80-2. Qualifications.
Article II
Elderly Exemption
§ 80-3. Grant of exemption.
§ 80-4. Qualifications.
Article III
Exemption for the Disabled
§ 80-5. Grant of exemption.
§ 80-6. Qualifications.
Article IV
Veterans’ Tax Credit
§ 80-7. Grant of credit.
§ 80-8. Qualifications.
Article V
Service-Connected Disability Credit
§ 80-9. Grant of exemption.
§ 80-10. Qualifications.
Article VI
Tax Credit for Surviving Spouse of Member of
Armed Forces Killed on Active Duty
§ 80-11. Grant of credit.
TOWN OF BOW
8002 3/17/2016
Article VII
Solar Energy Systems Exemption
§ 80-12. Adoption of statutory provisions.
§ 80-13. Definitions.
Article VIII
Wood Heating Energy Systems Exemption
§ 80-14. Adoption of statutory provisions.
§ 80-15. Definitions.
Article IX
Real Estate Tax Liens
§ 80-16. Adoption of procedure.
Article X
Semi-Annual Collection of Taxes
§ 80-17. Adoption of statutory provisions.
[HISTORY: Adopted as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
TAXATION
8003 3/17/2016
Article I
Exemption for the Blind
[Adopted 5-14-2008 Town Meeting Article No. 26.]
§ 80-1. Grant of exemption.
The Town votes to modify the property tax exemptions for the legally blind under the provisions
of RSA 72:37. The exemption from assessed value for qualified taxpayers shall be $75,000.
§ 80-2. Qualifications.
To qualify, the person must have resided in New Hampshire for at least one (1) year prior to the
tax year, must be legally blind as determined by the blind services program, bureau of vocational
rehabilitation, or department of education, must occupy the property as his/her principal place of
abode, and must own the property individually or jointly, or if owned by a spouse, they must
have been married for at least five (5) years.
Article II
Elderly Exemption
[Adopted 5-14-2008 Town Meeting Article No. 24.]
§ 80-3. Grant of exemption.
The Town votes under the provisions of RSA 72:39-b to modify the elderly exemptions from
property tax for qualified taxpayers, based on assessed value, to be as follows: for a person 65
through 74 years of age, $117,000; for a person 75 through 79 years of age, $143,000; for a
person 80 years of age and older, $169,000.
§ 80-4. Qualifications.
Under RSA 72:39-b, to qualify, the person must have been a New Hampshire resident for at least
three (3) consecutive years, own the real estate individually, or jointly, or, if the real estate is
owned by such person’s spouse, they must have been married for at least five (5) consecutive
years. In addition, a single taxpayer must have a net income, from all sources, of not more than
$38,500 or, if married, a combined net income of $50,000, from all sources, of not more than
$50,000; and own net assets not in excess of $200,000 excluding the value of the person’s actual
residence and the land upon which it is constructed, up to two (2) acres.
TOWN OF BOW
8004 3/17/2016
Article III
Exemption for the Disabled
[Adopted 5-14-2008 Town Meeting Article No. 25.]
§ 80-5. Grant of exemption.
The Town votes to modify the property tax exemption for the disabled under the provisions of
RSA 72:37-b. The exemption from assessed value for qualified taxpayers shall be $143,000.
§ 80-6. Qualifications.
To qualify, the person must be eligible under TITLE II or Title XVI of the federal Social
Security Act, must occupy the property as his/her principal place of abode, and must own the
property individually or jointly, or if owned by a spouse, they must have been married for at least
five (5) years, have had in the calendar year preceding April 1 a net income, from all sources, of
not more than $38,500 if single and $50,000, from all sources, if married and own net assets not
in excess of $200,000 excluding the value of the person’s actual residence and land upon which
it is constructed up to two (2) acres .
Article IV
Veterans’ Tax Credit
[Adopted 3-10-2004 Town Meeting Article No. 35.]
§ 80-7. Grant of credit.
The Town adopts the provisions of RSA 72:28, II for an optional veterans’ credit and an
expanded qualifying war service for veterans seeking the credit. The optional veterans’ credit is
$500.
§ 80-8. Qualifications.
To qualify, the veteran must be a New Hampshire resident for one (1) year preceding April 1 in
the year in which the tax credit is claimed. Must have served no less than ninety (90) days active
duty during a qualifying war or armed conflict period as per RSA 72:28 V. Veteran must have
been honorably discharged or an officer honorably separated from service.
TAXATION
8005 3/17/2016
Article V
Service-Connected Disability Credit
[Adopted 3-10-2004 Town Meeting Article No. 33.]
§ 80-9. Grant of Credit.
The Town adopts the provisions of RSA 72:35, I-a for an optional property tax credit for a
service-connected total disability. The optional disability credit is $2,000.
§ 80-10. Qualifications.
To qualify, the veteran must have been honorably discharged or an officer that was honorably
separated from the military service of the United States and who has a total and permanent
service-connected disability, or who is a double amputee or paraplegic because of serviceconnected
injury, or the surviving spouse of such a person. Veteran must supply the assessors or
selectmen certification from the United States Department of Veterans’ Affairs that the applicant
is rated totally and permanently disabled from service connection.
Article VI
Tax Credit for Surviving Spouse of Member of Armed Forces Killed on Active Duty
[Adopted 3-10-2004 Town Meeting Article No. 34.]
§ 80-11. Grant of credit.
The Town adopts the provisions of RSA 72:29-a, II, for an optional tax credit of $2,000 for the
surviving spouse of any person who was killed or died while on active duty in the armed forces
of the United States or any of the armed forces of any of the governments associated with the
United States in the wars, conflicts or armed conflicts, or combat zones set forth in RSA 72:28.
TOWN OF BOW
8006 3/17/2016
Article VII
Solar Energy Systems Exemption
[Adopted 3-11-1980 Town Meeting Article No. 7.]
§ 80-12. Adoption of statutory provisions. [Revised 3-9-2016 Town Meeting Article 19.]
The Town adopts the provisions of RSA 72:62 to grant property tax exemption for real property
equipped with a solar energy heating or cooling system. Exemptions shall be in the amount of
100% of the cost of equipment and installation of the system.
§ 80-13. Definitions.
RSA 72:61 Definition of Solar Energy Systems: In this subdivision “solar energy system”
means a system which utilizes solar energy to heat or cool the interior of a building or to heat
water for use in a building and which includes one or more collectors and a storage container.
“Solar energy system” also means a system which provides electricity for a building by the use
of photovoltaic panels.
Article VIII
Wood Heating Energy Systems Exemption
[Adopted 3-11-1980 Town Meeting Article No. 8.]
§ 80-14. Adoption of statutory provisions.
The Town adopts the provisions of RSA 72:70 to grant a property tax exemption for real
property equipped with a wood heating energy system which exemption shall be 50% of the cost
of the wood heating energy system up to a maximum of $3,000.
§ 80-15. Definitions.
RSA 72:69 Definition of Woodheating Energy System. In this subdivision “woodheating energy
system” means a wood burning appliance designed to operate as a central heating system to heat
the interior of a building. The appliance may burn wood solely or burn wood in combination
with another fuel. A central heating system shall include a central appliance to distribute heat by
a series of pipes, ducts or similar distribution system throughout a single building or group of
buildings. A wood burning appliance shall not include a fireplace, meaning a hearth, fire
chamber or similarly prepared place with a chimney intended to be used in an open configuration
whether or not it may also be closed and operated closed; or a wood stove meaning a wood
burning appliance designed for space heating purposes which does not operate as a central
heating system or as a sole source of heat.
TAXATION
8007 3/17/2016
Article IX
Real Estate Tax Liens
[Adopted 3-15-1989 Town Meeting Article No. 18.]
§ 80-16. Adoption of procedure.
The Town adopts the provisions of RSA 80:56-86 for a real estate tax lien procedure. These
statutes provide that tax sales to private individuals for non-payment of taxes on real estate are
replaced with a real estate tax lien procedure under which only a municipality or county where
the property is located or the state may acquire a tax lien against a land and building for unpaid
taxes.
Article X
Semi-Annual Collection of Taxes
[Adopted 3-11-1992 Town Meeting Article No. 18.]
§ 80-17. Adoption of statutory provisions.
The Town voted to adopt the provisions of RSA 76:15a which would provide for the semiannual
collection of property taxes.
TOWN PROPERTY
8501
Chapter 85
TOWN PROPERTY
Article I
Acquisition or Sale of Property
§ 85-1. Authorization.
Article II
Sale of Tax Deeded Property
§ 85-2. Adoption of statutory authorization.
Article III
Leasing of Land for Communications Towers
§ 85-3. Authorization.
Article I
Acquisition or Sale of Property
[HISTORY. Adopted 3-9-2005 Town Meeting as Art. 37.]
§ 85-1. Authorization.
A. The Board of Selectmen, per the provisions of RSA 41:14-a, is authorized to acquire or
sell land, buildings, or both provided that they submit any such acquisitions or sales to
the planning board, the Heritage Commission or Historical Commission, and the
Conservation Commission for their review and recommendation in accordance with the
provisions of the statute.
B. This authorization does not apply to Town owned conservation land, any part of a town
forest, or real estate given, devised, or bequeathed to the Town for charitable or
community purposes.
TOWN OF BOW
8502
Article II
Sale of Tax Deeded Property
[HISTORY. Adopted 3-9-1994 Town Meeting Article No. 25.]
§ 85-2. Adoption of statutory authorization.
The Town voted to authorize the Board of Selectmen to dispose of tax deeded property in
accordance with the provisions of RSA 80:80. This authorization shall remain in effect until
rescinded by a vote of the Town Meeting.
Article III
Leasing of Land for Communications Towers
[HISTORY. Adopted 3-9-2005 Town Meeting Article No. 38.]
§ 85-3. Authorization.
A. The Board of Selectmen is authorized to lease Town owned land to be used for the
construction and installation of communication towers.
B. This authorization does not extend to conservation land established under RSA 36-A or
land given devised, or bequeathed to the town for charitable purposes under RSA 36-A or
land give, devised, or bequeathed to the town for charitable purposes.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
10001
Chapter 100
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 100-1. Adoption of Code.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow 1-28-2014.]
§ 100-1. Adoption of Code.
The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow hereby adopts the regulations known as "Division
2, Board of Selectmen's Regulations," of the Code of the Town of Bow. This shall supersede and
replace by reference to said Code the ordinances and regulations heretofore adopted of a general
and permanent nature by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow.
CEMETERIES
10901
Chapter 109
CEMETERIES
Article I
Cemetery Administration
§ 109-1. Cemetery Trustees.
§ 109-2. Cemetery Sexton.
Article II
General Regulations
§ 109-3. Cemetery hours.
§ 109-4. Cemetery access.
§ 109-5. Vehicle restrictions.
§ 109-6. Firearms discharge.
§ 109-7. Expulsion.
Article III
Monuments and Headstones and Markers
§ 109-8. Monuments, Headstones and Markers.
Article IV
Plantings
§ 109-9. Plantings.
Article V
Decorations and Maintenance
§ 109-10. Decorations and Markers.
Article VI
Interments
§ 109-11. Interments.
TOWN OF BOW
10902
Article VII
Cemetery Plots
§ 109-12. Cemetery Plots.
Article VIII
Cemetery Fees and Charges
§ 109-13. Cemetery Fees and Charges.
Article IX
Perpetual Care
§ 109-14. Management of Funds.
§ 109-15. Use of Funds.
Article X
List of Cemeteries
§ 109-16. Public Cemeteries.
§ 109-17. Private Cemeteries.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow 9-17-2002.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I
Cemetery Administration
§ 109-1. Cemetery Trustees.
The Board of Selectmen shall serve as the Cemetery Trustees.
§ 109-2. Cemetery Sexton.
The Trustees shall appoint a Cemetery Sexton, who shall report to the Town Manager for
operational control. The Cemetery Sexton shall be responsible for the maintenance of cemeteries
and enforcement of these rules and regulations, and maintain burial records for each cemetery.
Determinations of the Cemetery Sexton may be appealed to the Board of Selectmen.
CEMETERIES
10903
Article II
General Regulations
§ 109-3. Cemetery hours.
The cemeteries will be open to visitors at sunrise and will be closed at sunset. Visitors will not be
allowed upon the grounds during the hours of darkness except by special permission of the
Cemetery Sexton.
§ 109-4. Cemetery access.
Only persons with cemetery business are permitted on the cemetery grounds. No horse, dogs, or
other pets are allowed on the grounds unless they are a part of a ceremony. No person shall
gather flowers, either wild or cultivated, on the premises, or remove, cut, break, or mark any tree,
shrub, or plant other than as part of maintenance; or mark upon, deface, or injure any monument
or any other structure on the grounds.
§ 109-5. Vehicle restrictions.
No vehicle shall be operated in any part of the cemeteries except upon the paved or otherwise
marked roads and at speeds of not more than 5 miles per hour. All funeral processions, while
within the grounds, will be subject to the direction of the Cemetery Sexton.
§ 109-6. Firearms discharge.
Firearms shall not be discharged in the cemeteries, except for salutes at military funerals,
Memorial Day ceremonies, or by special permission of the Cemetery Sexton.
§ 109-7. Expulsion.
Any person disturbing the quiet or good order of the grounds by acts of, but not limited to,
intoxication, loud noise, speeding, or disorderly contact, and any person who violates any of the
rules, will be expelled from the grounds by the Cemetery Sexton.
Article III
Monuments, Headstones and Markers
§ 109-8. Monuments, Headstones and Markers.
A. Monuments, headstones and markers can only be placed under the direction of the
Cemetery Sexton. Only one marker/headstone allowed per burial. Any company or
person wishing to place a monument, headstone or marker must get approval from the
Cemetery Sexton before arriving at the cemetery. Monuments, markers and headstones
will not be placed from November 1 through April 15. [Amended 4-23-2013 by Board
of Selectmen.]
TOWN OF BOW
10904
B. All headstones, monuments, permanent markers or other structure permitted to be erected
in the cemeteries must have a good and sufficient foundation. The Cemetery Sexton shall
approve all foundation plans prior to any work being performed.
C. No wood, metal, wire, hedge, or other fence material shall be erected or maintained on or
around any plot unless approved by the Cemetery Sexton.
D. Stone benches may be emplaced in lieu of a headstone or in lieu of a footstone, but must
be in line with other monuments and be on a firm foundation that is flush with the ground
and extends far enough from the base of the bench to facilitate mowing without requiring
edging. [Amended 6-12-2008 by Board of Selectmen.]
E. Perimeter markers shall be flush with the earth so that a mower can clear them without
adjustment.
F. Monuments, headstones and markers that are placed in the cemeteries remain the
property of the individual or family. The Town of Bow will not be responsible to repair
damage, vandalism, or graffiti that may occur to any monument, marker, or headstone.
The Town will be responsible for Damages inadvertently caused by the action of the
Town’s agents during maintenance or similar activities. [Amended 4-23-2013 by Board
of Selectmen.]
Article IV
Plantings
§ 109-9. Plantings.
A. Shrubs may only be planted on any gravesite if the species of plant and the precise
location has been approved by the Cemetery Sexton. [Amended 4-23-2013 by Board of
Selectmen.]
B. Annual flowers may only be planted within one foot of the memorial headstone and
footstone.
C. Perennial flowers planted without the approval of the Cemetery Sexton will be removed
if considered unsightly when not in bloom.
D. If any plant becomes detrimental to a plot, grave, or to the cemetery because of branches,
roots or otherwise, or is dangerous, the Cemetery Sexton shall have both the duty and the
right to remove any and all parts thereof. Loose items, dead plants or flowers, or any
other item considered to be unsightly or hazardous to mowers and trimmers will be
removed during routine maintenance by the Cemetery Sexton or other employees as
directed by the Sexton.
E. Bark mulch is permitted within one foot of the memorial headstone and footstone.
[Amended 4-23-2013 by Board of Selectmen.]
CEMETERIES
10905
Article V
Decorations and Maintenance
§ 109-10. Decorations and Markers.
A. Cut flowers shall be in containers at least eight inches high and be placed only within one
foot of the memorial headstone or directly on a footstone. The placing of artificial
flowers, signs, or glass containers on graves is not permitted. Plants must be watered and
maintained in a fresh state by those who emplaced them.
B. Flowers placed on a grave during the burial service shall be removed after one week,
except for flowers meeting the location criteria of § 109-10, Paragraph A. Flowers not
removed after one week shall be removed by the Cemetery Sexton and/or the grounds
keeping staff.
C. Memorial items, such as small statuettes, coins, toys, small stones, or other keepsakes
may be placed on top of a headstone or monument or within stone, plastic, or concrete
pots or planters. These must be emplaced within the same restricted area as cut flowers
(see § 109-10, Paragraph A.). Small stones placed in observance of religious custom may
be placed on top of a memorial headstone. Perpetual flame holders or plants on wire
hangers must be anchored at the base of the monument.
D. All work done in the cemetery by plot owners, their aides or employees will be subject to
supervision by the Cemetery Sexton. All rubbish and waste resulting from this work will
be removed by owners, their aides, or employees. If, as the result of work done, the good
appearance of the cemetery is adversely affected in the opinion of the Cemetery Sexton
or the Board of Selectmen, the Sexton may put such plots in order at the expense of the
owners.
E. The Cemetery Sexton shall have the authority to prune or remove any vegetation that is
encroaching upon an adjacent site and to bill the cost of such work to the current owner
of the encroaching site.
F. The placing of small flags or other veteran markers on graves is allowed, with the
understanding that the groundskeepers have the right to remove them at a later date, if
necessary.
G. Christmas wreaths and other wintertime decorations may only be placed on or
immediately in front of the memorial headstone or footstone. All such wintertime
decorations will be removed by the Cemetery Sexton on or after April 1 of each year.
[Amended 4-23-2013 by Board of Selectmen.]
Article VI
Interments
§ 109-11. Interments.
A. The cemeteries are closed to interment from November 1 to April 15 of each year unless
the weather justifies an adjustment of the schedule.
TOWN OF BOW
10906
B. Only human remains shall be interred in any Town cemetery, whether cremated or
otherwise. Erection of any memorial structure must be approved by the Cemetery
Sexton.
C. Before any interment, the Cemetery Sexton shall be furnished with a permit, such as may
be required by the ordinances of the Town of Bow or by the laws of the State of New
Hampshire, together with an order from the legal owner, or the legal representative, of
the right of burial in the plot in which interment is to be made. A grave shall only be
opened for interment or removal by a person in the employ of the Town of Bow under
direction of the Cemetery Sexton.
D. All interments shall be enclosed in a cement vault except infants for whom a fiberglass
container thirty (30) inches or less in length may be used. Cremations shall require an
urn or other approved container. The container provided by crematoriums is an approved
container.
Article VII
Cemetery Plots
§ 109-12. Cemetery Plots.
A. The Cemetery Sexton shall maintain a current map showing all cemetery plots that are
available for purchase in accordance with the cemetery master plan and a current
schedule of fees.
B. Cemetery plots may be purchased by residents and non-residents whenever plots are
available. Residents are entitled to purchase plots at the resident rate. Former residents
who provide proof that they had been a legal resident of Bow may purchase cemetery
plots at the resident rate. [Amended 4-23-2013 by Board of Selectmen.]
C. The Town of Bow offers family plots (blocks of two, four, and six contiguous grave
sites) and single grave sites. The breaking up of surveyed plots shall not be permitted.
D. Plots that are designated for the interment of cremains only, if there are plots so
designated, shall be sold subject to availability. Such plots shall be designated in areas
that are unsuitable for full grave sites. One (1) small upright marker shall be allowed on
such sites. Up to four (4) cremains may be interred in a regular burial plot either in
addition to one full body burial or instead of one (1). For the first interment, the plot
must be purchased at the full body rate.
E. The owners of rights of burial, or their heirs, shall not grant, sell, alienate, or convey, the
said exclusive right of burial, to any person or persons, without having first obtained the
written approval and consent of the Cemetery Trustees. The Town of Bow shall have the
right to repurchase a plot that is not to be used as a grave for the same price for which it
was purchased. This shall be a restriction on all deeds.
CEMETERIES
10907
Article VIII
Cemetery Fees and Charges
§ 109-13. Cemetery Fees and Charges.
A. The fees and charges for cemetery plots and burials are found in Chapter 124 Fee
Schedule, of this Code. [Amended 4-23-2013 by Board of Selectmen.]
B. Overtime rates will be charged on holidays, Saturdays, Sundays, and after 3:00 p.m.
Monday through Friday.
Article IX
Perpetual Care
§ 109-14. Management of Funds.
The Cemetery Trustees shall be the agents for managing, investing, and expending from
perpetual care trust funds.
§ 109-15. Use of Funds. [Amended 6-12-2008 by Board of Selectmen.]
A. The Town will provide grounds care in perpetuity for all gravesites in all public
cemeteries. The cost of perpetual care is included in the purchase price of burial plots,
50% of which shall be transferred to the Cemeteries Perpetual Care Expendable Trust
Fund.
B. Perpetual care includes the seeding and fertilization of grass, the cutting of grass upon the
plots, the raking and cleaning of the plots, and occasional pruning and trimming of
ornamental vegetation.
C. Maintenance and repair of headstones or other monuments is the responsibility of the plot
owner. The Town of Bow will only be responsible for repairing monuments damaged by
employees of the Town.
D. In private cemeteries the Town will rake fallen leaves, remove fallen branches and other
debris, and trim vegetation one every year.
TOWN OF BOW
10908
Article X
List of Cemeteries
§ 109-16. Public Cemeteries
Alexander Cemetery (River Road)
Evans Cemetery (White Rock Hill Road)
Green Cemetery (Bow Center)
§ 109-17. Private Cemeteries
Goodhue Cemetery
Hadley Cemetery
Hammond Cemetery
Heath Cemetery
Nichols Cemetery (aka East Dunbarton Cemetery
Ordway Cemetery
Private Cemetery (Brown Hill Road)
Private Cemetery (one grave, Brown Hill Road)
DISPOSITION OF MUNICIPAL RECORDS
11201
Chapter 112
DISPOSITION OF MUNICIPAL RECORDS
§ 112-1. Authority.
§ 112-2. Purpose.
§ 112-3. Applicability.
§ 112-4. Municipal Records Committees.
§ 112-5. Municipal Records Committee responsibilities.
§ 112-6. Retention of municipal records.
§ 112-7. Destruction of municipal records.
§ 112-8. Suspension of records disposal.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 4-23-19, as Ord. No. 19-02. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
§ 112-1. Authority.
This Policy is adopted in accordance with NH RSA 33-A.
§ 112-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this Policy is to ensure compliance with the requirements of RSA 33-A and to
govern the disposition of municipal records.
§ 112-3. Applicability.
This Policy applies to all municipal records generated in the course of the Town’s operation. As
used in this Chapter, municipal records are defined under RSA 33-A:1
§ 112-4 Municipal Records Committee.
The municipal officers or their designee together with the clerk, treasurer, an assessor, and tax
collector shall constitute a committee to govern the disposition of municipal records.
5-1-19
TOWN OF BOW
11202
§ 112-5. Municipal Records Committee responsibilities.
A. The Committee shall adopt a Record Retention Schedule detailing the initial
maintenance, retention and disposal schedule for municipal records of the Town.
B. To ensure that the Records Retention Schedule is followed, the Committee shall monitor
state laws affecting municipal record retention, and modify the Schedule as necessary.
C. The Committee shall designate the office or department responsible for the retention of
each type of record created for the municipality. (Appendix A)
D. The Committee shall monitor compliance with this Policy and, if necessary, develop
additional operational procedures to ensure that records are properly stored and
accessible.
§ 112-6. Retention of municipal records.
A. The Records Retention Schedule details the retention period for specific types and
categories of records in order to ensure legal compliance with the Statute/ In addition,
this schedule is designed to accomplish other objectives such as the preservation of
confidential and valuable administrative information, cost effectiveness, and space
management.
B. The Municipal Records Committee may determine that certain municipal records are to
be maintained by the Town for a period longer than the minimum required period. If so,
such determination shall be made a matter of record by incorporation into the Records
Retention Schedule.
C. The Committee shall determine the method of storage of municipal records in compliance
with the Statute.
§ 141-7. Destruction of municipal records.
A. Documents to be destroyed shall first be reviewed by the applicable department head to
determine if any portion(s) of those records should be retained due to their historical
value, with final approval of the Town Manager. If no reason exists to maintain the
record beyond the retention schedule then the documents shall be destroyed as follows:
(1) Non-confidential documents shall be disposed of with other paper recycled products
or shredded.
(2) Confidential documents shall be shredded.
(3) Electronic files shall be deleted from the individual’s computer as well as from any
backup or permanent media storage.
5-1-19
DISPOSITION OF MUNICIPAL RECORDS
11203
B. Documents being shredded in mass quantities shall be done so by authorized shredding
service. The shredding service shall provide the Town with a stamped receipt
acknowledging that the identified documents were shredded and the date of which the
shredding occurred.
C. Each department head is responsible for maintaining a Document Destruction Log which
shall contain the following minimum information:
(1) Department destroying the record
(2) What record was destroyed
(3) The date the record was destroyed
(4) Who destroyed the record
§ 141-8. Suspension of records disposal.
In the event any official or employee of the Town is served with any subpoena or Right-to-Know
request; or becomes aware of an investigation or audit concerning the Town or the
commencement of any litigation against or concerning the Town; such individual shall ensure
that all records are preserved, regardless of the Retention Schedule, until the Town’s legal
counsel determines that the records are no longer needed.
Storage of Municipal Records
5-1-19
DRINKING WATER PROTECTION COMMITTEE
11401
Chapter 114
DRINKING WATER PROTECTION COMMITTEE
§ 114-1. Establishment.
§ 114-2. Membership and terms of office.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow 1-24-2006.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 114-1. Establishment.
The Board of Selectmen established the Bow Drinking Water Protection Committee to ensure
clean water for all Bow residents and employees and to implement the recommendations of the
Source Water Protection Plan developed by the Source Water Protection Plan Steering
Committee.
§ 114-2. Membership and terms of office.
The Drinking Water Protection Committee shall consist of eight (8) members appointed by the
Board of Selectmen for staggered three (3) year terms. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Board of
Selectmen.]
ENERGY CONSERVATION COMMITTEE
11901
Chapter 119
ENERGY CONSERVATION COMMITTEE
§ 82-1. Establishment.
§ 82-2. Membership and terms of office.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow 9-26-2007.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 119-1. Establishment.
The Board of Selectmen established the Energy Conservation Committee to:
A. Work with all town government and willing parties to identify, study, encourage and
propose changes in current or future operational procedures or regulatory requirements
that are either cost neutral or that will result in a cost saving.
B. Create public awareness and disseminate information for promotion and implementation
of various measures to achieve the goal of reduction in carbon emissions and create a
more environmentally conscious Town of Bow.
§ 119-2. Membership and terms of office.
The Energy Conservation Committee shall consist of eight (8) members appointed by the Board
of Selectmen for staggered three (3) year terms. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Board of Selectmen.]
FEE SCHEDULE
12401
Chapter 124
FEE SCHEDULE
§ 124-1. Authority.
§ 124-2. Building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical and sign permit fees.
§ 124-3. Building rental fees.
§ 124-4. Cemetery fees.
§ 124-5. Community Development Department fees.
§ 124-5.1. General copy fees, all departments.
§ 124-6. Finance Department fees.
§ 124-7. Fire Department fees.
§ 124-7.1 Hawker, Peddler & Itinerant Vendor fees.
§ 124-8. Police Department fees.
§ 124-8.1 Public Works Department fees.
§ 124-9. Sewer use rates and fees.
§ 124-9.1 Solid waste disposal.
§ 124-10. Water rates and fees
§ 124-11. Zoning Board of Adjustment fees.
§ 124-12. Athletic Fields user permit fees.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow 6-12-2012.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 124-1. Authority.
The 1991 Town Meeting adopted the provisions of RSA 41:9-a, which enables the Board to
establish or amend fees without further Town Meeting action. Included purposes are licenses
and permits and rental fees for use or occupancy of Town facilities that have been established by
Town Meeting. A public hearing is required to establish or amend fees.
7/1/19
TOWN OF BOW
12402
§ 124-2. Building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical and sign permit fees. [Amended 6-25-19
by Board of Selectmen, Ord. No. 19-06]
As provided for in the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Bow, New Hampshire, the following
building fees are hereby established:
A. Building Permits
(1) Application fee (non-refundable): 1 and 2 family residential, $25; multi-family and
commercial: $125
(2) New Construction, renovations or alterations
(a) 1 and 2 family residential
[1] Habitable rooms/areas: $0.25 per square foot
[2] Unfinished rooms/areas: $0.10 per square foot
[3] Finish of previously unfinished space: $0.15 per square foot
[4] Change of use: $30
(b) Multi-family and commercial:
[1] All areas: $0.15 per square foot or $3.00 per $1,000 of cost, whichever is
greater
[2] Change of occupancy or tenant fit-up: $0.10 per square foot or $1.50 per
$1,000 of cost, whichever is greater
(3) Other construction:
(a) Swimming pool - in ground: $100
(b) Swimming pool - above ground, $40
(c) Sheds: $30
(d) Temporary structure (180 day maximum): $30
(e) Septic system design application fee: $25
7/1/19
FEE SCHEDULE
12403
(4) Other fees:
(a) Re-inspection: $50
(b) Surcharge for permit issued after work has been started: 2 times permit fee not to
exceed $200
(c) Building permit extension (6 months maximum): ½ of original fee
B. Demolition Permit: $0.10 per square foot
C. Plumbing Permits
(1) Application fee (non- refundable): $25
(2) Sink: $3 each
(3) Tub or shower: $3 each
(4) Lavatory: $3 each
(5) Water closet: $3 each
(6) Urinal: $3 each
(7) Dishwasher: $3 each
(8) Garbage grinder: $3 each
(9) Clothes washing connection: $3 each
(10) Laundry sink: $3 each
(11) Water heater (direct or indirect); $5 each
(12) Sewage ejector: $5 each
(13) Water treatment system: $10 each
(14) Public sewer connection (piping only; hookup fee additional): $10
(15) Portable water well: $10
(16) Irrigation system (backflow preventer and connection): $5 each
7/1/19
TOWN OF BOW
12404
(17) Drinking fountain: $3 each
(18) Grease interceptor: $5
(19) Miscellaneous items not described above: $3
(20) Roof drains: $5 each
(21) Drainage, waste vent piping: $3 per 100 feet
(22) Water distribution piping: $3 per 100 feet
(23) Storm drainage piping: $3 per 100 feet
(24) Re-inspection: $50
(25) Surcharge for permit issued after work has been started: Two times applicable fee
not to exceed $200
D. Mechanical Permits
(1) Application fee (non-refundable): $25
(2) Warm air furnace: $20
(3) Boiler (water or steam): $20
(4) Hot water (or steam) distribution piping: $3 per 100 feet
(5) Heater - floor/wall/room: $5
(6) Heat exchanger: $10
(7) Wood stove or other solid fuel appliance: $15
(8) Factory built fireplace and venting: $25
(9) Masonry fireplace and associated chimney: $30
(10) Chimney: $15
(11) Ductwork - commercial: $0.02 per 10 sq. feet of area served, minimum $20
(12) Pool heater: $15
(13) Toilet exhaust: $3
7/1/19
FEE SCHEDULE
12405
(14) Non-residential fans - commercial kitchen fans, roof-top fans: $20 each
(15) Commercial kitchen hood: $30 each
(16) Single package unit (includes roof-top unit): $25 each
(17) Chiller or condenser: $10 each
(18) Fuel System - natural gas or propane: $10 base fee
(19) Fuel System – oil: see Fire Department fees
(20) Gas piping: $30
(21) Gas supply outlets: $2 each
(22) Miscellaneous items not described above: $3
(23) Re-inspection, applies due to failure to pass initial inspection if not ready or if
premises not available: $50
(24) Surcharge for permit issued after work has been started: Two times applicable fee
not to exceed $200
E. Electrical Permits
(1) Application fee (non-refundable): $25
(2) Service entrance up to 400 amps: $30
(3) Service entrance over 400 amps: $50
(4) Sub-panels: $20 each
(5) Electrical generator: $30
(6) HVAC Mini Split: $10 per unit
(7) Devices (including switches, receptacles, lighting fixtures, ranges heating devices,
air handlers, motor operated units, smoke detectors, emergency lights, exit
lights): $0.50
(8) Surcharge for permit issued after work has been started: Two times applicable fee
not to exceed $200
7/1/19
TOWN OF BOW
12406
(9) Re-inspection - applies due to failure to pass initial inspection if not ready or if
premises not available: $50
F. Signs
(1) Permanent signs
(a) 1 to 5 square feet: $20
(b) 6 to 10 square feet: $30
(c) 11 to 20 square feet: $40
(d) 21 to 40 square feet: $50
(e) 41 to 48 square feet: $60
(f) Over 48 square feet: $60 plus $1 per square foot
(2) Temporary signs
(a) Up to 32 square feet: $20
(b) 33 square feet and over: $25.
§ 124-3. Building Rental fees. [Amended 6-25-2019 by Board of Selectmen, Ord. No. 19-06]
As provided for in Chapter 159, Town Buildings and Grounds, of the Code of the Town of Bow,
the following charges and fees for the use of Town buildings and facilities are hereby
established:
A. Community Building and Bandstand, Old Town Hall
(1) Rental fee for Designated Bow Organizations: $10/year
(2) Rental fee for Bow Community Interest Groups/Organizations.: $50/year
(3) Individual Bow Residents: $150/per use
(4) Non-Bow Organizations/Individuals: $250/per use
(5) Security deposit for Individual Bow Residents and Non-Bow
Organizations/Individuals: $75 for 25 people or less; $150 for over 25 people
(6) Police detail (if required by Bow Chief of Police): $80 per hour, minimum of 4 hours,
per officer
7/1/19
FEE SCHEDULE
12407
(7) Fire Detail/Fire watch (if required by Bow Fire Chief): $75 per hour, minimum of 2
hours, per firefighter
B. Bow Bog Meeting House
(1) Rental fee for Designated Bow Organizations: $10/year
(2) Rental fee for Bow Community Interest Groups/Organizations: $50/year
(3) Individual Bow Residents: $150/per use
(4) Non-Bow Organizations/Individuals: $250/per use
(5) Security deposit for Individual Bow Residents and Non-Bow
Organizations/Individuals: $75 for 25 people or less; $150 for over 25 people
(5) Police detail (if required by Bow Chief of Police): $80 per hour, minimum of 4 hours,
per officer
(7) Fire watch (if required by Bow Fire Chief): $75 per hour, minimum of 2 hours, per
firefighter
(8) Bell ringer fee: $25.00
§ 124-4. Cemetery fees. [Amended 1-10-2017 by Board of Selectmen]
As provided for in Chapter 109, Cemeteries, of the Code of the Town of Bow, the following
cemetery fees are hereby established:
A. Sale of a single full body grave: $400 resident; $800 non-resident
B. Sale of family plot (2 graves): $800 resident; $1,600 non-resident
C. Cremains grave: $300 resident; $600 non-resident
D. Grave opening: $550 Monday to Friday
E. Overtime grave opening: $650 Saturday; $750 Sundays and holidays
F. Cremains grave opening: $200 Monday to Friday
G. Overtime cremains grave opening: $250 Saturdays; $300 Sundays and holidays
H. Disinterment: Priced upon request
I. Pauper’s burial: $45
7/1/19
TOWN OF BOW
12408
§ 124-5. Community Development Department fees. [Amended 6-25-2019 by Board of
Selectmen, Ord. No. 19-06]
Community Development Department fees are set as follows:
A. Copy of property record card: No charge property owner: $1.00 all others
B. Septic system plans: No charge property owner: $4.00 all others
C. Tax Map - complete set: $50
D. Tax Map 11x17: $1.00 per page; no charge to property owner
E. Tax Map 8 ½ x11 portion: $0.25
F. Composite Tax Map: $25
G. Zoning Ordinance: $6
H. Business & Industrial Are Traffic Impact Fee Ordinance: $3
I. Impact Fee Ordinance: $3
J. Business Development District Ordinance: $3
K. Three Ordinances – Zoning, Impact Fee, Business Development: $11
L. Zoning Maps – color: $5
M. GIS on CD:
N. Subdivision Regulations: $5
O. Site Plan Regulations: $5
P. Master Plan: $3 CD; $55 hard copy; Maps only: $20
Q. Economic Development: $7
R. Simple property reports: $35 disc; $30 e-mailed
7/1/19
FEE SCHEDULE
12409
§ 124-5.1. General copy fees, all departments. [Amended 10-25-2016 by Board of
Selectmen]
Unless otherwise specified in Chapter 124, the general photocopy or print fee for all departments
is as follows:
A. Photocopying/Printing: $0.25 per page 8-1/2x11”; $0.50 per page 8-1/2x14”; $1.00 per
page 11x17”
§ 124-6. Finance Department fees.
Finance Department fees are set as follows:
A. Insufficient funds: $25
§ 124-7. Fire Department fees. [Amended 6-25-2019 by Board of Selectmen,
Ord. No. 19-06]
Fire Department fees are set as follows:
A. Ambulance charges:
(1) BLS transport: $675
(2) ALS I transport: $900
(3) ALS II transport: $1,525
(4) Loaded miles: $15
(5) Paramedic intercept: $550
B. Services/Inspections:
(1) Oil burner - residential: $50
(2) Oil burner - commercial: $70
(3) Oil burner - re-inspection: $15
(4) Fire alarm plan review: $35
(5) Fire alarm inspection; 1-50 devices: $50
(6) Fire Alarm inspection; 51-100 devices: $95
7/1/19
TOWN OF BOW
12410
(7) Fire alarm inspection; over 100 devices: $95 plus $2 per device over 100
(8) Fire alarm re-inspection due to failure: $30
(9) Sprinkler system plan review: $35
(10) Sprinkler system inspection NFPA 13D: $85
(11) Sprinkler system inspection NFPA 13R: $175
(12) Sprinkler system inspection NFPA 13: $250
(13) Sprinkler system re-inspection due to failure: $30
(14) Dry or Wet Chemical systems: $55 commercial cooking; $80 service station
pump protection/canopy
(15) Fire cistern pump inspection and test: $65 aboveground; $90 underground
C. Blasting permit: $60 - ninety days at one site
D. Life Safety Inspections:
(1) Family day care up to 6 children: $25
(2) Group day care 7-10 children: $30
(3) Day care center: $50
(4) Foster care up to 3 children: $25
(5) Residential placement up to 3 adults: $25
(6) Assembly permit: $35
(7) Temporary assembly: $30
E. Detail Rate/Fire Watch:
(1) Firefighter: $75 per hour, minimum two (2) hours
(2) Firefighter/EMT; $75 per hour, minimum two (2) hours
(3) Ambulance: $50 per hour plus 2 EMTS
(4) Fire apparatus: $100 per hour plus 3 firefighters
7/1/19
FEE SCHEDULE
12411
F. Nuisance/False Alarms:
(1) First 3 alarms: no charge
(2) 4th through 6th alarm: $100
(3) 7th false alarm: $150
G. Fire reports/EMS reports:
(1) Picked up or faxed: $10.00 per page up to 10 pages; $0.25 per page over 10
(2) Mailed: $20 up to 10 pages; $0.25 per page over 10
H. Photographs: $5 per photograph
§ 124-7.1 Hawker, Peddler & Itinerant Vendor Fees. [Amended 9-8-2015 by Board of
Selectmen Ord. 15-07]
A. Hawkers: $50/year
B. Peddlers: $50/year
C. Itinerant Vendors: $100/year
§ 124-8. Police Department fees. [Amended 6-25-2019 by Board of Selectmen,
Ord. No. 19-06]
Police Department fees are set as follows:
A. Pistol permits: (5 yr.) - NH RSA 159:6: $10
B. License to sell firearms (3 yr.) - NH RSA 159:8: $200
C. Commercial fireworks display permit: $200
D. Parking Tickets: If paid within 72 hours: $25; Late fee after 72-hour period: $10;
E. Parking boot attached when 3 or more violations outstanding: $25
F. Archive reports: $35 up to 10 pages, $1 per page thereafter
G. Digital photos, CD Rom, Floppy disks: $25 each
7/1/19
TOWN OF BOW
12412
H. Police Details:
(1) Police Officer: $80 per hour, minimum four (4) hours
(2) Police Officer for School District: $70 per hour
I. False Burglar Alarm:
(1) First 3 alarms: no charge
(2) 4th through 6th alarm: $100
(3) 7th false alarm: $150
J. Vehicle Identification Number (VIN) Verification: $20
K. Fingerprinting Service: $20
§ 124-8.1 Public Works Department fees. [Amended 10-22-2013 by Board of Selectmen.]
Department of Public Works fees are set as follows:
A. Excavation permit fee: $150
§ 124-9. Sewer rates and fees. [Amended 6-26-2018 by Board of Selectmen,
Ord. No. 18-01]
Sewer rates and fees are set as follows:
A. Definition of Sewer Unit. Where buildings have multiple uses, the unit charge will be the
sum of the uses as defined by the Town.
Definitions Unit Charges
Single Family Dwelling 1
Multi-Family Dwelling (per housing unit) 1
Condominium 1
Commercial/Industrial (first 6 employees) 1
Each additional group of 1 to 3 employees 0.5
7/1/19
FEE SCHEDULE
12413
School/Preschool (first 20 students) 1
Each additional group of 1 to 10 students 0.5
Definitions Unit Charges
Motel/Hotel, single and double occupancy (per room) 0.5
Restaurant (first 10 seats) 1
Each additional group of 1 to 5 seats 0.5
Country Club (first 50 members) 1
Each additional group of 1 to 25 members 0.5
Church/Community Service Clubs (first 50 members) 1
Each additional group of 1 to 25 members 0.5
Theatre or Playhouse (first 40 seats) 1
Each additional group of 1 to 20 seats 0.5
Gas Station (without repair or public bathroom) 1
With Repair, per bay Add 1
With Public Bathrooms Add 2.5
Convenience Store (without public bathroom or food service) 1
With Public Bathroom Add 2.5
With Food Service Add 4
Laundromat (per washing machine) 1
B. Sewer Use Rates: $91 per Sewer Unit, billed quarterly
C. System Development Charge: $1,500 per Sewer Unit; new users connecting after
2/1/2013.
§ 124-9.1. Solid waste disposal. [Added by Board of Selectmen 6-26-18, Ord. No. 18-01]
A. Commercial tipping fee: $70 per ton
7/1/19
TOWN OF BOW
12414
§ 124-10. Water rates and fees. [Amended 5-14-2013 by Board of Selectmen]
Water rates and fees are set as follows:
A. Water Rates
(1) Monthly Service Charge (based on meter size):
Meter Size (Inches)* Service Charge
5/8” $25.00
1” $40.00
1-1/2” $80.00
2” $125.00
> 2” $250.00
*Meter sizes determined by Water System Manager
**Service charge for meters >2” to be determined following the receipt of the
application for service by the Board of Selectmen
(2) Monthly Metered Consumption Charge = $5.65/1,000 gallons
B. Annual Fire Service Fee (based on tap size at the water main):
Fire Service Size (inches)* Annual Fire Service Fee
</= 4” $670
6” $1,125
8” $1,655
> 8” $2,125
*Fire service size based on the size of the tap/connection at the water main
**Fire service charge for services > 8” to be determined following the receipt of
the application for service by the Board of Selectmen
C. Fire Hydrant Fees
(1) Private Fire Hydrants: $620 annually per fire hydrant
(Located on private property and not owned by the Bow Water System)
(2) Public Fire Hydrants: $330 annually per fire hydrant
(Located on Town owned property and owned by the Bow Water System)
7/1/19
FEE SCHEDULE
12415
D. System Development Fee (based on meter size for each meter to be installed, paid in full
in advance):
SDC Meter Size (inches)* Amount
5/8” $695
1” $2,360
1-1/2” $5,690
2” $11,240
3” $20,525
4” $32,350
6” $40,550
8” $48,475
>8” $58,550
*Meter sizes determined by Water System Manager
**Service charge for meters >2” to be determined following the receipt of the
application for service by the Board of Selectman.
E. Fees for temporary hydrant connections (THC):
(1) Fee for service: $100
(2) Refundable deposit for meter and equipment: $200
F. Other/Miscellaneous Fees:
(1) Turn-on Fee, normal business hours (Monday-Friday, non-holiday, 8:00 a.m. –
4:00 p.m.): $40
(2) Turn-on Fee, after-hours (Monday- Friday, 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m., weekends and
holidays): $160
(3) Collection Charge: $75
(4) Backflow device testing fee: $75 per test
(5) Replace damaged or missing meter: $75 plus actual cost of meter assembly
(6) Late payment charge: 5% of any unpaid balance after 30 days
(7) Seasonal meter use: additional $75 to existing approved rates and fees
(8) Meter tampering charge: $500
7/1/19
TOWN OF BOW
12416
(9) Return check fee: $25
(10) Final water meter read/final bill generation: $75
G. Water Main Extension Program Fees
(1) Application Fee: $150
(2) Bond 100% of estimated project expense including Water System reviews (legal,
engineering and inspectional services).
§ 124-11. Zoning Board of Adjustment fees. [Amended 2-25-2014 by Board of Selectmen,
Ord. No. 14-1]
The Zoning Board of Adjustment fees are set as follows:
A. Application fee: $100
B. Certified notice fee: $10 per abutter
C. Published notice: $90
§ 124-12. Athletic Fields user permit fees. [Added 4-23-19 by Board of Selectmen]
As provided for in Chapter 134, Parks, Recreational Facilities and Public Lands, Article II,
Athletic Fields use Policy, of the Code of the Town of Bow, the following charges and fees for
the use of Town athletic fields are hereby established:
(1) Group I: Bow Parks and Recreation sponsored activities: no charge
(2) Group II: Designated Bow youth sports organizations: $5 per player, per season
(3) Group III: Bow School District activities: no charge
(4) Group IV: Non-profit youth and adult athletic programs with at least 50% Bow resident
participation: $10 per player, per season
(5) Group V: Non-profit youth and adult athletic programs with less than 50% Bow
resident participation: $15 per player, per season
(6)Group VI. Private groups: $250 for four (4) hours
7/1/19
FINANCIAL POLICIES
12601
Chapter 126
FINANCIAL POLICIES
Article I
Purchasing Policy
§ 126-1. Authority.
§ 126-2. Payment of monies.
§ 126-3. Purchasing and bid process.
§ 126-4. Artificial division.
§ 126-5. Cancellation and rejection of bids.
§ 126-6. Bid process exceptions.
§ 126-7. Multi-year agreements for consulting and professional services.
Article II
Investment Policy
§ 126-8. Applicability.
§ 126-9. Investment options.
§ 126-10. Security of funds.
Article III
Cash Receipts Policy
§ 126-11. Purpose.
§ 126-12. Regular deposit procedures.
Article IV
Petty Cash and Cash Drawer Procedures
§ 126-13. Purpose.
§ 126-14. Definitions.
3/22/2019
TOWN OF BOW
12602
§ 126-15. Establishment of Petty Cash/Cash Drawer Fund.
§ 126-16. Petty Cash procedures.
§ 126-17. Cash Drawer procedures.
Article V
Returned Check Procedure
§ 126-18. Returned check procedure.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow 5-28-2013.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I
Purchasing Policy
§ 126-1. Authority.
These Procedures are adopted by the Board of Selectmen in accordance with RSA 31:39 as it
relates to its management of the Town's prudential affairs and its authority over expenditures.
§ 126-2. Payment of monies.
All expenditures in the Town General Fund shall be paid out only as authorized by the Town
Manager on checks drawn by the Treasurer, or Deputy Treasurer, in accordance with the Internal
Control procedures adopted by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 126-3. Purchasing and bid process.
The following processes will be followed when making a purchase, based upon the total cost of
the purchase:
A. Up to $3,000. Department heads, or their designees, are authorized to make purchases on
behalf of the Town up to the amount of $3,000. Department Heads or their designees are
encouraged to do whatever is practicable to secure competitive pricing from multiple
sources.
B. Between $3,000 and $9,999: Informal written bids from at least three sources must be
obtained for purchases between $3,000 and $9,999. Faxed or e-mailed quotations are
acceptable. Direct solicitation is allowed. Award of the purchase requires the approval of
the Town Manager.
3/1/2019
3/22/2019
FINANCIAL POLICIES
12603
C. Over $10,000.00: The formal sealed bid is used for major purchases. An invitation to
bid must be publicly advertised in the legal paper of record at least fourteen (14) days
prior to the date set for opening. Bid specifications require the approval of the Town
Manager. Formal bids must be received sealed and in writing by a posted deadline. All
bids shall be opened before the public at a date, time and place designated in the bid
request. The Town Manager, Finance Director or their designee shall open all bids under
dual control. Late bids will not be accepted. If at least three bids are not received, the
Town Manager may require a re-bid. Award of purchase or contract requires the
approval of the Town Manager. Purchases over $25,000 also require approval by the
Board of Selectmen.
§ 126-4. Artificial division.
Purchases shall not be artificially divided so as to create lower purchase amounts and therefore
avoid some requirements of this policy. Whether or not a proposed purchase constitutes artificial
division shall be determined by the Town Manager.
§ 126-5. Cancellation and rejection of bids.
An invitation to bid, request for proposal, or other solicitation may be canceled, or any or all bids
or proposals may be rejected, in whole or part, as may be specified in the solicitation when it is
in the best interest of the Town. The reasons shall be made part of the formal bid file.
§ 126-6. Bid process exceptions.
The requirement for three (3) competitive bids may also be waived in the following instances by
the Town Manager. Waiver requests must be submitted, in writing, to the Town Manager for
review and disposition.
A. When purchasing through the State of New Hampshire or at prices comparable to State of
New Hampshire bid prices.
B. When there is only one known source of purchase, and there is no comparable substitute
product or service. Written documentation supporting the sole source must be provided
D. When purchasing a specific type or brand of supply or part necessary for acceptable
operation of a machine or device, or as required by warranty or contract on the machine
or device. Written documentation supporting the purchase of a specific brand or part
necessary for acceptable operation of a machine or device must be provided.
D. An item previously awarded within the past twelve (12) months.
3/22/2019
TOWN OF BOW
12604
E. An item or service that is required on an emergency basis. Emergency procurements may
be made when there exists a threat to public health, welfare or safety, provided that such
emergency procurement shall be made with such competition as is practical under the
circumstances. In case of an emergency requiring immediate purchase of materials,
supplies, equipment or services, the Town Manager hereby authorizes the Department
Heads to approve such emergency purchase if the situation permits. The Town Manager
shall be notified as soon as possible as to the emergency and the associated purchases. A
written determination for the basis of the emergency and for the selection of the particular
contractor or vendor shall accompany the purchase order and voucher. As soon as is
practicable, standard purchasing procedures will be reinstated.
§ 126-7. Multi-year agreements for consulting and professional services.
Where the Town is securing ongoing consulting or professional services, the Town may enter
into multi-year agreements with qualified vendors. However, no such contract shall be for a
duration longer than five years and shall include a fiscal funding clause that allows the Town to
withdraw from the contractual relationship should the Town, acting in good faith, fail to
appropriate enough funds to cover the costs anticipated in the agreement.
Article II
Investment Policy
[Amended by Board of Selectmen 7-16-2013.]
§ 126-8. Applicability.
This investment policy applies to all public funds held by the Town Treasurer in accordance with
RSA 41:29.
§ 126-9. Investment options.
A. Deposits and investments shall be made only in the New Hampshire Public Deposit
Investment Pool, in New Hampshire banks that are FDIC-insured, and in government
obligations which are guaranteed by the full faith and credit of the United States
government.
B. Investments in obligations of the United States government shall be limited to securities
which mature within one year from the date of investment.
C. Investments in bank certificates of deposit shall be limited to certificates of deposit which
mature within one year from the date of investment.
3/22/2019
FINANCIAL POLICIES
12605
§ 126-10. Security of funds.
Deposits or investments in banks shall be fully collateralized for any amount that exceeds FDIC
insurance limits. Collateral shall be held by a third party in the Town’s name. Only direct U.S.
government obligations, U.S. government agency obligations, and government sponsored
enterprise obligations shall be accepted as collateral.
Article III
Cash Receipts Policy
[Amended by Board of Selectmen 3-24-2015.]
§ 126-11. Purpose.
The Town of Bow deposits substantial sums of money each year carrying out the many functions
and services that it provides. Taxpayers have a right to expect that the municipality's operations
be carried out efficiently and expeditiously with adequate financial control and accountability.
The objective of this policy is to attempt to strike a balance between the need for department
operating efficiency and flexibility and the need for financial control and accountability. It is
also the purpose of this policy to implement uniform procedures for depositing funds that will
provide quality and operational efficiency.
As required by RSA 41:29 I, the Town Treasurer maintains custody of all funds except those
funds held by the Trustees of Trust Funds, Library Trustees. RSA 246:29 VI allows the Town
Treasurer to delegate deposits or other financial functions to other Town officials or employees
provided such delegation is in writing and includes written procedures.
§ 126-12. Regular deposit procedures.
A. Customer Receipts. Departments should ensure that all customers are issued a
sequentially numbered receipt at the time of collection of moneys from a customer.
Customers should be encouraged by appropriately placed signs to request a receipt.
B. A secure area is needed for the safeguarding and processing of cash received. Access to
the secured area is restricted to authorized personnel only. The secured area is locked
when not occupied. All revenue must be verified with the Finance Office at once per
week.
C. Each Department or committee (with the exception of the Town Clerk/Tax Collector)
identifies the various revenue accounts to be credited, as well as, a copy of the receipt for
each transaction. All checks should be stamped with the Bank Deposit Stamp.
3/22/2019
TOWN OF BOW
12606
D. The person who collects and prepares the deposit (the depositor) will bring it to the
Finance Office for verification. Verification will consist of the depositor being
physically present while the Bookkeeper or Finance Director counts and verifies the
amount to be deposited.
E. If there is a discrepancy, the Bookkeeper and the depositor will initial and provide a brief
explanation of any changes made for immediate resolution. In the event that the
Bookkeeper and the depositor cannot resolve the discrepancies the Finance Director will
be notified immediately.
F. The deposit will be given to the Town Clerk/Tax Collector and the Town Clerk/Tax
Collector will record it on the Town Clerk Courier log. The Deputy Town Clerk/Tax
Collector will bring the deposits to the bank as a backup to the Tax Collector.
G. The Tax Collector/Town Clerk or Deputy Town Clerk /Tax Collector will take the
deposits to the bank within twenty-four hours and provide copies of the receipt slips from
the bank to the Bookkeeper within forty-eight hours.
H. Under no circumstance will the Department utilize personal funds to compensate for
shortages or overages. All shortages or overages must be brought to the attention of the
Finance Director prior to submission. Employees and officials are not allowed to cash
personal checks made payable to the Town or paychecks with Town funds collected.
Article IV
Petty Cash and Cash Drawer Procedures
[Amended by Board of Selectmen 3-24-2015.]
§ 126-13. Purpose.
Petty cash/cash drawer fund controls and procedures are to ensure that petty cash/cash drawer
funds are properly established, maintained and that Town assets are adequately safeguarded.
Petty Cash funds may be established for payment of minor or infrequent expenses where it is
otherwise impractical to obtain a Town check or use a procurement card.
§ 126-14. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the words and phrases used herein shall have the following
meanings:
PETTY CASH - Minimal amount of cash kept on hand to pay for small expenditure items ($50
and under) when a procurement card cannot be used.
3/22/2019
FINANCIAL POLICIES
12607
CASH DRAWER - Specific amount of cash used to make change in retail operations.
§ 126-15. Establishment of a Petty Cash/Cash Drawer Fund.
A. The Town Manager shall authorize and establish funds. The Department Head and the
Finance Director will determine a base Petty Cash/Cash Drawer amounts. The Finance
Director shall keep a current listing of all Petty Cash and Cash Drawer Funds.
B. One employee will be named Petty Cash/Cash Drawer Custodian at a time and shall be
assigned the responsibility by the Department Head.
§ 126-16. Petty Cash procedures.
A. A locked cash box will be used to store Petty Cash funds and the key must be kept in a
secure location.
B. The Petty Cash Custodian will issue a two-part receipt for each payment made out of
Petty Cash. This receipt is to be signed by the Petty Cash Custodian and the employee
receiving the Petty Cash.
C. All reimbursements from Petty Cash for small purchases will be made to employees
authorized by the Department Head to make such purchases and the employee must
supply the appropriate receipts and a description of the purchase.
D. The following items shall not be reimbursed from petty cash:
(1) Single purchases in excess of $50.00
(2) Equipment of any kind
(3) Payment to an individual for services rendered
(4) Office parties, gifts, holiday decorations, flowers, greeting cards
(5) Alcoholic Beverages
(6) Gasoline
(7) Cashing of personal checks
E. At all times the total of receipts added to the cash remaining in the Petty Cash box must
equal the predetermined Petty Cash amount.
F. Replenishment of departmental Petty Cash funds shall be made by submitting a summary
of all purchase sorted by General Ledger account number to the Finance Department. All
receipts or other documents supporting the charges and receipts shall accompany the
request. The Finance Department will issue a check for the reimbursement during its
normal processing.
3/22/2019
TOWN OF BOW
12608
G. Department shall submit Petty Cash reimbursements requests once a month, for any
purchase receipts being held.
H. Under no circumstance will any employee utilize personal funds to compensate for
shortages or overages. All shortages and overages must be brought to the attention of the
Finance Director immediately upon discovery.
I. The Finance Director will perform random audits of all Petty Cash Funds. Any
discrepancies found must be explained in writing and in detail to the Finance Director
and Town Manager.
§ 126-17. Cash Drawer procedures.
A. A locked cash box or cash register will be used to store Cash Drawer Funds and the key
must be kept in a secure location.
B. Replenishment of departmental Cash Drawer Funds shall be made to the Finance
Department. The Finance Department will issue a check for the replenishment during its
normal processing.
C. Under no circumstance will any employee utilize personal funds to compensate for
shortages or overages. All shortages and overages must be brought to the attention of the
Finance Director immediately upon discovery.
D. The Finance Director will perform random audits of all Cash Drawer Funds. Any
discrepancies found must be explained in writing and in detail to the Finance Director
and Town Manager.
Article V
Returned Check Procedure
[Amended by Board of Selectmen 3-24-2015.]
§ 126-18. Returned check procedure.
A. Copies of checks returned for insufficient funds and bank documentation must be
submitted to the Finance Office. Returned checks will be recorded in the accounting
system against the revenue in which it was originally posted.
B. With the exception of tax payments, the Town will only re-deposit checks returned for
insufficient funds one time.
3/22/2019
FINANCIAL POLICIES
12609
C. The Department is responsible for notifying the issuer in writing that he/she must replace
any uncollected payments returned by the bank and a returned check fee of $25.00 plus
all protest, all bank, and legal fees per RSA 80:56 in the form of cash, money order, or
bank certified check. The returned check fees should be reported as a separate revenue
item.
Article VI
Disposal of Town Property
(Excluding Real Estate)
[Amended by Board of Selectmen 1-22-2019.]
§ 126-19. Process for disposal of Town property.
The disposal of any Town property, material or supplies that are determined to be surplus
(excluding real estate), shall be disposed of or sold in accordance with these provisions, based
upon the value of the surplus item. The value of a surplus item is to be established by the
Finance Director, with the concurrence of the Town Manager
A. Less than $100: These items may be disposed of by the Department Head, as they deem
appropriate, with the concurrence of the Town Manager.
B. Between $100 and $1,000: The Town Manager shall have the authority to transfer
property from one department to another, include surplus equipment as trade on
replacement equipment, placement in state surplus auction, retain for parts or authorize
sale by public auction or bid.
C. Greater than $1,000: These items will be reported to the Board of Selectmen with the
Board retaining the authority to authorize the form of disposition.
3/22/2019
HAWKERS, PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT VENDORS
12701
Chapter 127
HAWKERS, PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT VENDORS
§ 127-1. Authority.
§ 127-2. Definitions.
§ 127-3. Purpose.
§ 127-4. License requirement.
§ 127-5. Exceptions.
§ 127-6. Application process.
§ 127-7. License fees.
§ 127-8. Waiver of fees.
§ 127-9. Term of license.
§ 127-10. Posting required.
§ 127-11. License required for sales from private property.
§ 127-12. Public safety and traffic control.
§ 127-13. Revocation.
§ 127-14. Conflict with State Law.
§ 127-15. Penalties and fines.
[HISTORY. Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow on September 8, 2015
as Ordinance No. 15-07. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 127-1. Authority.
This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted under RSA 31:102-a and 31:102-b.
§ 127-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the words used herein shall have the following meanings:
HAWKER and/or PEDDLER - Any person or organization defined in RSA 320, as amended.
10/21/2016
HAWKERS, PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT VENDORS
12702
ITINERANT VENDOR – Any person or organization defined in RSA 321, as amended.
§ 127-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect the safety, health, and welfare of the general public
and not to protect the personal or property interests of any individual.
§ 127-4. License requirement.
A. Any person or organization intending to engage in hawking, peddling or itinerant
vending activities shall not do so until the person or organization has first been issued a
valid license by the Bow Town Manager or his/her designee.
B. All Town of Bow and State of New Hampshire licenses and permits must be publicly
displayed at all times so as to be in plain view of customers.
§ 127-5. Exceptions.
A. The license and fee provisions of this chapter shall not apply to youth groups officially
sanctioned by the Town of Bow or by SAU #67, nor to “lemonade stands” or other
similar enterprises operated solely by children aged 16 years or less for a period of two
consecutive days or less in a week.
B. The license and fee provisions of this chapter shall not apply to “yard sales” or “garage
sales” when the sale is held on the private residential property of at least one of the
sellers, the sale does not exceed three (3) days in duration, and no more than four (4)
sales are conducted at that site in a calendar year.
C. The license and fee provisions of this chapter shall not apply to farm stands located
within the bounds of the land upon which the products were grown or raised and the
products offered for sale originate from that property.
D. Exempt organizations or individuals conducting business on Town of Bow property or
within a Town of Bow right-of-way shall obtain advance location and hours of operation
approval from the Board of Selectmen or their designee.
§ 127-6. Application process. [Amended by Board of Selectmen 10-11-2016]
A. Applicants shall submit a completed application to the Town Manager’s Office.
Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant.
B. To be considered complete, the application shall include the following:
(1) A completed and signed Town of Bow application form.
(2) A copy of the applicant’s valid New Hampshire Hawkers and Peddlers license.
10/21/2016
HAWKERS, PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT VENDORS
12703
(3) The application fee in the form of cash or as a bank, cashiers, or certified check made
payable to the Town of Bow;
(4) A copy of the principal’s and any agent’s driver’s license or other State issued picture
identification card;
(5) An applicant seeking to engage in Hawking, Peddling or Itinerant Vending shall
submit a set of his/her fingerprints taken by a qualified law enforcement agency or an
authorized employee of the NH Department of Safety to the NH Department of
Safety Criminal Records Unit. The applicant will submit a notarized NH Municipal
Background Checks form, provided by the NH Department of Safety Criminal
Records Unit along with appropriate fees, to the NH Department of Safety Criminal
Records Unit. The applicant will request the results of the criminal background be
sent to the Bow Town Manager.
(a) The Ordinance and RSA will be cited as “Reason Fingerprinted” (NH RSA
31:102a, 31:102b and Ord. No. 15-07.) The New Hampshire State Police
will compare the subject’s fingerprints against its criminal file and submit
the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for a comparison with
nationwide records. The results of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
check will be returned to the New Hampshire State Police, which will
disseminate the state and national results to the Bow Town Manager, who
will then forward the results to the Police Chief for a fitness determination.
(b) The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall render a fitness determination
based upon the results of the criminal background check and communicate
its fitness determination to the Bow Town Manager.
(c) In rendering a fitness determination, the Police Chief will decide whether
the record subject has been convicted of, or is under pending indictment for
a crime which bears upon his/her ability or fitness to serve in this capacity.
(d) A record subject may request and receive a copy of his/her criminal history
record information from the Bow Police Department. Should the record
subject seek to amend or correct his/her record, he/she must contact the New
Hampshire State Police for a New Hampshire state record or the Federal
Bureau of Investigation for records from other jurisdictions maintained in its
file.
(e) If the applicant has already provided a record check to another city/town in
the State of New Hampshire within the past twelve (12) months, a copy of
said record check submitted to the Town of Bow Police Department shall
suffice.
(6) For food vendors only, a copy of a State Food License and a statement of inspection
from the Code Enforcement Officer;
10/21/2016
HAWKERS, PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT VENDORS
12704
(7) For any sales or services regulated under NH Law, a permit from the NH Department
of Health; and
(8) A description of the proposed location of the business, together with a certificate from
the Building Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer that the location is consistent with
the Zoning Ordinance and Site Plan Regulations of the Town of Bow.
(9) For those utilizing a motor vehicle, a copy of the vehicle registration, proof of
insurance and an Official Motor Vehicle Record Check (a release of Motor Vehicle
Records Form is available online at nh.gov).
§ 127-7. License fees.
The fees for Hawkers/Peddlers and Itinerant Vendors licenses are found in Chapter 124, Fee
Schedule, of this Code.
§ 127-8. Waivers of fees.
Licenses shall be issued without payment of fees to any non-profit corporation or organization
duly organized under RSA Chapter 292 and churches and other charitable organizations,
provided that any officer of such corporation or organization supplies upon request official proof
of such organization located in the Town of Bow, along with the dates and times of the proposed
activity.
§ 127-9. Term of license.
The Town of Bow Hawkers and Peddlers and Itinerant Vendor Licenses shall bear the approved
hours of operation and date on which they are issued and unless sooner revoked, shall expire one
year from the date of approval unless an earlier expiration date was established.
§ 128-10. Posting required.
Every Town of Bow Hawkers and Peddlers or Itinerate Vendor License shall be exhibited by the
licensee in full public view at the site of operation.
§ 127-11. License required for sales from private property.
A Town of Bow Hawkers and Peddlers or Itinerant Vendor License shall be required
notwithstanding the fact that goods, wares, merchandise or services are to be sold or offered for
sale from any private property within the Town. In the case of any such sale or offer for sale
from private property, where the itinerant vendor is not the landowner, the landowner of the
property shall co-sign the application.
§ 127-12. Public safety and traffic control.
Any itinerant vendor, hawker or peddler who sells, offers or exposes for sale, any goods, wares,
merchandise or services in such a manner in the opinion of the Chief of Police, so as to impede
the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or to create a health or safety hazard or a public
9/18/2015
HAWKERS, PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT VENDORS
12705
nuisance, shall be required to cease operating within the Town of Bow until the situation
warranting suspension of the license is appropriately abated and the license has been reinstated
by the Town Manager. The Chief of Police shall provide to the Town Manager a recommended
list of locations in the Town of Bow where any itinerant vending, hawking or peddling shall be
expressly prohibited. In locations where itinerant vending, hawking or peddling is allowed, the
Chief of Police may require the presence of a paid police detail to preserve the public safety or
welfare. The police detail shall be billed by and payable to the Town of Bow at prevailing rates,
and shall be the liability of the property owner of the site of the itinerant vending, hawking or
peddling activity. Permission of the Board of Selectmen is required in advance if the vending,
hawking, or peddling is to be conducted on land owned by the Town of Bow or within any
public right-of-way.
§ 127-13. Revocation.
Any Town of Bow Hawkers and Peddlers or Itinerant Vendor License granted by the Town of
Bow may be revoked by the Town Manager at any time for cause sufficient in law.
§ 127-14. Conflict with State Law.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as conflicting with any license duly issued under the
laws of the State of New Hampshire.
§ 127-15. Penalties and fines.
A. Any itinerant vendor, hawker or peddler operating without benefit of a Town of Bow
license shall be subject to trespassing charges and confiscation of his/her wares, goods,
etc. and charged with a $500.00 fine for each occurrence of selling of goods or wares as
defined above.
B. Any property owner who allows an unlicensed itinerant vendor, hawker or peddler to
operate on his/her private property shall be subject to a fine of $500.00 for each day the
unlicensed itinerant vendor, hawker or peddler is allowed to operate on that property.
9/18/2015
INDEMNIFICATION
12901
Chapter 129
INDEMNIFICATION
§ 129-1. Grant of indemnity.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow 11-13-2012.]
§ 129-1. Grant of indemnity.
The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow hereby adopts the provisions of RSA 31:105
whereby the Town shall indemnify and save harmless for loss or damage occurring after the date
of the adoption of this motion, to the fullest extent possible, any person employed by it and by
any member or officer of its Board of Selectmen, administrative staff or municipal agencies,
including, but not limited to, the Selectmen, Town Manager, Regional Planning Commissioners,
as well as the members of its Budget Committee, Conservation Commission, Heritage
Commission, Highway Safety Committee, Planning Board, Supervisors of the Checklist,
Trustees of Trust Funds and members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment from personal
financial loss and expense. Such losses and expenses shall include, but shall not be limited to, the
payment of damages, reasonable legal fees and costs, if any, arising out of any claim, demand,
suit or judgment by reason of negligence or other acts resulting in accidental injury to a person or
accidental damage to or destruction of property if the indemnified person at the time of the
accident resulting in such injury, damage or destruction, was acting within the scope of
employment or their official duties for the Town of Bow. This policy of indemnification shall not
apply to any action by an otherwise indemnified individual in the event that the conduct forming
the basis of the claim was as a result of a wanton or malicious behavior or actions taken in bad
faith which shall include, but not be limited to, conscious wrongdoing or behavior based upon a
dishonest, immoral or improper motive. The omission by title of any municipal employee,
official or board or committee member from the above enumeration shall not be construed to
deny indemnification to such individuals.
JOINT LOSS MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
13001 10/20/2016
Chapter 130
JOINT LOSS MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
§ 130-1. Authority.
§ 130-2. Purpose.
§ 130-3. Membership and structure.
§ 130-4. Meetings.
[History: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow 6-10-2014. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
§ 130-1. Authority. [Amended by Board of Selectmen 10-11-2016]
Pursuant to RSA 281-A: 64, the Town of Bow, by its Board of Selectmen, hereby establishes the
Town of Bow Joint Loss Management Committee.
§ 130-2. Purpose. [Amended by Board of Selectmen 10-11-2016]
The purpose of the Joint Loss Management Committee is to bring workers and management
together in a cooperative effort to promote workplace safety. The Committee shall meet regularly
to develop and carry out workplace safety programs, alternative work programs that allow and
encourage injured employees to return to work, and programs for the continuing education of
employers and employees on the subject of workplace safety. The Committee shall develop and
maintain a written safety program for submittal to the New Hampshire Department of Labor.
§ 130-3. Membership and structure. [Amended by Board of Selectmen 10-11-2016]
A. The Joint Loss Management Committee shall consist of the following members:
1 Finance Director
2, 3 Fire Department, one supervisory and one non-supervisory
4, 5 Police Department, one supervisory and one non-supervisory
6, 7 Department of Public Works, one supervisory and one non-supervisory
8, 9 Combined Municipal Offices and Parks and Recreation, one supervisory
and one non-supervisory
10 Library personnel, supervisory or non-supervisory
11 Members shall be appointed to two year staggered terms with an effective date of
January 1.
12 Supervisory members are to be appointed by the Town Manager and non-supervisory
members will be elected by the non-supervisory employees of each department.
JOINT LOSS MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
13002 10/20/2016
B. The Committee shall biennially elect a Chair, and the position will be rotated between
employer and employee representatives on an alternate basis.
§ 130-4. Meetings. [Amended by Board of Selectmen 10-11-2016]
The Joint Loss Management Committee shall meet on a quarterly basis per calendar year.
NAMING OF PUBLIC LAND AND FACILITIES AND
PLACEMENT OF MEMORIALS
13101
Chapter 131
NAMING OF PUBLIC LAND AND FACILITIES AND
PLACEMENT OF MEMORIALS
§ 131-1. Purpose.
§ 131-2. Authority.
§ 131-3. Criteria.
§ 131-4. Duration.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow 10-11-2011.]
§ 131-1. Purpose.
This policy provides the basis for acceptance and approval of proposals for commemorative
naming and placement of memorials in or on public land and facilities located within the
boundaries of the Town of Bow.
§ 131-2. Authority.
Under the authority granted by NH RSA 41:11-a:
A. The Board of Selectmen shall be responsible for the naming (or renaming) of any Town
owned land or facility. A facility shall be defined as a building, portion of a building,
driveway, or other parcel or portion of a parcel of land and places or natural features
contained therein, but shall not include any library or property related thereto under the
control of the Library Board of Trustees. Once a facility has been named, renaming will
be approved only by the Board of Selectmen.
B. The Board of Selectmen shall be responsible for approval of the placement of memorial
objects, artwork, signs, sculptures, banners, benches, trees or other plantings, fountains,
detached structures, and walls (hereinafter “a Memorial”) in or on any Town owned land
or facility, as defined above.
§ 131-3. Criteria.
A. When a memorial is proposed, at least one (1) calendar year shall expire from the date of
the event, or in the case of a person their death, before the Board of Selectmen may
consider a proposed Memorial.
TOWN OF BOW
13102
B. If a memorial will require the Town to expend funds or services to maintain, the Board of
Selectmen may condition acceptance on the provision by the proponent of a fund
sufficient to meet that obligation.
§ 131-4. Duration.
A. Once the Board of Selectmen assigns a name to land or a facility, the name shall remain
unchanged for twenty-five (25) years.
B. Once the Board of Selectmen accepts a memorial, the memorial may remain installed for
up to twenty-five (25) years. The Selectmen may extend the period of installation once
the initial term expires.
PARKS, RECREATIONAL FACILTIES AND PUBLIC LANDS
13401
Chapter 134
PARKS, RECREATIONAL FACILITIES AND PUBLIC LANDS
Article I
Rules and Regulations
§ 134-1. Purpose.
§ 134-3. Definitions.
§ 134-4. Hours for use.
§ 134-5. Permit required for use after hours.
§ 134-6. Misuse of facilities.
§ 134-7. Littering.
§ 134-8. Firearms use.
§ 134-9. Operation of motor vehicles.
§ 134-10. Dogs running at large.
§ 134-11. Violations and penalties.
Article II
Athletic Fields Use Policy
§ 134-12. Purpose.
§ 134-13. Priority of use by category; permit application and issuance.
§ 134-14. Special events.
§ 134-15. Restrictions.
§ 134-16. Permit revocation.
5-1-19
TOWN OF BOW
13402
Article III
Bow Town Pond
§ 134-17. Bow Town Pond rules and regulations.
[HISTORY. Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 4-2-19. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
Article I
Rules and Regulations
§ 134-1. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted to establish rules and regulations of the parks, recreational facilities
and public lands owned by the Town of Bow.
§ 134-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PERMIT: Any written license issued by or under the issuing authority, permitting the
performance of a specified act or acts.
PARKS, RECREATIONAL FACILITIES AND PUBLIC LANDS: Any lands situated in the
Town now owned, or hereafter acquired, under the jurisdiction of the Town, or any lands so
designated. These facilities include, but are not limited to, Hanson Memorial Recreation
Area, Sargent Park, Town Gazebo, Nottingcook Forest, Hammond Nature Preserve,
Community Center property and the Bow Town Pond.
§ 134-4. Hours for use.
Public lands and parks owned by the Town shall be open for use by the Town’s residents and
others desiring to use the lands and parks between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
§ 134-5. Permit required for use after hours.
A permit will be necessary for use of parks and public lands during hours other than as
established herein. Such permit or permits authorizing such use or uses of the public lands or
parks shall be granted in writing by the Board of Selectmen. All conditions of the permit
approved must be adhered to, and any falsifications or violation of the terms and conditions or
rules and regulations shall constitute grounds for its revocation by the Board of Selectmen.
5-1-19
PARKS, RECREATIONAL FACILTIES AND PUBLIC LANDS
13403
§ 134-6. Misuse of facilities.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, destroy or remove any sign, fence or other
structure or any living plant material, or cut and/or remove trees, shrubs, wetland plants and
grasses, or remove or disturb the soil. Forest and land management practices as instituted by
the Board of Selectmen are excluded.
§ 134-7. Littering.
No person shall commit, permit, or allow the dumping, placing or dropping of any trash,
bottles, cans, or any other type of refuse except in a proper receptacle furnished by the Town.
§ 134-8. Firearms use.
All State of New Hampshire hunting and firearms statutes and regulations must be followed.
§ 134-9. Operation of motor vehicles.
A. No person shall operate any motor vehicle, with the exception of Town
maintenance work, or grooming equipment in any part of the Town parks and
public land except on roadways or snow trails established expressly for the
operation of motor vehicles and designated as such by the Board of Selectmen.
B. No person shall park or be permitted to park any vehicle in any area of a public land or
park except those specifically designated for parking.
§ 134-10. Dogs running at large.
The Bow Annual Town Meeting adopted the provisions of RSA 466:30-a, Dog Control Law, on
3/14/87. See Chapter 44 Animals, Code of the Town of Bow, for these regulations.
§ 134-11. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of any provisions of this Chapter shall result in a fine of no less than $25.00 and
not more than $500.00.
5-1-19
TOWN OF BOW
13404
Article II
Athletic Fields Use Policy
§ 134-12. Purpose.
This article contains the policies and procedures for the rental of recreational facilities and parks
within the Town of Bow The purpose of this policy is to assure that usage, access, and
distribution of all recreational sites are in accordance with Town regulations. The primary use of
Bow recreation facilities and parks is for resident recreation activities. Town facilities may be
made available for additional activities if available and if not in conflict with proper maintenance
of the facility or other community use.
§ 134-13. Priority of use by category; permit application and issuance.
A. Permits for field/facility use are issued by the category in which the organization or event
is placed. The Parks and Recreation Department shall be responsible for assigning the use
of the Hanson Memorial Recreation Area athletic fields (Gergler, Goodwin, Gordon and
Gosling), Sargent Park athletic field, and the Knox Road Field, based on the following
priority order:
(1) Group I: Bow Parks and Recreation sponsored activities. These activities include
programs run by the Recreation and Parks Department, such as day camps, afterschool
programs, day programs, special events and seasonal sporting activities.
(2) Group II: Designated Bow youth sports organizations. These groups are
independent organizations that have been established to serve the recreational
interests of the participants.
(3) Group III: Bow School District activities
(4) Group IV: Non-profit youth and adult athletic programs with at least 50% Bow
resident participation.
(5) Group V: Non-profit youth and adult athletic programs with less than 50% Bow
resident participation
(6) Group VI. Private groups who request the use of facilities on an occasional basis
when space is available.
B. Applications for all field usage shall be on a form approved by the Town Manager.
Applicants must submit completed Application, Certificate of Liability Insurance and any
necessary fees to the Bow Parks and Recreation Department. Fees and charges for field
usage are found in Chapter 124, Fee Schedule, of this Code. Permits and forms will be
signed by Bow Parks and Recreation Director and kept on file at the Parks and Recreation
Department.
5-1-19
PARKS, RECREATIONAL FACILTIES AND PUBLIC LANDS
13405
C. Renters must be at least twenty-one (21) years of age and a person at least twenty-one (21)
years of age must supervise events during the time of use.
D. Upon issuance of a permit, the holder, or agents of the holder of any permit, shall be liable
for any and all damages done to the park facilities during the times the permit is in effect.
§ 134-14. Special events.
Permits are required for special events to reserve a facility or area. The Town Manager and/or
his/her designee shall be authorized to issue use permits. No permit is required for any event
sponsored and sanctioned by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 134-15. Restrictions.
A. All private groups, businesses or organizations that charge fees and/or earn a profit are
not allowed usage unless the Board of Selectmen grants an exception to the policy
approving the rental request and assesses the rental fees.
B. No for-profit vendors are allowed on Town owned or leased property to sell goods such
as food, souvenirs and any other items for sale, unless permission is received from the
Board of Selectmen.
§ 134-16. Permit revocation.
Violation of any law, ordinance, rule, regulation, or permit conditions by the holder, or agent of
the holder of any permit, shall constitute grounds for revocation. The Town Manager or his/her
designee shall have authority to revoke a permit. Appeal of a denial or revocation may be made
to the Board of Selectmen.
Article III
Bow Town Pond
§ 134-17. Bow Town Pond rules and regulations.
In addition to the rules and regulations set forth in Article I of this chapter, the following
rules and regulations shall apply to Bow Town Pond:
A. Swimming in the Bow Town Pond is prohibited at all times.
B. No one may use any type of watercraft or flotation device on or in Bow Town Pond at
any time. Exceptions to this prohibition include emergency services of any type which
may be present for training or in response to a call; employees of the Town of Bow as
necessary for the performance of their official duties; and any radio-controlled toy boat or
other similar toy.
5-1-19
TOWN OF BOW
13406
C. Fishing in the Bow Town Pond is reserved for persons who are under the age of fourteen
(14). All fish taken shall be immediately removed from the hook and returned to the
Pond. Nothing in this provision shall be construed as preventing a person who is
prohibited from fishing to assist or instruct a person who is legally fishing, provided that
only the person who is legally fishing possesses fishing equipment.
D. Ice skating. The Town Manager or his/her designee will post the designated skating area
on the Pond as open or closed for use. The skating area shall be declared open only when
there is eight (8) inches or more of ice. All persons who venture onto the ice for skating
or for other on-ice activities do so at their own risk.
5-1-19
PERSONNEL PLAN
13601
Chapter 136
PERSONNEL PLAN
§ 136-1. Purpose of plan.
§ 136-2. Administration of plan.
§ 136-3. Equal Opportunity Policy.
§ 136-4. Hiring process.
§ 136-5. Position descriptions.
§ 136-6. Employee classifications.
§ 136-7. Date of Hire/Anniversary date.
§ 136-8. Probationary period.
§ 136-9. Compensation.
§ 136-10. Personnel Action Report Form.
§ 136-11. Work schedule.
§ 136-12. Overtime.
§ 136-13. Unauthorized absences.
§ 136-14. Payroll time sheet.
§ 136-15. Performance evaluations.
§ 136-16. Personnel files.
§ 136-17. Employee appearance.
§ 136-18. Smoking policy.
§ 136-19. E-mail, Internet and computer usage.
§ 136-20. Cell phone/PDA policy.
§ 136-21. Sexual and Anti-harassment policy.
TOWN OF BOW
13602
§ 136-22. Drug and Alcohol testing for DOT Compliance.
Appendix A. Drug and Alcohol Policy Procedures -
Federal Motor Carrier Regulated Drivers
Appendix B. Drug and Alcohol Policy Procedures - Non-DOT
§ 136-23. Disciplinary procedures.
§ 136-24. Grievance procedure.
§ 136-25. Holidays.
§ 136-26. Vacation leave.
§ 136-27. Sick leave.
§ 136-28. Family and Medical Leave.
§ 136-29. Maternity leave.
§ 136-30. Leaves of absence.
§ 136-31. Workers' Compensation.
§ 136-32. Temporary Alternative Work
§ 136-33. Travel expenses.
§ 136-34. Tuition reimbursement.
§ 136-35. Life insurance.
§ 136-36. Health insurance.
§ 136-37. Dental insurance.
§ 136-38. Short Term disability insurance.
§ 136-39. Retirement.
§ 136-40. COBRA.
PERSONNEL PLAN
13603
[History: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow 7-12-2011. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
§ 136-1. Purpose of plan.
A. The purpose of this plan is to establish uniform administrative practices for all employees
of the Town of Bow. This plan is not a contract and it does not create any legally
enforceable right for any employee. All employees, except those employed pursuant to a
written employment contract for a specified term or pursuant to a statute providing
otherwise, are employed "at-will." This means that either the Town or the employee may
terminate the employment relationship at any time, with or without cause.
B. Employees covered under this plan will receive a copy of the plan and shall receive
copies of new and/or amended policies as change(s) occur and shall acknowledge receipt
of same.
§ 136-2. Administration of plan.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the Board of Selectmen to establish the policies that
comprise the plan.
B. The Town Manager shall be responsible for the overall administration of the plan.
C. Department heads shall be responsible for adherence to this plan within their departments.
Department heads may adopt departmental policies not inconsistent with the policies
established in this plan. Departmental policies shall become effective only upon the
approval of the Town Manager.
§ 136-3. Equal Opportunity Policy.
A. It is the policy of the Town of Bow to ensure equal employment opportunity for all
employees and appointed representatives. This commitment includes a mandate to
promote and afford equal treatment and services to all citizens, employees, and Town
representatives, and to assure equal employment opportunity based on ability and fitness
to all persons regardless of race, religion, color, creed, national origin, age, sex, sexual
orientation, physical or mental disability, or marital status. The Town is committed to
providing equal employment opportunities to qualified individuals with disabilities,
which includes providing reasonable accommodation to qualified applicants to allow
them to perform essential job duties.
TOWN OF BOW
13604
B. In general, it is the employee's responsibility to notify the Town of the need for an
accommodation of any physical or mental disability which substantially limits a major
life activity. When appropriate, the Town may need an employee's permission to obtain
additional information from the employee's physician or other medical or rehabilitation
professionals to document that the employee has a disability and to assist the Town in
assessing any functional limitations for which a reasonable accommodation may be
needed. All medical information will be treated as confidential in accordance with the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). The Town will take all requests for
accommodation seriously and will promptly determine whether the employee is a
qualified individual with a disability and whether a reasonable accommodation exists
which would allow the employee to perform essential functions of the job without
imposing an undue hardship on the Town or other employees.
§ 136-4. Hiring process. [Amended 6-12-2012 by Board of Selectmen.]
A. Recruitment. The Town Manager will be notified immediately of all position vacancies.
The affected department may be asked to assist the Town Manager’s Office, as
necessary, in formulating job announcement ads. The Town Manager’s Office will
distribute to all Town departments copies of the job announcement for posting.
Advertisements for placement in local newspapers, trade publications, and professional
journals will be developed and placed by the Town Manager’s Office, with assistance
from the affected department.
B. Promotions and Transfers. The Town strives to provide employees with the opportunity
to make full use of their skills, interests and potential. To support employee growth and
development, the Town will make every effort to promote qualified employees from
within the Town, if possible, based upon the needs of the Town and employee
qualifications.
C. Residency. Applicants shall be citizens of the United States of America or hold proper
certification that enables them to work in this country.
D. Driver’s license. Applicants for positions in which the applicant is expected to operate a
motor vehicle must be at least 18 years old and will be required to present a valid state
driver's license with any necessary endorsements. Driving records of applicants may be
checked. Applicants with poor driving records, as determined by the Town, may be
disqualified for employment with the Town in positions requiring driving.
E. Pre-employment examination. The Town may administer pre-employment examinations
to test the qualifications and ability of applicants, as determined necessary by the Town.
The Town may contract with any competent agency or individual to prepare and/or
administer these examinations.
PERSONNEL PLAN
13605
F. Interviews/appointments. The department head will review the applications that are
submitted and conduct interviews of candidates. The department head will then present a
final candidate to the Town Manager for his/her review and action.
G. Criminal background check. Once an applicant has been extended an offer of
employment, a background investigation, to include a criminal background check, will be
conducted.
H. Physical examination. The Town may require persons selected for employment to
undergo a medical examination, which may include testing for alcohol and controlled
substances. The purpose of the examination is to determine if the individual is physically
able to perform the job and to ensure their physical condition will not endanger the
health, safety or well-being of other employees or the public. The offer of employment
may be conditioned on the results of the examination. A candidate may be disqualified
from consideration if:
(1) Found physically unable to perform the duties of the position and the individual's
disability cannot reasonably be accommodated in the workplace;
(2) The candidate refuses to submit to a medical examination or complete medical
history forms; or
(3) If the exam reveals use of alcohol and/or controlled substances.
§ 136-5. Position descriptions.
A. A description will be prepared for each position which will generally outline the duties
and responsibilities of the position, necessary knowledge, skills and abilities and Fair
Labor Standards Act (FLSA) classification.
B. Employees shall receive a copy of their position description at the time of appointment.
C. All position descriptions shall be retained at the Town Manager’s Office and are available
for review.
D. Any position description may be changed at the discretion of the Town Manager with
such notice as he/she determines to be appropriate.
TOWN OF BOW
13606
§ 136-6. Employee classifications. [Amended 6-26-18 by Ord. No. 18-02]
Employees shall be defined as listed below. When appointed, employees shall be made aware of
their status.
A. Full-time employee: An employee who is regularly scheduled to work a minimum of
forty (40) hours per week on a regular basis throughout the year (52 weeks).
B. Regular Part-time employee: An employee who is regularly scheduled to work a
minimum of at least twenty (20) hours per week but less than forty (40) hours per week
on a regular basis throughout the year (52 weeks).
C. Part-time employee: An employee who is regularly scheduled to work less than twenty
(20) hours per week; or who works only when called. Part-time employees are not
eligible for paid leave (including holidays), group insurance coverage, and other
employee benefits.
D. Seasonal employee: An employee who is hired for a specific period of time which is less
than fifty-two (52) weeks per years. Seasonal employees are not eligible for paid leave
(including holidays), group insurance coverage, and other employee benefits
E. All employees are classified as either Exempt or Non-exempt employees. An employee's
Exempt or Nonexempt status is determined by his/her responsibilities, duties, educational
qualifications, and salary. Classification of employees with regard to eligibility for
overtime pay is done in accordance with the criteria set forth in the rules and regulations
of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA).
§ 136-7. Date of Hire/Anniversary date.
A. Date of hire shall mean the effective date of the individual's employment with the Town.
The date of hire shall be used to determine length of service.
B. Anniversary date shall mean the date the employee began his/her employment in the most
recent position. An employee whose position is changed by promotion, demotion, or
transfer will have his/her anniversary date changed to the effective date of the promotion,
demotion or transfer.
§ 136-8. Probationary period.
The appointment of an employee shall in the first instance be made for a probationary period of
six (6) months. A performance evaluation will be performed at the end of the probationary
period. A probationary period may be extended for an additional period by the Town Manager if
it is determined that a longer period of evaluation is necessary.
PERSONNEL PLAN
13607
§ 136-9. Compensation. [Amended 6-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-05]
A. Each employment position is assigned to a pay grade on the Town's salary and wage
schedule. Employees shall be paid within the limits of the pay range applicable to the pay
grade to which his/her position has been assigned.
B. New employees will normally start employment at the minimum level of the applicable
pay range. However, an exception can be made where the new employee's training,
education and/or experience warrants a higher starting compensation, or when the
prevailing market conditions require higher starting compensation.
C. Employees may be eligible to advance through the steps of their pay range based on
performance and upon the recommendation of their Department Head. The Town
Manager shall approve step increases based on satisfactory evaluations (see § 136-15.
Performance evaluations). Step increases shall become effective at the beginning of the
next pay period closest following the employee’s anniversary date.
D. Cost-of-living increases may be awarded at such times and amounts as authorized by the
Board of Selectmen. Cost-of-living increases shall become effective on the first day of
the full pay period following the beginning of the fiscal year (July 1).
§ 136-10. Personnel Action Report Form. [Amended 6-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-05]
A. A Personnel Action Report form (“PAR”) shall be completed by the department head to
report an employee’s hire and all subsequent aspects of that employee’s employment
including the following.
1. Completion of probationary period
2. Voluntary or involuntary termination
3. Suspensions and other disciplinary action
4. Promotions
5. All wage adjustments other than cost of living adjustments
6. Reclassifications
7. Unpaid leaves of absence
8. FMLA leaves
B. PARs shall be submitted to the Town Manager for approval and shall be signed by the
employee only after Town Manager approval.
C. The approved PAR original shall be maintained in the employee’s personnel file in the
Town Manager’s Office, and copies shall be provided to the department head, employee
and Finance Office.
TOWN OF BOW
13608
§ 136-11. Work schedule.
Actual starting and closing times vary from department to department. The department heads,
with the approval of the Town Manager, will determine workday hours. Employees shall
generally be paid on a weekly basis. The work week shall begin on Sunday and end on Saturday.
Compensation for a given work week shall generally be paid on the following Thursday.
§ 136-12. Overtime. [Amended 6-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-05]
A. Non-exempt employees, with the exception of personnel working in a fire protection and
EMS activities position, as defined in the Fair Labor Standards Act, shall be paid at 1.5
times their normal hourly rate for each hour or portion thereof actually worked in excess
of forty (40) hours in a pay period. Paid leave occurring during a pay period shall be
counted as hours worked for the purpose of calculating overtime.
B. Non-exempt employees working in a fire protection and EMS activities position, as
defined in the Fair Labor Standards Act, shall be paid and paid at a rate of 1.5 times their
normal rate for each hour or portion thereof actually worked in excess of fifty-two (52)
hours in a pay period. Paid leave occurring during the pay period shall be counted as
hours worked for the purpose of calculating overtime.
C. Overtime is not authorized unless approved in advance by the employee's supervisor.
Any employee working overtime without such advance approval may be subject to
disciplinary action.
D. Call back pay. All non-exempt employees who are called back to work after the
conclusion of his/her regularly scheduled work period, shall be paid a minimum of two
(2) hours of pay at the rate of 1.5 times their normal hourly rate. Employees working in
fire protection and EMS activities will be paid their hourly rate until they have exceeded
fifty-two (52) hours in that pay period.
E. Compensatory leave. The Town’s normal practice is to pay cash overtime. At the
employee’s request, department heads may authorize compensatory leave time in lieu of
cash payment for overtime.
(1) Non-exempt employees, with the exception of personnel working in a fire
protection and EMS activities position, as defined in the Fair Labor Standards
Act, may accrue compensatory leave at a rate of 1.5 times their normal hourly
rate for each hour or portion thereof actually worked in excess of forty (40)
hours in a pay period.
PERSONNEL PLAN
13609
(2) Non-exempt employees working in a fire protection and EMS activities
position, as defined in the Fair Labor Standards Act, may accrue compensatory
leave at a rate of 1 times their normal hourly rate for each hour or portion
thereof actually worked in excess between forty-eight (48) hours and fifty-one
(51) hours in a pay period, or at a rate of 1.5 times their normal hourly rate for
each hour or portion thereof actually worked in excess of fifty-two (52) hours in
a pay period.
(3) Qualifying employees may accrue compensatory time up to forty (40) hours;
any overtime thereafter worked shall be paid in cash until the compensatory
time balance has been reduced below forty (40) hours.
(4) Upon voluntary or involuntary termination, an employee will be compensated
for all accrued compensatory time.
F. Employees exempt from the overtime provisions of the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act
(FLSA exempt) are expected to work whatever hours are necessary in order to complete
their essential job functions and responsibilities. Generally, to meet these expectations, an
exempt employee will need to work 40 or more hours per week. Exempt employees are
not eligible to accumulate compensatory time. The Town Manager may permit time off
when an exempt employee is required to work due to exceptional situations such as
temporary high priority project assignments, performing work due to department
vacancies or responding to emergency situations.
§ 136-13. Unauthorized absences.
The absence of an employee from duty for a day, or part of a day, that is not authorized by
specific permission from the department head, will be deemed to be an absence without leave.
Any such unexcused absence will be without pay and may be reason for disciplinary action.
§ 136-14. Payroll time sheet. [Amended 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 14-02]
A. Department heads are responsible for maintaining complete and accurate records of
attendance within their departments and for the accurate reporting of attendance on
weekly payroll time sheets to be submitted to the Finance Department before 8:30 a.m.
each Monday. The time sheet shall be signed by employee and the department head, or
his/her designee.
B. The payroll time sheet shall report all hours actually worked and all hours of paid and
unpaid leave. Reported hours may be rounded to the nearest ¼ hour or nearest 1/10 hour.
TOWN OF BOW
13610
§ 136-15. Performance evaluations.
All employees shall be evaluated at least once annually on or about their anniversary date. The
purpose of the evaluation is to monitor the employee's performance and to provide a record of
the employee's strengths and weaknesses. Evaluations shall be completed by the department head
and reviewed by the Town Manager. The evaluation shall become the basis for any available
merit increase. Employees shall have the opportunity to review and comment on evaluations.
§ 136-16. Personnel files. [Amended 6-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-05]
A. A file shall be maintained for each employee. The file maintained by the Town
Manager’s Office shall be considered the employee's official file.
B. An employee may inspect his/her own personnel file during regular office hours, upon
reasonable request. However, the employee may not be permitted to review his/her
personnel file if he/she is subject to an investigation at the time of the request and
disclosure of such information would prejudice law enforcement. File inspection must be
done on the employee’s own time, and must be arranged through the Town Manager. An
employee may not remove any portion of the file. Upon request, an employee will be
provided with a copy of all or part of his/her personnel file.
C. If an employee disagrees with any of the information contained in such file, he/she may
submit a written statement explaining his/her version of the information together with
evidence supporting such version. The Town will maintain such statement as part of the
employee’s personnel file and will include the statement in any transmittal of the file to a
third party.
D. An employee must notify the Town Manager’s Office as soon as possible of any changes
in their name, address, telephone number, marital status, dependents and/or beneficiaries.
The Town Manager’s Office shall forward changes to the Finance Office.
§ 136-17. Employee appearance. [Amended 9-13-2011 by Board of Selectmen.]
Employees shall dress appropriately for their position and maintain reasonable neatness and
cleanliness in order to present a professional image to customers, visitors, coworkers, and the
public. Dress requirements may vary by department; however, certain rules apply across the
board to all employees. Employees should consult their supervisor if they have questions as to
what constitutes proper attire. Exceptions may be granted to employees to accommodate
religious or cultural factors or medical conditions. Employees who are inappropriately dressed
may be sent home and required to return to work in acceptable attire. Under this circumstance,
employees will not be paid for the time away from work.
PERSONNEL PLAN
13611
§ 136-18. Smoking policy.
In order to accommodate employees, visitors, and vendors’ interests the Town is committed to
providing a safe, healthy, and smoke-free work environment. Consistent with state law, the
Town has declared a no smoking policy within our buildings and in or on Town vehicles, except
in designated smoking areas. Designated smoking areas will be properly posted and enforced by
the appropriate Department Head. Employees may smoke only during authorized breaks and in
designated areas. If an employee fails to comply with these rules, the employee shall be subject
to disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
§ 136-19. E-mail, Internet and computer usage.
A. E-mail. E-mail is a mode of communication provided by the Town to its employees to
facilitate communication. Electronic mail is Town property. The Town reserves the right
to monitor electronic mail, to check system performance and ensure that the system is
used appropriately. The Town must have access to an employee’s electronic mail if the
employee is not available. Employees do not have a personal privacy right in matter
created, received or sent via electronic mail.
B. Internet access. Access to the Internet is a mode of communication provided by the Town
to its employees to facilitate communication. Access to the Internet is limited to Town
business only. The Town reserves the right to monitor Internet usage to ensure that the
system is being used properly.
C. Misuse of the electronic mail system and the Internet may result in disciplinary action, up
to and including termination. Examples of misuse include, but are not limited to:
(1) Use of electronic mail and the Internet for any unlawful purpose
(2) Using profane or abusive language.
(3) Using electronic mail and the Internet for harassment including sexual
harassment.
(4) Using electronic mail and the Internet for personal business or commercial
purposes.
(5) Use of electronic mail and the Internet to create or send messages which might
constitute intimidating, hostile, or offensive materials on the basis of sex, age,
race, color, religion, national origin, sexual orientation, or disability.
D. Loading of programs/software. No employee may download any program or software, or
load software onto his/her computer, server or network, without approval from the Town
Manager.
TOWN OF BOW
13612
§ 136-20. Cell phone/PDA policy. [Amended 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 14-02]
A. Town employees authorized to carry Town-owned cell phones will be appointed by the
Town Manager each year. Town employees are permitted limited use of Town cell
phones for personal needs if the use does not interfere with Town business and involves
no additional expense to the Town. Department heads shall be responsible for monitoring
employee's use of equipment.
B. Each Town employee who is authorized to carry a Town- owned cell phone may
choose to use their own personal cell phone and receive a monthly stipend for such
usage. The amount of the monthly stipend will be determined each year by the Town
Manager. Only employees who are authorized to carry Town- owned cell phones will
be eligible for this reimbursement. Employees using their own cell phones for business
will not receive any additional funds to the cover cost of replacement of the equipment
if lost or damaged during the course of their work, insurance payment reimbursement
or be reimbursement for any added usage.
C. Drivers may not use their phones or other personal digital devices in any manner,
including but not limited to making or receiving calls; sending, viewing or receiving text
or voice messages of any kind; checking time; looking up information contained on
phone or personal digital devices while driving a Town vehicle, while driving any vehicle
on Town related business, or while driving or operating any Town machinery or
equipment with the exception of police, fire and public works personnel who may
receive work-related calls and texts in their official capacity. Failure to comply with this
policy may result in disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
§ 136-21. Sexual and Anti-harassment policy.
A. The Town of Bow believes that each individual employed by us has the right to be free
from illegal discrimination or harassment because of race, creed, color, familial status,
religion, national origin, age, sex, marital status, sexual orientation, physical or mental
disability or veteran status. All employees should be able to work in an environment free
from all forms of discrimination, intimidation and harassment, including sexual
harassment. All employees must treat each other with courtesy, consideration and
professionalism. To achieve our goal of providing a workplace free from sexual and other
illegal harassment, the conduct that is described in this policy will not be tolerated and we
have provided a procedure by which inappropriate conduct will be dealt with. Where
inappropriate conduct is found, we will act promptly to eliminate the conduct and impose
such corrective actions as are necessary including disciplinary action or termination
where appropriate. Please note that while this policy sets forth our goals of promoting a
workplace that is free of sexual or other illegal harassment, the policy is not designed or
intended to limit our authority to discipline or take remedial action for workplace conduct
which we deem unacceptable, regardless of whether that conduct satisfies the definition
of illegal or sexual harassment.
PERSONNEL PLAN
13613
B. Harassment refers to unreasonable conduct or behavior which is personally offensive or
threatening, impairs morale, or interferes with the work effectiveness of employees.
Examples of harassment include conduct or comments that threaten physical violence;
offensive, unsolicited remarks; unwelcome gestures or physical contact, display or
circulation of written materials, items or pictures degrading to any gender, racial, ethnic,
religious, age, handicap or other group listed above; and verbal abuse or insults about or
directed at any employee, or group of employees because of their relationship in any of
the groups listed above. Sexual harassment includes unwelcome sexual advances,
requests for sexual favors, and verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature when:
(1) Submission to or rejection of such advances, requests or conduct is made either
explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of employment or as a basis for
employment decisions; or,
(2) Such advances, requests or conduct have the purpose or effect of unreasonably
interfering with an individual's work performance by creating an intimidating,
hostile, humiliating or sexually offensive work environment.
C. The legal definition of sexual harassment is broad and in addition to the above examples,
other sexually oriented conduct, whether it is intended or not, that is unwelcome and has
the effect of creating a workplace environment that is hostile, offensive, intimidating, or
humiliating to male or female workers may also constitute sexual harassment. While it is
not possible to list all those additional circumstances that may constitute sexual
harassment, the following are some examples of conduct which, if unwelcome, may
constitute sexual harassment depending upon the totality of the circumstances including
the severity of the conduct and its pervasiveness:
1) Verbal: sexual innuendoes, racial or sexual epithets, derogatory slurs, off- color
jokes, propositions, threats or suggestive or insulting sounds;
(2) Visual/non-verbal: derogatory posters, cartoons, or drawings; suggestive objects
or pictures; graphic commentaries; leering; or obscene gestures;
(3) Physical: unwanted physical contact including touching, interference with an
individual's normal work movement or assault; and
(4) Retaliation: making or threatening reprisals as a result of a negative response to
harassment.
D. Each employee must exercise his or her good judgment to avoid engaging in conduct that
may be perceived by others as harassment. Harassment can come from superiors, fellow
employees, clients, visitors or vendors. Men as well as women can be victims of sexual or
other harassment. It cannot be stressed enough that the Town will not tolerate any form of
illegal discrimination or harassment. Violations of this policy, whether intended or not,
will not be permitted. All employees should take special note that retaliation against an
TOWN OF BOW
13614
individual who has complained about sexual or other harassment, and retaliation against
individuals for cooperating with an investigation of a sexual or other harassment
complaint is unlawful and will not be tolerated by the Town.
E. Should you feel that you are being harassed or that you have observed harassment, please
follow these guidelines to help us remedy the problem. Harassment by other employees,
clients or vendors should immediately be brought to the attention of your immediate
supervisor, your department head or the Town Manager. These individuals are also
available to discuss any questions or concerns you may have and to provide information
to you about our policy on sexual or other illegal harassment and our complaint process.
Do not allow an inappropriate situation to continue by not reporting it, regardless of who
is creating the problem. No employee or official in this organization is exempt from this
policy. If, at any point in the process, a complaining employee is dissatisfied with the
investigation being conducted, the employee should bring it to the attention of the
individuals listed above.
F. Harassment investigation. When we receive a complaint of harassment, we will promptly
investigate the allegation. Complaints will be kept confidential to the extent consistent
with our obligation to look into and remedy any harassment. For most matters, the
investigation will include an interview with the person filing the complaint, an interview
with the person alleged to have committed the harassment, and to the extent necessary,
interviews with co-employees or other witnesses. All employees are expected to be
truthful, forthcoming and cooperative in connection with a complaint investigation. Once
the investigation is complete, we will, to the extent possible, inform the person filing the
complaint and the person alleged to have committed the conduct of the results of the
investigation. If it is determined that inappropriate conduct occurred, we will act
promptly to eliminate the offending conduct, and where it is appropriate, we will impose
disciplinary action. There may be instances when, depending upon the nature of the
allegations of harassment, an alleged harasser will be suspended, with pay, pending
investigation. Suspension pending investigation should not be considered as a conclusion
of wrongdoing.
G. Disciplinary action. The Town of Bow will not condone, permit or tolerate harassment of
employees in any manner whatsoever. Any employee or official who is found to have
engaged in harassment or discrimination contrary to this policy will be subject to
disciplinary action, up to and including suspension or termination, depending, among
other things, on the nature of the conduct.
H. Retaliation. The Town of Bow also prohibits any form of retaliation against any
employee for filing a good faith complaint under this policy or for assisting in a
complaint investigation. Anyone who is found to have engaged in such retaliation against
a person who has registered a complaint under this policy or to have retaliated against
anyone for assisting in the investigation of such a complaint will be subject to
disciplinary action up to and including suspension or termination. Any employee who
PERSONNEL PLAN
13615
believes that he or she is being retaliated against should bring it to the attention of the
Town Manager, or any department head, so that appropriate action may be taken.
§ 136-22. Drug and Alcohol testing. [Amended 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 14-02]
Policy for Federal Motor Carrier Regulated Drivers - Appendix A at end of Chapter
Policy for Non-DOT personnel in safety sensitive functions - Appendix B at end of
Chapter
§ 136-23. Disciplinary procedures.
A. Nothing in this section shall change the "at will" nature of employment with the Town of
Bow which means that employees may be terminated with or without cause. However,
disciplinary action may be taken for any cause, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Attendance: absenteeism; tardiness.
(2) Performance: poor performance; impaired performance caused by drug or alcohol
use.
(3) Infractions: offenses against the law or against generally accepted standards of
personal conduct; insubordination.
(4) Sexual harassment
B. Depending upon the nature of the offense, discipline may be initiated at the appropriate
level. This sequence need not be followed in cases of serious infarctions that warrant
immediate suspension, demotion or discharge.
(1) Verbal warning. The immediate supervisor or department head shall issue a verbal
warning as soon as possible after knowledge of the infraction. The supervisor or
department head shall notify the employee of the nature of the infraction and will
offer remedial suggestions. Documentation regarding the verbal warning is to be
filed within the department and it will not be forwarded for placement in the
employee’s personnel file.
(2) Written warning. The department head shall issue a written warning for the repeat
of the offense that was the source of verbal warning or for a more serious offense.
The warning will outline the nature of the infraction and will offer remedial
suggestions. A copy of the warning will be placed in the employee's personnel file
and the Town Manager shall be made aware of the action initiated.
(3) Suspension. The department head may suspend the employee without pay for
recurring offense or an offense that warrants suspension. The length of the
suspension shall depend upon the nature of the offense. The department head shall
notify the Town Manager of the suspension within one (1) workday of initiating
the suspension. The employee shall be notified in writing, and a copy of the letter
of suspension shall be placed on the employee's personnel file.
TOWN OF BOW
13616
(4) Termination. The department head shall recommend to the Town Manager that
the employee be terminated. The recommendation shall be made in writing. The
Town Manager will meet with the department head to discuss the
recommendation and shall render a decision within fourteen (14) days.
§ 136-24. Grievance procedure. [Amended 6-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-05]
The grievance procedure shall be as follows:
Step 1. An employee is expected to discuss any grievance initially with his/her immediate
supervisor. If the matter is not resolved, the employee may choose to submit it in writing
to the department head. The grievance must specify the person allegedly causing the
grievance; the time and place of the action being grieved; the nature of the grievance; the
specific injury or loss that is claimed; and the remedy sought. The grievance must be
submitted to the department head, in writing, no later than 30 days after the injury, loss,
action, or inaction had occurred. The department head shall provide a written response
within seven (7) business days following the receipt of the written grievance.
Step 2. If the grievance is not resolved to the employee’s satisfaction at Step 1, a written
appeal may be filed with the Town Manager within seven (7) business days of the receipt
of the decision at Step 1. All documentation presented at Step 1, along with the Step 1
decision, shall accompany the appeal to the Town Manager. The Town Manager shall
arrange a meeting between all interested parties in an effort to solve the grievance. The
Town Manager shall render a written decision no later than ten (10) business days
following the hearing.
Step 3. If the grievance is not resolved to the employee’s satisfaction at Step 2, a written
appeal may be filed with the Board of Selectmen within seven (7) business days of the
receipt of the decision at Step 2. All documentation presented at Steps 1 and 2, along with
Step 1 and 2 decisions, shall accompany the appeal to the Board of Selectmen. The Board
of Selectmen shall render a written decision no later than fifteen (15) business days
following receipt of the appeal, excluding the day that the appeal is received.
§ 136-25. Holidays. [Amended 6-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-05]
A. All Full-time and regular part-time employees are eligible for the following holidays with
pay, effective upon the date of employment.
New Year’s Day Veterans Day
Martin Luther King Day Thanksgiving
Presidents Day Day after Thanksgiving
Memorial Day Christmas Eve
Independence Day Christmas Day
Labor Day
PERSONNEL PLAN
13617
B. On each holiday, Full-time non-exempt employees of the Fire Department, who are
required to work when their scheduled shift falls on the actual holiday (not observed),
shall be paid at 1.5 times their base hourly rate for work on a holiday from 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m. Fire Department Full time employees assigned to shift duties, regardless of
whether they are normally assigned to work on a holiday or not shall receive
compensation of eight (8) hours of straight time for the holiday. Holiday pay shall be in
addition to the compensation which an employee earns for working on the holiday.
C. On each holiday, non-exempt employees of the Police Department, who are typically
required to work when their scheduled workday falls on a holiday, shall be paid at 1.5
times their base hourly rate for work on a holiday. Police Department employees assigned
to shift duties, regardless of whether they are normally assigned to work on a holiday or
not shall receive compensation of eight (8) hours of straight time for the holiday. Holiday
pay shall be in addition to the compensation which an employee earns for working on the
holiday.
D. Other Full-time employees will be granted eight (8) paid leave for the holiday. Regular
Part-time employees will be paid a prorated number of holiday pay hours at their base
wage rate whether or not they actually work on that holiday. For example, a part-time
employee who is regularly scheduled to work twenty hours per week will be paid four
hours of holiday pay (8 hours X 20/40). For these employees, holidays falling on a
Sunday will be observed on the following Monday, and holidays falling on a Saturday
will be observed on the preceding Friday. If a non-exempt employee is required to work
an unscheduled holiday they shall be paid 1.5 times their normal hourly rate for time
worked on the holiday in addition to the holiday pay.
§ 136-26. Vacation leave. [Amended 6-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-05]
A. All Full-time employees and Regular Part-time employees will accrue paid vacation
leave at the following hourly accrual rates. Since the vacation leave which is accrued
during one year is expected to be taken within the next year, an employee’s vacation
leave accrual balance shall never exceed an amount equal to twice his/her annual accrual
as indicated below.
Years of Service Hourly Accrual Maximum Accrual
0-5 years 0.0385 160 hours
6-14 years 0.0577 240 hours
15-19 years 0.0769 320 hours
20 years or more 0.0962 400 hours
B. Vacation schedules shall be determined by department heads and/or their designees,
based on seniority and other departmental priorities. All employees must submit requests
for vacation time to their supervisor in writing.
C. A paid holiday falling within a vacation is not considered as a day of vacation.
TOWN OF BOW
13618
D. Employees are encouraged to take at least one (1) calendar week of vacation leave.
Employees shall not take longer than two (2) consecutive calendar weeks of vacation
leave at one time unless approved by the Town Manager.
E. Vacation leave shall not accrue during a work week in which the employee is not in pay
status (working or on paid leave) for less than the employee’s regular schedule. For
example, a Full-time employee, who is scheduled to work 40 hours per week but works
only 16 hours before beginning an unpaid leave of absence, will accrue no vacation for
that work week.
F. Upon voluntary or involuntary termination, an employee will be compensated for all
accrued vacation leave.
§ 136-27. Sick leave. [Amended 6-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-05]
A. All Full-time and Regular Part-time employees shall accrue sick leave at the rate of
0.0577 per hour worked to a maximum of 720 hours.
B. Sick leave benefits shall apply to bona fide cases of sickness, accidents, doctor or dental
appointments and maternity leave. An employee may use sick leave for family illness or
injury only if the employee must provide direct care to an immediate family member. For
a sick leave absence of three (3) or more consecutive workdays, an employee may be
required to provide a physician’s written prognosis and for a sick leave absence of seven
(7) or more consecutive calendar days an employee may be required to complete an
application for short-term disability insurance benefits.
C. When an employee goes on sick leave he/she must notify his/her department head or
designated supervisor immediately. Notification should be within thirty (30) minutes
after the beginning of the scheduled work day. Failure to do so may result in denial of
such leave pay. The employee should also let the supervisor know when he/she expects to
return to work.
D. It is the responsibility of each department head or designated supervisor to ensure the
provisions of this policy are observed. Corrective action should be taken in instances of
suspected abuses or misinterpretation of the utilization of sick leave. Department heads or
designated supervisors will ensure that any sick leave used will be reflected with the
submission of time sheets.
E. At time of voluntary termination of employment, an employee may be entitled to receive
compensation, at his/her normal base rate, of up to forty (40) hours of his/her remaining
unused sick leave if the employee notifies their supervisor in writing at least two weeks
in advance of their departure date and works the remaining two weeks of employment
without using sick or vacation leave. Employees shall not be paid unused sick leave upon
involuntary termination of employment.
PERSONNEL PLAN
13619
F. In the event of an employee's death, all accumulated sick leave will be paid according to
NH RSA 560:20-21.
G. Any non-exempt Full-time employee who has used no accrued sick leave during a
calendar quarter shall accrue four (4) hours of compensatory time leave so long as the
forty (40) hour maximum compensatory time accrual is not exceeded.
§ 136-28. Family and Medical Leave.
A. Under the provisions of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA), all
employees who have worked for the Town for at least 12 months and have worked at
least 1,250 hours during the last 12 months are eligible for family and medical leave.
B. Each qualified employee is eligible for up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave in any 12 month
period. The term "any 12 month period" as used in this section shall be defined as a
rolling 12 month period measured backward from the date leave use begins. Leave may
be granted for:
(1) The birth and first year care of a child.
(2) The adoption or foster placement of a child in the employee's home.
(3) The care of a spouse, child, parent or other family member, if the employee's
presence is deemed necessary by the family member's health care provider.
Certification from the health care provider must be submitted and must state that
the employee is needed to provide care.
(4) The employee's own serious health condition. Serious health condition is defined
as an illness, injury, impairment or physical or mental condition that requires
inpatient or continuous out-patient treatment.
C. Requests for family and medical leave must be submitted in writing to the Town Manager
at least 30 days in advance of the start of the leave. If the need for the leave was not
foreseen, notice must be provided as soon as possible after the need arises. The decision
concerning the request shall be made by the Town Manager. The Town also reserves the
right to place an employee on family and medical leave status of its own volition if
conditions warrant such leave, even if the leave is not requested by the employee.
D. Certification by a health care provider as defined in federal law is required for any leave
based on the employee's or family member's serious health condition. The Town reserves
the right, at the Town's expense, to require a second or third opinion if there is a question
about the certification provided by the employee's health care provider.
TOWN OF BOW
13620
E. All employees on approved family and medical leave are expected to report to the Town
Manager any change in status in their need for such leave, or their readiness to return to
work. Any eligible employee who returns from such leave at or before the conclusion of
12 weeks will be restored to the same position of employment as held when the leave
began, or be restored to an equivalent position with equivalent benefits, pay, and other
terms and conditions of employment. Employees returning from extended leave of
absence must notify the Town Manager at least 10 working days in advance of their
projected return to work or the end of the leave period, whichever occurs first. Employees
will be allowed to return to work as soon as the Town receives certification from the
employee's health care provider of the employee's ability to return to work.
F. The employee is required to utilize available accrued sick leave, vacation leave, and
compensatory time while on an FMLA leave.
G. While the employee is in pay status, the Town will continue to pay its share of group
insurance premiums and deduct the employee’s share from his/her pay. Even if the
employee is no longer in pay status, the Town will pay its share of group insurance
premiums for a maximum period of twelve weeks and bill the employee for his/her share.
After this twelve-week period, if the employee is not in pay status, he/she shall be
responsible for all group insurance premiums.
H. For an FMLA absence of seven or more consecutive calendar days an employee may be
required to complete an application for short-term disability insurance benefits.
§ 136-29. Maternity leave.
Employees affected by pregnancy, childbirth or related medical conditions shall be treated in the
same manner as any employee affected by any other temporary disability. After an employee has
exhausted all paid leave benefits (including paid vacation time) and/or is otherwise ineligible for
paid leave benefits, she is still allowed to take an unpaid leave of absence in accordance with the
Family and Medical Leave Act (“FMLA”). When an employee is physically able to return to
work, her original job or a comparable job will be available to her unless business necessity
makes this impossible or unreasonable.
§ 136-30. Leaves of absence. [Amended 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 14-02]
Leaves of absence may be granted under certain circumstances. The Town Manager must be
informed by the department head prior to a leave of absence being taken. The following types of
leaves of absence will be allowed:
Military leave. Any Full-time or part-time employee with one or more years of service
who is called to perform short-term annual active duty for training as a member of the
United States Armed Forces Reserve or National Guard, shall be paid as provided herein
for days spent performing such duty provided the employee would not otherwise be on
layoff or leave of absence. In order to receive payment, an employee must give his/her
PERSONNEL PLAN
13621
department head and the Town prior written notice of such military duty and upon his/her
return to work, furnish the Town with a written statement of the military pay received for
performing such duty. Town compensation shall be the difference between what the
employee’s wages would ordinarily have been if the employee has been on Town duty
instead of military duty. Payment shall be limited to a maximum of ten (10) working days
in a calendar year.
Jury duty. The Town of Bow considers it a civic duty to serve on a jury if summoned. In
the event an employee is called to serve as a juror, the Town agrees to pay the employee
his/her normal compensation while on jury duty. The employee shall provide to the Town
a written statement of any remuneration which he/she receives in conjunction with the
jury duty and shall reimburse the Town in the amount of the remuneration.
Bereavement leave. Leaves of absence with pay shall be granted to Full-time and regular
part-time employees when a death occurs in the employee's immediate family (spouse,
parent, child, brother, sister, mother-in-law, father-in-law, grandparent, grandchild,
stepparent, or a blood relative or ward residing in the same household). Such leave will
be granted for a period not to exceed three (3) days. Leave of one day with pay will be
granted in the event of the death of his/her sister-in-law, brother-in-law, aunt/uncle, or
niece/nephew. In extenuating circumstances, the Town Manager may extend
bereavement leave.
Unpaid leave of absence. Under certain circumstances, an unpaid leave of absence may
be granted by the Town Manager. During such leave, the employee shall not accrue
vacation leave or sick leave. He/she will be responsible for paying the full amount of
applicable group insurance premiums and he/she will be ineligible for medical insurance
waiver incentives. Unpaid leave may not be considered time in service for completing a
probationary period, for step increase eligibility, or for seniority purposes.
§ 136-31. Workers' Compensation. [Amended 6-12-2012 by Board of Selectmen.]
A. The Town of Bow shall purchase and pay the premiums for New Hampshire Workers’
Compensation, the benefits of which will be available to all employees regardless of their
classification.
B. Employees must report all injuries received while on duty to their Department Head or
immediate supervisor as soon as possible after an occurrence, and be responsible for
filing form 8WC which can be obtained from their Department Head.
C. The Town, and/or its Workers’ Compensation carrier, retains the right to request updated
medical information during the disability. If a medical exam is requested, the Town or
carrier shall use a qualified doctor.
TOWN OF BOW
13622
D. A Workers’ Compensation claim which results in lost time must be supported by a
doctor’s statement outlining the nature of the disability and if possible, the anticipated
length of the disability.
E. An employee utilizing Workers’ Compensation benefits shall advise their Department
Head immediately upon receiving a medical clearance to return to work including work
in a light duty capacity. Prior to returning to work, the employee shall provide a doctor’s
statement clearing the employee’s return to his/her regular duties.
F. An employee out on Workers’ Compensation leave from the Town may not perform
work for another employer.
G. While on Workers’ Compensation leave, employees shall continue to accumulate
seniority and will remain eligible for full benefits, up to a maximum of fifty-two (52)
weeks.
H. The first several weeks are adjustment weeks when the employee is awaiting the
decision of the Workers’ Compensation carrier and the receipt of Worker’s
Compensation payments. During the initial period, the Town will continue to issue the
employee a check for his/her normal base pay, less all normal deductions.
I. All Workers’ Compensation benefits received retroactively by an employee for the
period during which the Town was providing normal base pay in accordance with this
Article will be assigned by the employee (by “signing over” checks) to the Town to
reimburse it in part for the advancing of such benefits. No employee shall thus earn more
on Workers’ Compensation than they would have, had they been working during the
period.
J. In the event that an employee fails to sign over to the Town any Workers’ Compensation
check(s) due to the Town under this Article, the Town shall have no further obligation to
pay the employee hereunder, unless and until the employee fulfills his/her obligation by
signing over said checks to the Town.
K. Upon acceptance of a Workers’ Compensation claim and upon receipt of benefit
payments, the Town will reimburse the employee for all Medicare, Social Security (if
applicable), and retirement deductions taken as part of the Workers’ Compensation share
of the initial payments made by the Town.
L. In the event that the Workers’ Compensation check received by the employee is less than
100% of normal base pay, the Town will issue a separate check for the difference making
normal required deductions for F.I.T., Retirement, FICA and voluntary deductions as
previously approved by the employee, and the employee shall keep the entire Workers’
Compensation check. In the event that Workers’ Compensation check is greater than
100% of normal base pay, the employee shall keep the entire check, and the Town will
make no supplemental payment.
PERSONNEL PLAN
13623
M. If an employee is denied benefits, he/she must repay the Town for all compensation
received from the Town. Repayment will be accomplished by charging vacation and/or
sick/comp time accumulations, both current and future, until the overpayment has been
rectified, provided, however, that any repayment of sums due from accrued vacation
and/or sick/comp time will not be reduced below the level where the employee cannot
take at least one week of vacation and/or sick/comp time leave each year.
N. Employees out on Workers’ Compensation leave will remain responsible for payment of
all their weekly health insurance co-payment, health spending, and dependent care
deduction amounts. If an employee is not receiving any supplemental payment from the
Town (with or without the use of vacation and or sick/comp time), they shall make
arrangements with the payroll department to pay these deductions through the use of cash
or checks payable to the Town’s health insurance third party administrator and the Town
of Bow.
O. Employees out on Workers’ Compensation leave continue to accrue leave benefits as
long as the employee stays in paid status.
§ 136-32. Temporary Alternative Work. [Amended 6-26-18 by Ord. No. 18-02]
A. In accordance with the provisions of RSA 281-A: 23-b, the Town will provide temporary
alternative work opportunities for employees who suffer a work-related injury or illness.
When practicable, employees will be returned to their regular duties with modifications
consistent with a healthcare provider’s stipulated work restrictions. In the event that such
restrictions make it impracticable for an employee to perform his or her normal job
duties, even with modification, the employee may be reassigned to different duties or a
different work schedule and may include assignment to a different department with the
Town. The specific assignment of duties shall be determined on a case-by-case basis
pursuant to the healthcare provider’s restrictions and the work available at the time of the
injury or illness.
B. The Temporary Alternative Work program will be available to employees for a period of
time extending as long as the circumstances of the illness/injury requires, but not longer
than four (4) months as dictated by the treating physician and as such duties are available.
C. The treating healthcare provider and the ill/injured employee share the responsibility of
providing the Town with the NH Workers’ Compensation Medical Form. This form
provides information relating to the employee’s capabilities necessary to structure a
temporary duty program. The department head and Town Manager will work with the
employee to facilitate a safe return to work program within limitations listed by the
treating physician. If necessary, the Town may contact the treating physician for
additional information.
TOWN OF BOW
13624
D. After each subsequent visit, the ill/injured employee will be responsible for providing an
updated medical form completed by the treating healthcare provider and returned to the
Department Head or Town Manager. Additional modifications will be made to the return
to work program as required.
E. Upon release by the healthcare professional, the employee will assume normal duties of
his or her regular position.
F. Tasks appropriate for Temporary Alternative Duty
(1) Word processing
(2) Document processing and/or filing
(3) Light maintenance: cleaning, sweeping
(4) Minor repair work: small equipment, light building repairs
(5) Inspection activities
(6) Public education outreach
(7) Planning and project management
(8) Training programs
(9) Inventor activities
(10) Any other task within the scope of the medical approval to return to duty
§ 136-33. Travel expenses. [Amended 6-12-2012 by Board of Selectmen.]
A. With Department Head approval, the Town will reimburse employees for reasonable and
necessary expenditures made by employees while on official business or attending preapproved
training and educational seminars. Employees who utilize their personal
vehicles for travel will be reimbursed at the current IRS mileage rate.
B. Whenever possible the Town encourages employees to utilize town vehicles for travel
and to minimize trips by coordinating with other departments or carpooling.
§ 136-34. Tuition reimbursement. [Amended 6-12-2012 by Board of Selectmen.]
A. Any Full-time employee who has completed one year of continuous Full-time
employment may request tuition reimbursement for job-related courses taken at their own
initiative and on their off-duty time. Reimbursement shall be subject to Town and
departmental budget restrictions.
B. Employees shall make the request prior to registering for the course. The request shall be
submitted to the department head outlining the institution offering the course, course
content, tuition cost, benefit to employee and to the Town.
C. The department head will review the request and will submit a recommendation to the
Town Manager for final approval.
PERSONNEL PLAN
13625
D. In order to receive reimbursement, the employee must submit documentation of
achieving a passing grade of “B” or better and a receipt for the tuition cost of the course.
E. All educational contracts between the Town and employee are binding and subject to
enforcement.
§ 136-35. Life insurance. [Amended 6-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-05]
A. The Town will provide and pay for group term life insurance to all Full-time employees.
The amount of coverage shall be equal to 100% of the employee’s base annual wages,
with a minimum of $50,000. A copy of the life insurance policy shall be provided to each
qualified and covered employee.
B. Life insurance coverage shall become effective of the first day of the month following an
employee’s date of hire. If an employee’s date of hire is on the first day of a month,
coverage will become effective immediately.
C. Life insurance coverage expires on the last day of the month following an employee’s
separation of service or termination.
§ 136-36. Health insurance. [Amended 6-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-05]
A. Full-time employees are eligible for group health insurance coverage. Health insurance
plans and employer contributions amount and employee contribution amounts are subject
to change. Current employer and employee contribution rates are available from the
Finance Department.
B. Regular Part-time employees opting for health insurance coverage are responsible for
paying 100% of the premium cost for coverage. Health insurance plans offered are
subject to change. Current premium rates are available from the Finance Department.
C. Full-time employees, who are covered by another health insurance plan, may elect to
waive coverage in the Town group health insurance plan and receive a cash incentive to
be paid on a weekly basis as part of the employee’s paycheck. The current incentive
amounts are available from the Finance Department.
D. Health insurance coverage shall become effective on the first day of the month following
an employee’s date of hire. If an employee’s date of hire is on the first day of a month,
health insurance will become effective immediately.
E. Health insurance coverage expires on the last day of the month following an employee’s
termination. If an employee’s termination is effective on the last day of a month, health
insurance coverage expires immediately.
TOWN OF BOW
13626
F. Unless a marriage, civil union, adoption, or birth is appropriately reported to the Town
within sixty (60) calendar days of the event, a related spouse or child cannot be added to an
employee’s health insurance coverage until the next plan renewal date.
G. Employees are responsible for reporting within thirty-one (31) calendar days a divorce,
death, or other event, which would reduce their group health insurance coverage.
§ 136-37. Dental insurance. [Amended 6-11-2019 by Ord. No. 19-05]
A. Full-time employees are eligible for coverage in the Town’s group dental insurance plan.
Dental plans and employee or employer contribution rates are subject to change. Current
employer and employee contribution rates are available from the Finance Department.
B. Regular Part-time employees opting for dental insurance coverage are responsible for
paying 100% of the premium cost for coverage. Dental insurance plans offered are
subject to change. Current premium rates are available from the Finance Department.
C. Dental insurance shall become effective on the first day of the month following an
employee’s date of hire. If an employee’s date of hire is on the first day of a month,
dental insurance will become effective immediately.
D. Dental insurance expires on the last day of the month in which an employee’s
Termination occurs. If an employee’s termination is effective on the last day of a month,
dental insurance expires immediately.
E. Unless a marriage, civil union, adoption, or birth is appropriately reported to the Town
within sixty (60) calendar days of the event, a related spouse or child cannot be added to an
employee’s dental insurance coverage until the next plan renewal date.
F. Employees are responsible for reporting within thirty-one (31) calendar days a divorce,
death, or other event, which would reduce their group dental insurance coverage.
§ 136-38. Short Term disability insurance. [Amended 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 14-02]
A. The Town will provide and pay for short-term disability insurance coverage for Full-time
employees. This coverage will provide, for a fifty-two (52) week period, a weekly
benefit equal to the lesser of $750 and 66.67% of the employee’s base weekly wage
beginning with the first day of an accident and the eighth day of an illness.
B. Work-related injuries or illnesses are not covered by short-term disability insurance but
by workers compensation insurance.
C. Disability insurance shall become effective on the first day of the month following an
employee’s date of hire. If an employee’s date of hire is on the first day of a month,
disability insurance will become effective immediately.
PERSONNEL PLAN
13627
D. Disability insurance expires on the last day of the month following an employee’s
termination. If an employee’s termination is effective on the last day of a month,
disability insurance expires immediately.
E. Employees out on Short Term Disability will continue to accrue leave benefits as long as
the employee stays in paid status.
F. Employees are not eligible for holidays which may occur while he/she is receiving shortterm
disability payments.
G. If an employee is denied benefits he/she must repay the Town for all compensation
received from the Town. Repayment will be accomplished by charging vacation and/or
sick/comp time accumulations, both current and future, until the overpayment has been
rectified, provided, however, that any repayment of sums due from accrued vacation
and/or sick/comp time will not be reduced below the level where the employee cannot
take at least one week of vacation and/or sick/comp time leave each year.
H. Employees out on Short Term Disability will remain responsible for payment of all their
weekly health insurance co-payment, health spending, and dependent care deduction
amounts. If an employee is not receiving any supplemental payment from the Town (with
or without the use of vacation and or sick/comp time), they shall make arrangements with
the Finance Department to pay these deductions through the use of cash or checks
payable to the Town’s health insurance third party administrator and the Town of Bow.
I. If an employee has exhausted all Family and Medical Leave Act leave, the decision to
permit him/her to return to work after a short-term disability leave will be based upon the
ability of the employee to perform his/her essential job functions with reasonable
accommodation, if necessary, unless such accommodations would cause undue hardship
to departmental operations.
J. Before returning to work from Short Term Disability leave, an employee must provide
his or her supervisor, and the Finance Department, with a release to return to work by a
health care provider indicating that he/she is able to perform the essential functions of the
job with or without reasonable accommodations. An employee who fails to provide a
release to return to work as of their first schedule workday after a medical or other
approved leave will not be allowed to return tow ok and subsequent absences will be
deemed unexcused or unscheduled, which may result in termination of employment.
§ 136-39. Retirement. [Amended 6-12-2012 by Board of Selectmen.]
A. Employees who regularly work 35 hours or more per work week are required by NH
Statute to be enrolled in the NH Retirement System. Fire Department personnel and
uniformed Police Department personnel shall be enrolled in Group II, while all other
employees shall be enrolled in Group I. Related employee payroll deductions are
established by NH Statute.
TOWN OF BOW
13628
B. Full-time and Regular Part-time employees are eligible for participation in one of the
following IRS 457 deferred compensation plans: ICMA, Nationwide, and VALIC.
Participation in these plans is voluntary, and all contributions to the plan are made
through employee payroll deductions.
§ 136-40. COBRA.
The Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985 (“COBRA”) provides eligible
employees and their covered dependents with the opportunity to continue medical and dental
insurance for a period of time, at their own expense, if they would otherwise lose coverage for
certain qualifying reasons.
RECYCLING COMMITTEE
14401
Chapter 144
RECYCLING COMMITTEE
§ 144-1. Establishment.
§ 144-2. Membership.
[History: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow 8-13-1991. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
§ 144-1. Establishment.
The Recycling Committee is to review current and future technologies, review recycling
methods and procedures, inform and educate the townspeople on recycling, and recommend to
the Board ways to further reduce solid waste costs through recycling.
§ 144-2. Membership.
The Recycling Committee shall consist of eleven (11) members, seven (7) regular members and
four (4) alternate members, appointed by the Board of Selectmen for staggered three year terms.
[Amended 4-1-2013 by Board of Selectmen. Amended 2-10-2015 by Board of Selectmen,
Ord. No. 15-02.]
April 1, 2015
RIGHT TO KNOW POLICY
Chapter 146
RIGHT TO KNOW REQUEST POLICY
§ 146-1. Purpose.
§ 146-2. Procedure.
[History: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow 4-26-2016. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
§ 146-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this policy is to create a standard method of processing records requests under the
Right to Know Law (RSA 91-A). It is the policy of the Town to facilitate public access to
existing governmental records, as governmental records are defined under RSA 91-A, and where
such access is required under RSA 91-A.
§ 146-2. Procedure.
A. All requests for documents per RSA 91-A are to be referred to the Town Manager’s
Office. The Town Manager’s Office serves as the one point of contact for the Town and
the one point of information dissemination.
B. The Town Manager’s Office will ask the person making the request to fill out a “Right to
Know” Request form or it will be filled out on their behalf. The Town cannot require
citizens or requestors to use the Town’s form; however, the form needs to be used to
document the request.
C. The Town Manager will review the request and indicate how the Town is to respond. If
the document is readily available for immediate inspection, this must be allowed to occur.
If the Town is unable to make a governmental record available for immediate inspection
and copying, it must, within 5 business days of the request, make such record available,
deny the request in writing with reasons, or furnish written acknowledgement of receipt
of the request and a statement of the time reasonably necessary to determine whether the
request shall be granted or denied. Nothing in the statute requires the Town to compile,
cross-reference, or assemble information into a form in which it is not already kept or
already reported. The information will be provided in the format that it is in.
D. In the event the requested governmental records are not subject to RSA 91-A or are
exempt from disclosure under RSA 91-A, the requestor will receive a response in writing
with the reasons for denial of access to the governmental record, provided the requestor’s
identity and mailing information has been provided. Statutory exemptions for documents
that are not available to the public include:
(1) Records pertaining to internal personnel files or practices;
(2) Confidential or commercial information, if release would be an invasion of
privacy;
14601 7/5/2016
TOWN OF BOW
(3) Written legal advice; and
(4) Preliminary drafts, notes, memoranda and other documents not in their final
form and not disclosed, circulated, or available to a quorum or a majority of
the members of a public body.
E. Any document produced in response to a Right to Know request per RSA 91-A will be
copied and kept in a separate file in the Town Manager’s Office along with the
corresponding Right to Know request form.
F. Unless requesting a document for which State Statutes require a specific fee, if a
computer, photocopy machine, or other device, is used to copy the governmental record
requested, the person requesting the copy will be charged the Town’s standard copy fees
as found in Chapter 124 Fee Schedule, of this Code.
14602 7/5/2016
SEWERS
14901
Chapter 149
SEWERS
Article I
Sewer Use Ordinance
§ 149-1. Definitions.
§ 149-2. Unsanitary disposal methods prohibited.
§ 149-3. Unlawful discharge prohibited.
§ 149-4. Private disposal systems prohibited.
§ 149-5. Sewer use required.
§ 149-6. Building sewers and connections specified.
§ 149-7. Record plans required.
§ 149-8. Damages awarded.
§ 149-9. Running traps not permitted.
§ 149-10. Disposal of waters prohibited.
§ 149-11. Subsoil drainage control.
§ 149-12. Discharge method specified.
§ 149-13. Excessive discharge prohibited.
§ 149-14. Traps required.
§ 149-15. Trap maintenance required.
§ 149-16. Notification of change required.
§ 149-17. Control of discharge required.
§ 149-18. Preliminary treatment facility maintenance required.
§ 149-19. Control structure required.
§ 149-20. Standard analysis methods required.
TOWN OF BOW
14902
§ 149-21. Applicant agreement required.
§ 149-22. Analysis of industrial wastes.
§ 149-23. Annual report required.
§ 149-24. Special agreements allowed.
§ 149-25. Septic tank waste.
§ 149-26. Dilution of wastes.
§ 149-27. Protection from damage stated.
§ 149-28. Powers and authority of inspectors stated.
§ 149-29. Penalties for violation.
Article II
Sewer User Billing
§ 149-30. Billings.
§ 149-31. Determination of charges.
§ 149-32. Past due bills.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow 5-28-2013.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I
Sewer Use Ordinance
§ 149-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this ordinance
shall be as follows:
ACT - Shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), as amended
by Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (Pub. L92-500), Pub. L. 93-243,
and by other legislative actions.
APPLICANT OR OWNER - Applicant or owner shall mean any person requesting approval to
discharge industrial or domestic wastewaters into facilities of the Town.
SEWERS
14903
BDC - (Denoting biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of the wastewater under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at
20 degrees C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
BOARD OF SELECTMEN - Shall mean the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow, New
Hampshire.
BUILDING DRAIN - Drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of
the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning 10 feet outside the inner face of the
building.
BUILDING SEWER - Shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal
COMBINED SEWER - Shall mean a sewer receiving both wastewater and storm surface water.
COMMISSION - Shall mean the New Hampshire Water Supply and Pollution Control
Commission (NHWS & PCC).
DOMESTIC SEWER AND SANITARY SERVICE - Shall mean a sewer which carries domestic
wastewater and to which storm, surface and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER - Shall mean the wastewater derived principally from dwellings,
business buildings, institutions and the like.
E.P.A. - Shall mean the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States Government.
EXCESSIVE - Shall mean amounts or concentrations of a constituent of a wastewater which in
the judgment of the Town will cause damage to any sewerage facility; which will be harmful to a
wastewater treatment process; which cannot be removed in the wastewater treatment works of
the Town to the degree required to meet the limiting stream classification standards of the
receiving water; which can otherwise endanger life, limb or public property; and/or which can
constitute a nuisance.
FACILITIES - Shall include structures and conduits for the purpose of collecting, treating,
neutralizing, stabilizing or disposing of domestic wastewater and/or industrial or other
wastewaters as are disposed of by means of such structures and conduits including treatment and
disposal works, necessary intercepting, outfall and outlet sewers, and pumping stations integral
to such facilities with sewers, equipment, furnishings thereof and other appurtenances connected
therewith.
GARBAGE - Shall mean the animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of food. It is composed largely of putrescible organic matter
and its natural moisture content.
TOWN OF BOW
14904
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT - Shall mean any pollutant, other than biochemical oxygen
demand, suspended solids, pH, coliform bacteria, or additional pollutants identified by EPA,
which the treatment works was not designed to treat and does not remove to a substantial degree.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER - Shall mean the wastewater in which the liquid wastes from
industrial manufacturing processes, laboratory, trade, or business, predominates as distinct from
domestic wastewater.
INDUSTRY - Shall mean an establishment with facilities for mechanical, testing, trade or
manufacturing purposes.
INTERFERE - Shall mean an inhibition or disruption of the treatment works, its treatment
processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal which is a cause of or
significantly contributes to either a violation of any requirement of the Town's NPDES permit or
to the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in accordance with the following statutory
provisions and regulations or permits issued there under (or more stringent State or local
regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (which is more
commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) and including
State regulations contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D
of the (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, and the Toxic Substances Control Act. A user significantly
contributes to such a permit violation or prevention of sludge use or disposal in accordance with
above cited authorities whenever such user:
(1) Discharges a daily pollutant loading in excess of that allowed by the contract with
the city of Concord or by Federal or State law;
(2) Discharges wastewater which substantially differs in nature or constitutes from the
user's average discharge; or
(3) Knows or has reason to know that its discharge, along or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, would result in a permit violation or prevent sewage
sludge use or disposal in accordance with the above-cited authorities as they apply
to the selected method of sludge management.
INVERT - Shall mean the bottom inside of the sewer pipe.
MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY - Shall mean any industry that: (1) has a flow of 5,000
gallons or more per average work day or (2) has a flow greater than 5% of the flow carried by the
municipal system receiving the waste; or (3) has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as
defined in standards issued under Section, 307 (a) of the-Act; or (4) has a significant impact,
either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on a public owned treatment
works or on the quality of effluent from that treatment works.
SEWERS
14905
,
NATURAL OUTLET - Shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or around water.
PERSON - Shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
group, trust or governmental authority that discharges wastewater to the facilities of the Town.
pH: Shall mean the reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen in concentration in grams per
liter of solution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE - Shall mean garbage that has been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWERS - Shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights, and is controlled by public authority.
RECEIVING WATERS - Shall mean any watercourse, river, pond, ditch, lake, aquifer, or
other body of surface or ground water receiving discharge of wastewaters.
SEWER - Shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater.
SHALL - Is mandatory "may" is permissive.
SLUG - Shall mean any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more
than five (5) times the average 24 hour concentration, or flow, during normal operation.
SPILL - Shall mean the release, accidental or otherwise, of any material not normally, released to
the facilities, which by virtue of its volume, concentration or physical or chemical characteristics,
creates a hazard to the facilities, their operation or their personnel. Such characteristics shall
include, but are not limited to, volatile, explosive, toxic or otherwise unacceptable materials.
STORM DRAIN OR STORM SEWER - Shall mean a pipe or conduit for conveying rainwater,
groundwater, subsurface water, condensate, cooling water, or other similar discharge, but
excludes wastewater and polluted industrial wastes.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS OR SS - Shall mean solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering
and are referred to as non-filterable residue in the laboratory test prescribed in "Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater".
TOWN - Shall mean the Town of Bow, New Hampshire.
WASTES - Shall mean substances in liquid, solid or gaseous form that can be carried in water.
TOWN OF BOW
14906
WASTEWATER - Shall mean the spent water of a community and may be a combination of the
liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and storm water that may be present.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT - Shall mean all structures, equipment, and processes
for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater.
§ 149-2. Unsanitary disposal methods prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary
manner upon public or private property within the Town of Bow, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of said Town, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable
waste.
§ 149-3. Unlawful discharge prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town of Bow or in any area
under the jurisdiction of said Town any sanitary wastewater industrial wastes, or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent
provisions of this ordinance. It is not intended by this section to prohibit the discharge of any
sanitary wastewater into an existing sewer which discharges its sanitary wastewater into any
natural outlet within the Town of Bow if such discharge is allowed by the State of New
Hampshire regulatory agencies.
§ 149-4. Private disposal systems prohibited.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, vault,
septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
§ 149-5. Sewer use required.
A. The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation, or other purpose for which toilet facilities may be required,
situated within the Town and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there
is now located a public sanitary sewer of the Town, is hereby required at his expense to
install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the
proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance within 90 days
after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet of
the building.
SEWERS
14907
B. Waivers. Waivers shall be granted by the Board of Selectmen if both of the following
conditions are met and not otherwise:
(1) The owner demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Board of Selectmen that an
existing septic system constructed prior to the installation of the municipal sewer
system is functioning properly in accordance with Town and Water Supply and
Pollution Control Commission standards and that the system is being used for the
purposes for which it was designated.
(2) The owner demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Board of Selectmen that
the anticipated average daily flow is less than 200 gallons per day.
C. Termination of waivers. Waivers shall terminate automatically on the first to happen of
the following events:
(1) Two years from issuance unless renewed in accordance with paragraph 5.1.
(2) Any material failure of the existing septic system.
(3) Any expansion, renovation or alteration of the building which would require
alteration of the septic system under Water Supply and Pollution Control
Commission regulations then in effect.
(4) Any obnoxious condition creating a nuisance to abutting property owners
or the public.
§ 149-6. Building sewers and connections specified.
All connections to the facilities must conform to the following:
A. Permit required. No person shall uncover, make any connections with or
openings into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Board of Selectmen. After
the application has complied with the requirements set forth herein, the permit
shall be issued to the applicant by the Board of Selectmen.
B. Application deposit required. There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits;
(1) for residential and commercial service; and (2) for service to establishments
producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application
on a special form furnished by the Board of Selectmen. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in
the judgment of the Board of Selectmen. As a condition of the giving of written consent
to such work, the Board of Selectmen may require of the applicant a deposit of the
estimated cost of the engineering labor and materials to be furnished by the Town, such
deposit to be paid to the Town in advance of the doing of the work, any unexpended
TOWN OF BOW
14908
balance to be returned to the petitioner by the Town, or any deficiency to be paid by the
applicant to the Town upon the completion of the work. Each person will be responsible
at his own expense, to collect and discharge his wastewater from property into the
facilities provided by the Town, all in acceptable manner and with prior approval of the
Town.
C. Owner responsibility stated. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
the Town for any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer. All persons agree to abide by all rules and regulations
set forth in this ordinance.
D. Separate building sewers required. A separate and independent building sewer shall be
provided for every building.
E. Connection test required. A new building may use an existing building sewer only after
it is found on examination and tested by the Board of Selectmen to meet all requirements
of this ordinance.
F. Construction of drains specified. All particular drains which hereafter enter any
common sewer shall be built of such materials dimensions, descriptions and with such
inclinations as the Board of Selectmen shall direct and shall, at all times, be subject to
enlargement and alterations whenever the Board of Selectmen shall so determine.
G. Builders of private drains specified. All private drains which are laid underground to
connect with the public sewers shall be built and connected by some suitable person, who
shall be held responsible for such drains. The drain laver shall construct such drains in all
cases watertight of imperishable materials and upon secure foundations so that they shall
not be liable to settle or crack. The drain layer shall make connections with the sewer at
the points where the Town lays the connecting drains at the line of the street and not
elsewhere except by special permission of the Board of Selectmen, and such connections
shall be made in a proper manner, according to instructions which may be given the drain
layer from time to time by said Board of Selectmen and in all cases subject to their
approval.
H. Building drain materials and workmanship specified. All changes in direction of drain
pipes shall be made gradually using curves where necessary, and avoiding sharp angles,
and the inside of every drain shall be left smooth from end to end, and perfectly clean.
The drain layer shall give the greatest inclination to such drain that the circumstances will
permit, and in no case shall water closet or kitchen drains be laid with an inclination less
than one quarter inch to the foot, except by special permission of the Board of Selectmen
and upon such conditions as the Board of Selectmen may prescribe. The end of all pipes
not to be immediately connected with water-closets, sinks, etc., must be securely guarded
SEWERS
14909
against the introduction of sand or earth. All work shall be performed in the most
thorough and workmanlike manner, suitable and proper materials and none other shall be
used, and such drains shall be provided with suitable traps and other appurtenances as
required by this article.
I. Building sewer placement specified. Whenever possible, the sanitary sewer shall be
brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall
be laid parallel to or within three (3) feet of any bearing wall except for purposes of
crossing said bearing wall. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost.
The sanitary sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as
possible. Changes in direction shall' be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings
or manholes.
J. Drain elevation requirements specified. In all buildings in which any building drain is
too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary wastewater carried by such
drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the same building
sewer.
K. Construction technique specified. All excavations required for the installation of a
building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the Board of
Selectmen. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with accepted
standards except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected.
L. Connection method specified. The connection of the building sewer into the public
sewer shall be made at the “NY” branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location.
When connecting a four (4) inch diameter building sewer to any public sewer eight (8)
inches in diameter or less, a "Y" or "T" branch must be installed. When connecting a six
(6) inch diameter building sewer into any public sewer 12 inches in diameter or less, a
"Y" or "T" branch must be installed. Such "Y" or "T" branches shall be installed at the
owner's expense and at the location specified by the Board of Selectmen. Where the
public-sewer is greater than maximum diameter for installation of a "Y" branch as
specified above and no properly located "Y" branch is available, a neat hole may be cut
into the upper quadrant of the public sewer to receive the building sewer with entry in the
downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees. A proper sized "Y" saddle is to be
inserted in the hole so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The
invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at a higher elevation than
the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection
made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for
the connection only when approved by the Board of Selectmen.
TOWN OF BOW
14910
§ 149-7. Record plans required.
Whenever any common sewer or drain is ordered to be built or repaired, the Board of Selectmen
shall cause a plan of the same to be made, which plan shall be inserted in a book to be kept for
that purpose, showing the size of such sewer, the street or streets through which the same is to be
laid, the method of construction, and the materials of which the same is to be made; said plan
shall also show the places where entries may be made for the purpose of drainage. Said officials
shall keep an accurate account of the expense of constructing and repairing each common sewer
or drain.
§ 149-8. Damages awarded.
Whenever in the construction of any common sewer or drain, it shall be found necessary or
convenient to carry the same, or any portion thereof, through or across any private land, or land
not included within the limits of any public street or highway, the Town may order the same to
be so carried, by giving notice and awarding damages to the owner of such land, as provided by
law in the case of laying out of highways.
§ 149-9. Running traps not permitted.
The placing of running traps is not permitted.
§ 149-10. Disposal of waters prohibited.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water,
groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process
waters to any sanitary sewer.
§ 149-11. Subsoil drainage control.
Where subsoil drains are placed under the cellar floor or used to encircle the outer walls of a
building, the said drains shall be made of material conforming to the Town's plumbing code
which will be not less than four (4) inches in diameter. Cellar drains shall not be discharged to
building sewers.
§ 149-12. Discharge method specified.
Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are
specifically designated as storm sewers, or a natural outlet approved in writing by the Board of
Selectmen. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters discharged to a storm sewer or
natural outlet requires a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, and
also requires written approval of the Board of Selectmen.
SEWERS
14911
§ 149-13. Excessive discharge prohibited.
A. No person may discharge, or cause or allow to be discharged, into any sewer connected
directly or indirectly to the Town's waste water facilities substances prohibited under
subsections (a) through (o) of this section, unless expressly allowed in a discharge
permit issued to such person under Section 5.2-29.5. Said permit shall not violate state
standards without written variance from New Hampshire Water Supply and Pollution
Control Commission. In addition, no person shall discharge wastewater that interferes
with Town wastewater works. Persons who desire to discharge industrial wastewaters
into facilities of the Town shall make their formal application to the Board of Selectmen.
In forming an opinion as to the limitations on acceptability of any wastes, the Board of
Selectmen will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers,
nature of the wastewater treatment process, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant,
degree of treatability of wastes in the wastewater treatment plant, facilities discharge
permit, and other pertinent factors. Any person discharging industrial wastewaters
directly or indirectly into facilities of the Town that do not comply with this ordinance
may be subject to action by the Town, which action shall include, but not be limited to,
the withdrawal of permission to discharge wastewaters into facilities of the Town.
B. Any "spill" as defined in the Definitions shall be reported immediately to the Board of
Selectmen.
C. Any damages experienced by the Town as the result of a spill are considered a violation
of this ordinance and costs for repair, replacement and other associated costs are
recoverable under Section 27 of this ordinance.
D. Wastewaters and wastes considered to contain excessive constituents or characteristics
as determined by the Town and, therefore, shall be prohibited, include:
(1) Any wastewater containing toxic or poisonous liquids, gases, or solids in
excessive Quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes. Said toxic
pollutants are defined in standards, issued from time to time under Section
307(a) of the Acts.
(2) Any incompatible pollutant controlled by an industry in an amount or
concentration in excess of that allowed under standards or guidelines issued
from time to time pursuant to Section 304, 306 or 307 of the Act.
(3) Any wastewaters, liquid, or vapor having a temperature higher than 140
degrees F.
(4) Any wastewaters containing an increase in caustic alkalinity, calculated as
CaCO3 (calcium carbonate) in excess of 75 parts per million by weight, or in
volumes which may be excessive.
TOWN OF BOW
14912
(5) Any wastewaters having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5 or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damages or hazards to sewers,
structures, equipment, process or personnel at the wastewater works.
(6) Any wastewaters containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not,
in excess of 100 mg/1 or containing Substances which may solidify or become
viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees F and 140 degrees F. (0-60°).
(7) Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid,
solid or gas.
(8) Any solid or viscous substances in such quantities or of such size to be capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in the sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the wastewater works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass; rags, feathers, tar, plastics,
wood, un-ground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair, fleshing, entrails,
paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage
grinders.
(9) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4 horsepower (0.75
hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the Board of
Selectmen.
(10) Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or
concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
(11) Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar
objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine
requirement to such degree that any such material discharged to the public
sewer exceeds the Federal, State or Town limits established for such materials.
(12) Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing
substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by
the Board of Selectmen as necessary after treatment of the wastewater to meet
the requirements of the State, Federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for
such discharge to the receiving waters.
(13) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes in excessive amounts of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established in applicable State or Federal
regulations or by the Town.
(14) Any obnoxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public
nuisance.
SEWERS
14913
(15) Any wastewaters containing:
(a) An average concentration of suspended solids in excess of 300 milligrams
per liter (mg/1) or excessive dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to,
sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
(b) Materials which cause excessive discoloration (such as but not limited to,
dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).
(c) An average concentration of BOD in excess of 250 milligrams per liter
(mg/1) or material which causes unusual chemical oxygen demand, or
chlorine requirements.
(d) Materials in such concentration as to constitute "slugs" as defined herein.
(e) Materials which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the
wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amendable to treatment
only to such a limited degree that the waste water treatment plant effluent
cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
(f) Septic tank solids that are not diluted sufficiently to assure that all particles
will be carried freely under all flow conditions in facilities of the Town.
§ 149-14. Traps required.
Grease, oil and sand traps shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Board of Selectmen,
they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive
amounts or any flammable wastes, sand, and other harmful ingredients; except that such traps
shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All traps shall be of a type
and capacity approved by the Board of Selectmen and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil traps shall be constructed of
impervious materials, capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature.
They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable
covers which when bolted in place shall be gas-tight and water-tight.
§ 149-15. Trap maintenance required.
Where installed, all grease, oil and sand traps shall be maintained by the owner at his expense in
continuously efficient operation at all times.
TOWN OF BOW
14914
§ 149-16. Notification of change required.
A. The Board of Selectmen must be notified 45 days in advance by any person or persons
involved in:
(1) Proposed substantial change in volume or character of pollutants over that being
discharged into the treatment works at the time of issuance of this permit;
(2) Proposed new discharge into the treatment works of Pollutants from any source
which would be a new source as defined in Section 306 of the Act if such source
were discharging pollutants; or
(3) Proposed new discharge into the treatment works of pollutants from any source
which would be subject to Section 30 of the Act if it were discharging such
pollutants.
B. Any of the above increases in industrial waste discharge to the public sewer must be
approved by the NEFS & PCC.
§ 149-17. Control of discharge required.
A. If any wastewaters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the
public sewers, containing excessive or possessing excessive characteristics as defined
herein, the Board of Selectmen may:
(1) Reject the wastewaters or the wastes;
(2) Require that pretreatment of wastewaters or wastes be provided to modify
them to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; and/or
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge of the wastewaters or
the wastes; and/or
(4) Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the wastes.
B. If the Board of Selectmen permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the
design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject" to the review of
the Board of Selectmen and the NHWS & PCC.
§ 149-18. Preliminary treatment facility maintenance required.
Where preliminary treatment or monitoring facilities are provided for any waters or wastes
they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at
his expense.
SEWERS
14915
§ 149-19. Control structure required.
When required by the Board of Selectmen, any industry discharging to the facilities of the Town
may be required to perform such monitoring of its discharge as the Board of Selectmen may
reasonably require, including the installation, use and maintenance of monitoring equipment, the
keeping of records of the results of such monitoring, and the reporting of results of such
monitoring to the Board of Selectmen. Such records shall be made available by the Town to the
NEWS & PCC or the EPA upon request.
§ 149-20. Standard analysis methods required.
All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of waters and to which reference is
made in Sections 13 and 16 shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of
"Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", and shall be determined at
the control structure provided for in Section 19, or shall be determined upon suitable samples
taker at said control structure. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the
point at which the building sewer is connected.
§ 149-21. Applicant agreement required.
All applications to discharge any industrial wastewater, drainage, substances, or wastes directly
into any sewer under the control of the Town, or tributary thereto, shall be accompanied by an
agreement stating that the applicant agrees to abide by all ordinances and rules and regulations of
the Board of Selectmen, that the applicant will provide such works for the preliminary treatment
of the wastewater, drainage, substances or wastes as may be required by the Board of Selectmen,
and that the applicant will permit duly authorized representatives of the Board of Selectmen to
enter the premises of the industry to sample and measure wastewater, to inspect any monitoring
equipment, or to have access to any records as needed to check characteristics of the
wastewaters, when so directed by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 149-22. Analysis of industrial wastes.
Measurements and analysis of industrial wastes are to include the following list where
applicable, and any other pollutants as required by the Board of Selectmen. The analysis is to be
conducted in accordance with the methods prescribed in the latest edition of "Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater". If any item is not applicable, it shall be so stated
on the report of the measurements and the reason for deletion stated.
Physical Parameters:
Flow
pH
Temperature
Color
Specific Conductance
TOWN OF BOW
14916
Chemical and Biological Para Meters:
Total Solids
Total Volatile Solids Total Suspended Solids
Total Dissolved Solids
Acidity (as CaCO3)
Alkalinity (as CaCO3)
5-day BOD
COD
Oil and Grease
Chloride
Sulfate (as SO4)
Sulfide (as S)
Pnenols
NH3 (as N)
NO3 (as N)
NO2 (as N)
Kjeldahl Organic Nitrogen (as N)
Ortho-Phosphorous (as P)
Total Phosphorous (as P)
And the following Trace Elements:
Cr, Cu, Fe, Cd, Pb, Mn, Zn, F, As, Hg
§ 149-23. Annual report required.
Each individual user may be required to submit an annual report to the Board of Selectmen, on
the first of July each year, or such other time as designated by the Board of Selectmen containing
information as to the minimum, average and peak flows of industrial wastewater discharges
during the previous year and at the time or times designated by the Board of Selectmen
accompanied by designated analysis of wastewater samplings taken in an acceptable manner at
approved times during the flow measuring periods.
§ 149-24. Special agreements allowed.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or
agreements between the Board of Selectmen and any industrial concern whereby an industrial
waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Board of Selectmen for treatment,
provided that such agreements do not contravene any requirements of any existing Federal or
State laws and/or regulations promulgated there under, and are compatible with the User Charger
system in effect.
SEWERS
14917
§ 149-25. Septic tank waste.
Septic tank waste (septage) will not be accepted into the sewer system. All septage shall be
discharged at the City of Concord's wastewater treatment facility. Procedures for the disposal of
such wastes shall be in conformance with the operating policy of the City of Concord's sewage
treatment plant and disposal shall be accomplished under this policy.
§ 149-26. Dilution of wastes.
It shall be illegal to meet requirements of this Sewer Ordinance by diluting wastes in lieu of
proper treatment.
§ 149-27. Protection from damage stated.
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or
tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal
wastewater works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under
charge of disorderly conduct.
§ 149-28. Powers and authority of inspectors stated.
The Board of Selectmen and other duly authorized employees of the Town bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of
this ordinance.
§ 149-29. Penalties for violation.
The following procedure is set forth to deal with any violations of these ordinances:
A. Written notice of violation required. Any person found to be violating any provision of
this ordinance except Section 25 shall be served by the Town with written notice stating
the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violations.
B. Penalty stated. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in Section 149-29, paragraph A. shall be guilty of a violation and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding one hundred ($100) dollars
for each violation by individuals or five hundred ($500) dollars for each violation by
corporations. Each day in which such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate
violation.
TOWN OF BOW
14918
C. Liability for damages stated. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
ordinance shall become liable to the Town for any expense, loss or damage occasioned
the Town by reason of such violation. The expense, loss or damage shall be taken to be
the extent determined by a competent registered professional engineer determined by the
Board of Selectmen to be particularly skilled in the operation and maintenance of
wastewater collection and treatment works.
§ 149-28. Board of Selectmen powers.
The Board of Selectmen shall see that all provisions of the articles regulating or relating to
sewers or drains are enforced. The Board of Selectmen shall inspect all private drains within
public ways before the same are covered and shall keep a record of the result of said inspection
giving the name of the owner and of the occupant of the premises, the street and number, the
position of the inlet employed, the size of the drain, inclination of the same and the manner in
which it enters the main sewer, and shall perform such duties in the enforcement of the
provisions of said article.
§ 149-29. Industrial pretreatment standards and regulation.
A. All persons discharging wastes into Town wastewater works or into public sewers
connected to Town wastewater works, shall comply with applicable requirements of City
of Concord, Federal and State industrial pretreatment regulations (as amended).
B. Compliance with categorical pretreatment standards shall be achieved within three years
of the date such standard is effective, unless a shorter compliance time is specified in
the standard.
C. The Board of Selectmen may, after informal notice to the person discharging wastewater
to the public sewer, immediately halt or prevent any such discharge reasonably appearing
to present an imminent endangerment to the health and welfare of person, or any
discharge presenting, or which may present, an endangerment to the environment or
which threatens to interfere with operation of the public sewer or wastewater treatment
facilities. Actions which may be taken by the Town include ex parte temporary judicial
injunctive relief, entry on private Property to halt such discharge, blockage of a public
sewer to halt such discharge, or demand of specific action by the person.
D. The Board of Selectmen shall notify appropriate persons of applicable industrial
pretreatment standards and any applicable requirements under Section 204(d) and Section
405 of the Act and subtitles C and D of the Resource Conservation Recovery Act, as
amended (42 U.S.C. 4901 et seq.).
E. Monitoring and compliance. The Board of Selectmen shall, as necessary, sample and
analyze the wastewater discharges and contributing industries and conduct surveillance
and inspection activities to identify, independent of information supplied by such
persons, occasional and continuing non-compliance with industrial pretreatment
standards.
SEWERS
14919
F. Investigations. The Board of Selectmen shall investigate instances of non-compliance
with industrial pretreatment standards and requirements.
G. Public participation. The Town shall comply with the public participation requirements
of 40 CFR Part 25 in the enforcement of industrial pretreatment standards and
requirements.
H. Categorical permit amendment. Within 180 days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard, persons subject to such standards shall submit a permit
amendment application containing information required under applicable Federal and
State industrial pretreatment reporting regulations. Such information, as a minimum, shall
include:
(1) The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operators and
owners;
(2) A list of all environmental permits held by or for the facility;
(3) A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and Standard
Industrial Classification of the operations carried out at such facility;
(4) A schedule of actions to be taken to comply with the categorical standards;
(5) Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in
gallons per day, to the public sewer from regulated process streams and from
other streams;
(6) An identification of the industrial pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process; and
(7) An analysis identifying the nature and concentration of pollutants in the
discharge.
(8) The Board of Selectmen may require additional information to be included in
such application.
I. Permit amendment required. Industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards may not discharge wastewater directly or indirectly to Town wastewater works
after the compliance date of such standards unless a categorical permit amendment is
issued by the Board of Selectmen.
J. Categorical compliance report. Within 90 days after the date for final compliance by
existing industrial users with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case
of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the
public sewer, industrial users shall submit a report indicating the nature and concentration
of pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process(es) governed by pretreatment
TOWN OF BOW
14920
standards and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units. Such report
shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance practices or pretreatment is
necessary. Such industrial users shall also submit during the months of June and
December, unless required more frequently, a report indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the discharge and violations of applicable categorical
pretreatment standards. Additional requirements for such periodic reports may be
imposed by the Board of Selectmen.
K. Slug discharge notification. Industrial users shall immediately notify the Board of
Selectmen of any slug discharged by such user.
L. Signature for reports. Reports submitted under this Section shall be signed by an
authorized representative. An authorized representative may be:
(1) A principal executive officer of at least a level of vice president, if the industrial
user is a corporation;
(2) A general partner or the proprietor, if the industrial user is a partnership of sole
proprietorship; or
(3) A duly authorized representative of either of the individuals designated above, if
such representative is responsible for the overall operation 01 the subject facility.
M. Monitoring reports. Industrial users subject to the reporting requirements under this
Section shall maintain records of information resulting from monitoring activities
required to prepare such reports. Such records shall include for each sample:
(1) The date, exact place, method and time of sampling and the names of person or
persons taking the sample;
(2) The dates analyses were performed;
(3) Who performed the analyses;
(4) The analytical techniques and methods used; and
(5) The results of such analyses
Such records shall be maintained for a minimum of three years and shall be made
available for inspection and copying by the Board of Selectmen.
N. Public Information. Information and data submitted to the Board of Selectmen
under this Section relating to wastewater discharge characteristics shall be
available to the public without restriction. Other such information shall be
available to the public at least to the extent provided by 40 CFR Section 2.302.
SEWERS
14921
O. Temporary exclusion. The Board of Selectmen may temporarily exclude industrial
wastes from one or more industrial users, whether pretreated or not, if necessary or
helpful in determining the effects of such wastes upon City of Concord wastewater
works.
P. Industry permits. Effective 90 calendar days after this provision is adopted by the
Town, the discharge of industrial wastewater by an industry to Town, or to public sewer
system connected to City of Concord wastewater works is prohibited without a permit.
Such permits may be obtained by submission of a completed permit application form to
the Board of Selectmen no later than 45 days before the effective date of such
prohibition.
Q. Pretreatment program participation. All participants seeking to discharge wastewater
to the Town wastewater works shall be required to participate in the City of Concord's
pretreatment program.
Article II
Sewer User Billing
§ 149-30. Billings.
The Town of Bow Finance Office issues a quarterly bill detailing charges from the previous
quarter. The quarters to be billed are as follows: January 1 - March 31, April 1 - June 30,
July 1 - September 30 and October 1 - December 31.
§ 149-31. Determination of charges.
The fees and charges for sewer users are found in Chapter 124, Section 124-9, of this Code.
§ 149-32. Past due bills.
A. All sewer user bills past due will be charged interest at a rate of 12% per annum.
B. If a payment is delinquent more for more than twelve (12) months from the time of
billing, the Tax Collector shall file sworn statements showing such delinquencies with the
Tax Collector’s Office. Such statement shall be deemed as notice of a lien upon the real
estate for which the sewer service is supplied.
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
15401
Chapter 154
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Article I
Town Right of Way
§ 154-1. Purpose.
§ 154-2. Definitions.
§ 154-3. Regulations.
§ 154-4. Permission requests.
§ 154-5. Existing structures.
§ 154-6. Determination of the Right of Way.
§ 154-7. Mailboxes and temporary signs.
§ 154-8. Enforcement.
Article II
Excavations
§ 154-9. Authority.
§ 154-10. Permit required.
§ 154-11. Fees.
§ 154-12. Bond or deposit.
§ 154-13. Insurance.
§ 154-14. Indemnification.
§ 154-15. Departments to be notified.
§ 154-16. Inspection required.
§ 154-17. Excavation limits.
§ 154-18. Restoration.
§ 154-19. Safety measures.
TOWN OF BOW
15402
§ 154-20. General conditions.
Article III
Traffic Control
§154-21. Traffic control requirements.
Article IV
Snow Removal
§154-23. Snow removal.
§154-24. Penalty.
Article V
Deposit of Debris in Town Right of Way
§154-25. Deposit of Debris.
§154-26. Penalty.
of way, or placing any items on sidewalks or rights of way
[HISTORY. Adopted by the Board of Selectmen on 10-8-2002. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
Article I
Town Right of Way
§ 154-1. Purpose. To govern the placing of objects or structures, or the conduct of activity
within the public right-of-way, in order to lessen the danger to the traveling public, facilitate the
maintenance of storm and surface water drainage systems, regulate underground and above
ground utilities and protect the community's investment in public streets and roads.
§ 154-2. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article
chapter shall be as follows:
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS - Shall mean the duly appointed director of the Department
of Public Works or his/her duly authorized representative.
RIGHT-OF-WAY - Shall mean the area of land which constitutes a public way under the
provisions of NH RSA 229:1, extending from the property line on one side of the right-of-way to
the property line on the other side of the right-of-way.
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
15403
SELECTMEN - Shall mean the duly elected Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow.
STRUCTURE - Shall mean any material placed or affixed to the land, including buildings, walls,
fences, stones, signs, mailboxes, culverts and catch basins.
TOWN - Shall mean the Town of Bow, New Hampshire.
§ 154-3. Regulations.
A. No structures or objects including permanent or portable buildings, signs, lights,
displays, fences, walls, or sanitary facilities may be placed or erected on, over or under
the highway right-of-way without express permission of the Board of Selectmen or their
designee.
B. No construction, excavation, clearing, dredging for installation of drainage or
underground utilities may be conducted on, over or under a public right-of-way without
express permission of the Board of Selectmen or their designee.
C. No temporary use or blockage of a street, road or other public way for parades, street
fairs, etc. shall be permitted without the express permission of the Board of Selectmen.
D. The installation, construction and maintenance of utility poles and wires shall be
governed by the provisions of NH RSA 231:159 et seq.
§ 154-4. Permission requests.
Any request for a use governed by the Selectmen's permission shall be in writing directed to the
Board. The Board shall solicit and accept comment from Town Departments including the Town
Manager, Police, Fire, the Director of Public Works and the Code Enforcement Officer. In
considering an application, the Selectmen shall be governed by the general premise that no use
should ordinarily be allowed within the public right-of-way, and no activity which compromises
safety, impedes free flow of traffic, or could result in increased municipal expenditure should be
permitted. No easement is created or inferred by the granting of a request but a revocable license
for use thereof.
§ 154-5. Existing structures.
Structures or uses in place as of September 1, 2002 may, but need not, apply for permission from
the Selectmen to remain. In the event that permission is not applied for, the structure or use shall
be permitted to remain provided that they are not deemed to be a danger to the public. The
Director of Public Works shall determine whether a structure is a danger to the public by the
following criteria:
TOWN OF BOW
15404
A. The structure is not maintained in a safe manner.
B. The structure is so located that it impedes snow removal operations.
C. The structure is so located that it impedes free flow of traffic or impedes safe sight
distance.
D. The structure is so located that it impedes the access to public property. The Director of
Public Works shall have the concurrence of the Police Chief in this determination.
E. That the owner accepts all liability that may arise because of the said structure and agrees
to indemnify the Town for all resulting damage or injury because of the presence of the
structure in the right-of-way.
F. That the owner agrees to remove the structure at his expense if the structure is deemed to
be a danger to the public or is impeding highway or utilities work. If an owner fails to
remove such item upon notice, the Director of Public Works may be directed to remove
same and the owner shall have no claim against the Town for reimbursement or loss
caused by the removal and disposal of said structure; further, the owner shall be billed for
the cost of removal.
G. Any person notified by the Director of Public Works to remove a structure or object from
the right-of-way may apply to the Board of Selectmen for a permit, provided they have
not already been denied such permission.
§ 154-6. Determination of the Right-of-Way.
The Director of Public Works, upon consultation of plans available and discussion with the
Town Engineer, shall be responsible for determining the location of the Right-of-Way line. Any
concerned property owner may submit, at his/her expense, a survey plan by a licensed land
surveyor to assist the Director of Public Works in his determination. In doubtful situations, the
Director of Public Works may require the installation of permanent bound markers.
§ 154-7. Mailboxes and temporary signs.
A. Mailboxes.
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, an individual may erect and place
a receptacle for receipt of U.S. Mail and motor or rural delivery of daily or
weekly newspapers without permission of the Selectmen. All such installations
shall be sufficiently off the traveled way so as to assure public safety and
facilitate snow removal. Design criteria of the U.S. Postal Service shall be
adhered to with respect to size and placement of mailboxes. Exhibit A illustrates
mailbox placement that meets the requirements of both the U.S. Postal Service
and the Town of Bow.
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
15405
(2) The Town assumes no liability with respect to loss or damage to mailboxes or
newspaper receptacles placed in the right-of-way unless such loss or damage to a
mailbox is the result of intentional or willful conduct, or gross negligence. For
the Town to assume liability, the mailbox must display tangible physical
evidence of having been actually struck by a snowplow, mower, or other Town
vehicle performing official duties. Mailboxes that have been pushed over by
snow or other causes but do not show the mark of a strike will be the sole
responsibility of the property owner. If the Town acknowledges a struck
mailbox, the Town will, at the option of the mailbox owner, install a generic
rural mailbox on a metal post or issue a check to the mailbox owner in the
amount of thirty dollars ($30.00).
B. Temporary Signs.
(1) Signs of a temporary nature, such as yard sale signs, political campaign signs, or
real estate signs, may be placed within the Town Right-of-Way provided that
they are erected far enough away from the shoulder maintenance area so as to not
hinder a snowplow, mower, or other Right-of-Way maintenance work, and
provided that they do not constitute a safety hazard such as restricting the line of
sight.
(2) Any sign impeding maintenance or constituting a hazard will be immediately
removed and stored at the Highway Garage for a period of thirty days, after
which it will be destroyed if not claimed by the owner. Before a temporary sign
may be emplaced within the Town Right of Way, permission must also be
obtained from the owner of the land abutting the right of way at that point. An
abutting property owner who has not granted such permission shall have the right
to remove a temporary sign from the right of way.
(3) Political campaign signs shall not be erected prior to the end of the filing period
for office and must be removed within ten (10) days after election day.
(4) Yard, garage, or rummage sale signs shall not be erected more than seven days
prior to the sale and must be removed the day after the sale.
(5) Real estate “lead-in” or “arrow” signs must meet all of the above criteria and
shall be immediately removed when the property is sold or when the listing has
expired.
(6) Temporary signs shall not be attached to, nor supported in any way, by any
Town sign emplaced within the R.O.W., nor shall they be affixed to any utility
pole per NH R.S.A. 236:75. Signs displayed in violation of this prohibition will
be immediately removed and destroyed.
TOWN OF BOW
15406
(7) Town Land: The permitting of temporary signs in the Town’s R.O.W. does not
extend to Town lands and buildings. No signs other than those directed by the
Board of Selectmen shall be displayed on Town lands and buildings.
§ 154-8. Enforcement.
A. The Board of Selectmen by their designee, the Town Manager, shall be responsible for
administration and enforcement of this article Removal of items within the right-of-way
shall be done at the direction of the Town Manager.
B. The Fire Department and Police Department shall report to the Town Manager any
structure within the right-of-way erected in violation of this ordinance, or any preexisting
structure they deem to be a danger to the public.
Article II
Excavations
[HISTORY. Amended by Board of Selectmen on 9-24-13.]
§ 154-9. Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by RSA 236:9-11, New Hampshire
Revised Statutes Annotated, as amended.
§ 154-10. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate any part of the streets, sidewalks or public places
of the Town for the purpose of putting down or laying gas or water pipes, cable television or
telephone lines, cellar or other drains or for any other purpose without first having obtained a
permit from the Bow Public Works Director.
§ 154-11. Fees.
The fees for the excavation permit are found in Chapter 124, Fee Schedule, of this Code.
§ 154-12. Bond or deposit.
Prior to the issuance of any permit required by this article, the Public Works Director shall
require the applicant to provide a bond, with corporate surety, payable to the Town of Bow, NH,
in such amount as may be considered by the Public Works Director to be adequate to cover the
costs and expenses of filling the authorized excavation and restoration of the surface of the place
excavated to as good condition as it was prior to the excavation. In lieu of a bond, an applicant
may provide a cash deposit for this purpose. The bond or cash deposit shall be held by the Town
of Bow for a period of one (1) year following the acceptance of the project by the Public Works
Director.
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
15407
§ 154-13. Insurance.
Prior to the issuance of a permit under this article, the applicant shall furnish a certificate of
insurance naming the Town of Bow, NH as certificate holder, with limits of coverage at a
minimum of general liability - $1,000,000; automobile liability - combined single loss limit
(CSL) of $1,000,000 and evidence of worker's compensation coverage. Evidence of coverage
shall also be furnished for all subcontractors. If the policy is changed or canceled during the
policy period, the policy shall provide that written notice will be given to the Board of
Selectmen of the Town of Bow, NH at least fifteen (15) days prior to the effective date of such
change or cancellation.
§ 154-14. Indemnification.
The permit holder shall fully indemnify and save harmless the Town of Bow, NH from all
claims for damage or injury whatsoever that may arise from the encumbrance, obstruction,
occupation, or use of said highway, and the permit holder shall be accountable for all damage
that may occur on account of said encumbrance, obstruction, occupation, or use of the aforesaid
highway, or that may arise from the obstruction or use of any public sewer or water facility in
connection with the work contemplated under the permit.
§ 154-15. Departments to be notified.
The Department of Public Works (603-228-2207), Police Department (603-228-0581), and
DIG SAFE (1-888-344-7233) shall be notified in writing at least seventy-two hours prior to any
excavation being started. In the event of an emergency excavation, DIG SAFE, the Public Works
Director, and the Police Department shall be verbally notified at the time, and the written
excavation permit shall be applied for no more than forty-eight (48) hours after the work is
completed.
§ 154-16. Inspection required.
All projects shall be inspected by the Public Works Director, or his designee. The Public Works
Director shall be notified at all stages of the work for the purpose of inspection. All work
performed under the permit shall be to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director or his
designee.
§ 154-17. Excavation limits.
No opening or excavation in any street shall extend beyond the center line of the street before
being backfilled, and the surface of the street must be passable to traffic. No more than three
hundred (300') feet measured longitudinally shall be opened in any street at one time, except by
special permission of the Public Works Director. A minimum of one (1) lane of traffic shall be
provided on all streets at all times. The minimum width for temporary traffic lanes is eleven (11')
feet. Access shall be provided to all places of business at all times.
TOWN OF BOW
15408
§ 154-18. Restoration.
A. Excavated material shall be replaced or backfilled in layers or courses not to exceed nine
(9") inches in compacted thicknesses; and shall be compacted at or near optimum
moisture content using pneumatic tampers, vibratory compactors, or other approved
means. The material shall be compacted to not less than 95%. If unsuitable for backfill,
excavated material shall be replaced with granular backfill as specified in the "Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, State of New Hampshire Department
of Public Works and Highways." Water shall be uniformly applied during compaction in
the amount necessary for proper consolidation, but puddling will not be allowed. The
compacted backfill material shall be laid to within twelve (12") inches of the adjacent
road surface; nine (9") inches of crushed bank run shall then be compacted in place. An
approved bituminous mix material shall then be placed and carefully graded and rolled
to the adjacent pavement grade as a temporary patch. After suitable exposure to traffic
compaction, as determined by the Public Works Director, with a minimum of thirty (30)
days, the pavement shall be sawed or cut in a clean manner on either side of the trench
to provide a two (2') foot minimum overlap of the final patch on the undisturbed
material. Within the sawed limits, the existing and temporary material shall be removed
and replaced with a matching depth of asphaltic concrete. Edges of the trench cut shall
be coated with an epoxy or bitumastic binder before the base course is applied. This
final application shall contain a minimum of two (2") inch base course and one (1") inch
of wearing course, and will be laid and compacted to meet exactly the existing pavement
edge.
B. The Public Works Director reserves the right to restore the highway or cause the same to
be restored under his direction, and the grantees or parties to whom this permit is
granted shall reimburse the Town for any and all liability and expense suffered by
reason of such work.
§ 154-19. Safety measures.
From the time that any excavation is begun pursuant to a permit required by this article until
completion of the work and restoration of the surface of the place excavated, the permit holder
shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of adequate safeguards to protect
persons, animals, and property from dangers directly or indirectly arising from all work done
with respect to such excavation, and the following safeguards, among others which may be
necessary or appropriate, shall be mandatory: warning signs, adequate illumination at night and
during other periods of darkness or poor visibility and enclosures of the place of excavation by
guards, barricades, rope, or other suitable fixtures.
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
15409
§ 154-20. General conditions.
A. Property or street line monuments, survey reference points, and permanent survey bench
marks shall not be removed or disturbed, unless specifically permitted in writing.
B. Shade trees shall not be cut down, trimmed, or otherwise injured.
C. Advertisements, notices, and signs shall not be displayed on or attached to any barricade
or fence in any highway.
D. The highway shall be left in as good condition of repair and cleanliness at the expiration
of the permit as existed when said permit was granted.
§ 154-21. Penalties.
Any person found to be in violation with the provisions of this article may be fined not more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.) for each violation.
Article III
Traffic Control
[HISTORY. Amended by Board of Selectmen on 9-24-13.]
§154-22. Traffic control requirements.
The Chief of Police of the Town may at his/her discretion require that traffic control people
(flag people) are employed to safely control traffic by any construction company, utility
company, or any other company or individual doing any work on private or public property that
requires the placing or parking of any equipment on any portion of any road in the Town,
which in the opinion of the Chief of Police constitute a hazard to the general public. The cost of
such traffic control people shall be borne by the company or individual required to hire them.
The Chief of Police may require the use of detailed police officers on heavily traveled arterial
roads, and the chief may approve the use of cones on lightly traveled roads.
Article IV
Snow Removal
§154-23. Snow removal.
A. No person shall permit or allow snow removed from their driveway or parking lot to be
plowed or placed onto or across any road in the Town at any time.
B. No person shall permit or allow snow removed from their driveway, parking lot or
property to be plowed or placed or deposited onto any Town property, nor shall any snow
removed be placed or deposited in any manner that would hinder access to any Town
property.
TOWN OF BOW
15410
§154-24. Penalty.
Any person found to be in violation with the provisions of this article may be fined not more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.) for each violation.
Article V
Deposit of Debris in Town Right of Way
[HISTORY. Amended by Board of Selectmen on 5-14-19 by Ord. No. 1-04.]
§154-25. Deposit of Debris.
No person shall place, throw, leave, in any way deposit or permit to be deposited, or permit to
remain any dirt, leaves, rubbish, litter, debris or material of any kind upon any street, sidewalk,
right of way, drainageway, or public ground in the Town of Bow
§154-26. Penalty.
of way, or placing any items on sidewalks or rights of way
Any person found to be in violation with the provisions of § 154-25 may be fined not more than
one hundred dollars ($100.) for each violation.
5-1-19
STREET NUMBERING AND NAMING
15701
Chapter 157
STREET NUMBERING AND NAMING
§157-1. Purpose.
§157-2. Parties affected.
§157-3. Numbering system.
§157-4. Numbering requirements and procedures.
§157-5. Naming of streets, roads and private ways.
[History: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow 9-10-2013. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
§157-1. Purpose.
A. To establish a uniform system of numbering buildings and establishing street and mailing
addresses within the Town of Bow.
B. To provide a more expedient response from all emergency service agencies, such as
police, fire, ambulance or other rescue services.
C. To promote efficiency in locating buildings within the Town of Bow for the delivery of
utilities, mail, and other services.
D. To provide a uniform and standard system for naming the public or private ways, streets of
the Town of Bow.
E. For the purposes of this Article, “addressable structure” shall be defined as: Any buildings
currently occupied, or which in the future may be occupied, to which emergency services
may be dispatched.
§157-2. Parties affected.
A. Properties and primary structures on any new public or private way, street or road.
B. Any new addressable structure built on an existing new public or private way, street or
road will require the renumbering of all addressable structures and properties on that street
in accordance with the numbering system detailed in §157-3.
C. Any public or private way, street or road that is renamed by the Board of Selectmen will
result in the renumbering of all addressable structures and properties on that public or
private way, street or road in accordance with the numbering system detailed in §157-3.
TOWN OF BOW
15702
§157-3. Numbering system.
The numbering system has been established by the Board of Selectmen upon recommendation of
the New Hampshire Department of Safety, Division of Emergency Services and Communications.
The numbering system is based on the following processes:
A. The starting point of each public or private way, street or road is determined by its
primary intersection, and the numbering begins at each public or private way, street or
road’s starting point.
B. All addressable structures for which the access point is on the right side of the public or
private way, street or road shall have an even number. All addressable structures for
which the access point is on the left side of the public or private way, street or road shall
have an odd number. Unused numbers shall be reserved for future use to prevent the need
to renumber in the future.
C. One even or odd number shall be assigned to every 50-foot increment from the starting
point of the public or private way, street or road.
D. All public or private way, street or road numbering will be based upon the most current
Addressing Standards Guide prepared by New Hampshire Department of Safety, Division
of Emergency Services and Communications.
§157-4. Numbering requirements and procedures.
All primary structures shall be required to display the assigned number in the manner described in
this section.
A. All existing and new addressable structures shall use only the number assigned by the
Board of Selectmen.
B. All numbers shall be affixed, either vertically or horizontally, to a post or other fixture, such
as a tree or mailbox, but not to a utility pole. With the exception of numbers affixed to a
building as in paragraph C, below, or to a mailbox as in paragraph D, below, numbers shall
be displayed at a height of between 4 to 8 feet from the elevation of the traveled roadway.
If the numbers are affixed to a post or other fixture, such fixture shall be located on the
property between 4 to 8 feet from either side of the driveway or access, and shall be no
closer than 2 feet from the road right-of-way.
C. As an alternative, where an addressable structure is visible from the traveled roadway, the
numbers may be placed on the building in an unobstructed location, so as to be easily
visible from the traveled roadway from both directions of travel. Such numbers shall
conform to all other requirements of this section.
STREET NUMBERING AND NAMING
15703
D. Mailboxes may be installed pursuant to US Postal Service regulations, as long as the
mailbox or any part of its structure does not project into the traveled roadway or interfere
with travel, road maintenance, and snow removal. In situations in which a mailbox is
placed on the side of the traveled roadway opposite the primary structure, the numbers must
be displayed on a separate post at the driveway or access to the primary structure. To
eliminate confusion for emergency services and others, the street number shall be displayed
only on the side of the traveled roadway on which the primary structure is located.
E. All property owners are responsible to maintain their street numbers so as to be visible year
round. All numbers shall be placed so as to be visible and legible from both directions of
travel.
F. All numbers shall be displayed in Arabic form (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9).
G. All numbers shall be at least 4 inches high, with the exception of numbers affixed to a
mailbox, which shall be at least 3” high. Numbers shall be reflective or shall be visible at
all hours of the day and in all weather conditions throughout the year.
H. All existing numbers shall be changed to conform to the provisions of this Chapter. No
person shall display any number that may be confused with or conflict with the number
assigned by the Board of Selectmen (except for those numbers on signs that identify the
year in which a historic house was established or built).
§157-5. Naming of streets, roads and private ways.
A. Under the provisions of RSA 231:133, any future requests to name a public or private way,
street or road shall be first submitted to the Board of Selectmen for approval. The Board of
Selectmen shall consult with the Police Chief, Fire Chief, and Town of Bow E911 Liaison
prior to approving any name.
B. The Planning Board, while reviewing an application for a subdivision that will result in a
public or private way, street or road, shall refer the subdivision applicant to the Board of
Selectmen for approval of the proposed public or private way, street or road name(s).
C. Pursuant to RSA 231:133, the Board of Selectmen shall not approve any name that is
“confusingly similar to any such existing name, or which otherwise might delay the
locating of any address in an emergency.”
TAX INCREMENT FINANCE DISTRICTS
15801
Chapter 158
TAX INCREMENT FINANCE DISTRICTS
Article I
Authority to Establish
§ 158-1. Authority.
Article II
Bow Business Corridor Tax Increment Finance District
§ 158-2. Establishment.
§ 158-3. District Administrator.
§ 158-4. District Advisory Board.
Article III
South Bow Tax Increment Finance District
§ 158-5. Establishment.
§ 158-6. District Administrator.
§ 158-7. District Advisory Board.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow 3-12-2019.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I
Authority
§ 158-1. Authority.
The authority to establish one or more development districts is found in Chapter 50, Economic
Development and Revitalization Districts, of this Code.
5-1-19
TOWN OF BOW
15802
Article II
Bow Business Corridor Tax Increment Finance District
§ 158-2. Establishment.
The Annual Town Meeting voted to adopt and establish the Bow Business Corridor Tax
Increment Finance District dated December, 2017. [Adopted by the Annual Town Meeting
3-14-2018 as Art. 23.]
§ 158-3. District Administrator
The Board of Selectmen, or designee, will serve as District Administrator and will be an exofficio
member of the Advisory Board.
§ 158-4. District Advisory Board.
A. The District Advisory Board shall include three members who represent owners or
occupants of real property located within the District boundaries; one member of the Bow
Business Development Commission; and one member of the public.
B. Members shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen for a term of three (3) years with
vacancies being filled by the Board of Selectmen for an unexpired term. The initial
appointments shall have staggered term expirations.
C. Should the owner or occupant status of the an appointed Advisory Board member change,
the member shall resign from the position on the Advisory Board.
D. The Advisory Board shall perform the following functions:
(1) Meet annually, or as scheduled by the District Administrator, not more than
quarterly.
(2) Review compliance with the adopted Bow Business Corridor TIF District Financing
and Development Plan.
(3) Review the annual report, and financial data, as required by RSA 162-K:11, and
make a report to the Board of Selectmen.
(4) Review and consult with the District Administrator regarding maintenance,
operations, construction and development within the District.
(5) Make recommendations to the Board of Selectmen in the event of changes to
legislation, or should modifications to the Bow Business Corridor TIF District
Finance and Development Plan be suggested.
5-1-19
TAX INCREMENT FINANCE DISTRICTS
15803
Article III
South Bow Tax Increment Finance District
§ 158-5. Establishment.
The Annual Town Meeting voted to adopt and establish the South Bow Tax Increment Finance
District and adopt the Development Plan for the South Bow TIF District. [Adopted by the
Annual Town Meeting 3-13-2019 as Art. 14.]
§ 158-6. District Administrator
The Annual Town Meeting voted to designate the Board of Selectmen as the District
Administrator and to authorize the Board of Selectmen to appoint a five-member Advisory
Board for the South Bow TIF. [Adopted by the Annual Town Meeting 3-13-2019 as Art. 15.]
§ 158-7. District Advisory Board.
A. The District Advisory Board shall include three members who represent owners or
occupants of real property located within the District boundaries; one member of the Bow
Business Development Commission; and one member of the public.
B. Members shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen for a term of three (3) years with
vacancies being filled by the Board of Selectmen for an unexpired term. The initial
appointments shall have staggered term expirations.
C. Should the owner or occupant status of the appointed Advisory Board member change,
the member shall resign from the position on the Advisory Board.
D. The Advisory Board shall perform the following functions:
(1) Meet annually, or as scheduled by the District Administrator, not more than
quarterly.
(2) Review compliance with the adopted Bow Business Corridor TIF District Financing
and Development Plan.
(3)Review the annual report, and financial data, as required by RSA 162-K:11, and
make a report to the Board of Selectmen.
(4) Review and consult with the District Administrator regarding maintenance,
operations, construction and development within the District.
5-1-19
TOWN BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS
15901 3/8/2017
Chapter 159
TOWN BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS
Article I
General Provisions
§ 159-1. Definitions.
§ 159-1.1. Compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
§ 159-1.2. Liquor liability insurance.
Article II
Bow Municipal Building
§ 159-2. Use of Municipal Building meeting rooms.
§ 159-2.1. Hours and days of use.
§ 159-3. Use regulations.
Article III
Bow Community Building and Bandstand
§ 159-4. Use of Community Building and Bandstand.
§ 159-5. Rental.
§ 159-6. Use regulations.
§ 159-6.1. Posting of signs at bandstand.
Article IV
Old Town Hall
§ 159-7. Use of Old Town Hall.
§ 159-8. Rental.
§ 159-9. Use regulations.
Article V
Bow Bog Meeting House
§ 159-10. Use of Bow Bog Meeting House.
§ 159-11. Rental.
§ 159-12. Use regulations.
[HISTORY. Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow 4-3-1987. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
TOWN OF BOW
15902 3/8/2017
Article I
General Provisions
[Added 6-30-15 by Board of Selectmen Ord. No. 15-06.]
§ 159-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases used herein shall have the following
meanings:
• BOW COMMUNITY INTEREST GROUPS AND ORGANIZATIONS -
Groups/organizations, based in Bow, devoted to meeting the educational, social, or
recreational needs and the development and betterment of Bow residents. 50% of the
group/organization members must be residents of Bow.
• DESIGNATED BOW ORGANIZATIONS - Organizations as designated by the Board of
Selectmen, including Bow Community Men's Club, Rotary Club of Bow, Bow Garden
Club, Bow Fire Department Ladies Auxiliary, Bow Young at Heart Club, Bow Open
Spaces, Bow Athletic Club, Bow Pioneers Snowmobile Club, Bow Soccer Club, Bow
Youth Football, Boy Scout Troop 75, Bow Girl Scouts, Marine Corp League, and the
Bow Booster Club. [Amended by Selectmen 9-8-15 and 2-9-16.]
• INDIVIDUAL BOW RESIDENT(S) - Domiciled resident(s) of the Town of Bow, New
Hampshire.
• NON-BOW GROUPS AND ORGANIZATIONS/INDIVIDUALS -
Groups/organizations not based in Bow and individuals who are not a resident of Bow.
§ 159-1.1. Compliance with applicable laws and regulations. Persons or groups reserving any
Town building or facility shall comply with all laws and regulations of the State of New
Hampshire, and departments, boards, agencies, and commissions which may be applicable to the
Premises, including without limitation, fire control laws and regulations, laws and rules
concerning the serving and consumption of alcohol, and shall also comply with all applicable
Town ordinances and with any rules and regulations issued by the Bow Police Department.
§ 159-1.2. Liquor liability insurance. If alcoholic beverages are to be served and consumed in
the Community Building or Old Town Hall, the organization or individual renting these facilities
must provide evidence of liquor liability coverage. The organization or individual shall name the
Town of Bow as an additional covered party by endorsement and the organization or individual
shall provide notice to the Town of Bow of proof of insurance in the form of a certificate of
insurance at least ten (10) business days in advance of the event. [Added by Board of Selectmen
2-15-17 by Ord. No. 17-03]
TOWN BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS
15903 3/8/2017
Article II
Bow Municipal Building
[Amended by Board of Selectmen by Ord. No. 15-06 on 6-30-15. Amended by Board of
Selectmen by Ord. No. 17-02, 2-15-2017.]
§ 159-2. Use of Municipal Building meeting rooms.
It is the intent of the Board of Selectmen to permit use of the meeting rooms at the Bow
Municipal Building on a not-to-interfere basis with official municipal activities. Therefore, the
use of the meeting rooms will be limited to:
A. Town of Bow municipal government bodies or departments. The Town of Bow shall
always have precedence for use of the facility at any time and reserves the right to void
any reservation by other parties at any time. The Town will not exercise this right except
in instances where the greater public good will be served, such as the unexpected need to
open an emergency shelter, or when a Town-sponsored event for the entire community
requires the use of the facility.
B. Bow School District bodies performing necessary, required duties.
C. Designated Bow Organizations.
D. Bow Community Interest Groups/Organizations.
§ 159-2.1. Hours and days of use.
The use of Municipal Building meeting rooms shall be limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to
11:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Exceptions to these hours and days may be approved on a
case to case basis by the Town Manager.
§ 159-3. Use regulations.
A. Damage. The user shall be responsible for all damages done to the premises.
B. Alcohol. The consumption of alcohol anywhere on the property is prohibited.
C. Smoking. Smoking is prohibited anywhere inside the Municipal Building.
TOWN OF BOW
15904 3/8/2017
Article III
Bow Community Building and Bandstand
[Amended by Board of Selectmen by Ord. No. 15-06, 6-30-2015.]
§ 159-4. Use of Community Building and Bandstand.
It is the intent of the Board of Selectmen to permit use of the Bow Community Building and
Bandstand on a not-to-interfere basis with official municipal activities. Therefore, the use of the
Bow Community Building and Bandstand will be limited to:
A. Town of Bow municipal government bodies or departments. The Town of Bow shall
always have precedence for use of the facility at any time and reserves the right to void
any reservation by other parties at any time. The Town will not exercise this right except
in instances where the greater public good will be served, such as the unexpected need to
open an emergency shelter, or when a Town-sponsored event for the entire community
requires the use of the facility.
B. Bow School District bodies performing necessary, required duties.
C. Designated Bow Organizations
D. Bow Community Interest Groups/Organizations
E. Individual Bow Residents
F. Non-Bow Organizations/Individuals
§ 159-5. Rental.
A. Prior to use, a reservation must be made with the Director of Parks and Recreation and a
written rental agreement must be executed.
B. Rental limit. The facility may not be reserved for more than two consecutive calendar
days. Designated Bow Organizations and Bow Community Interest
Groups/Organizations may schedule multiple events throughout a calendar year,
depending upon availability. Renters must specify a beginning time and an ending time
and this time period must include any set-up and clean-up time in addition to the time of
the actual event. The rental fees are established by the Board of Selectmen (Chapter 124,
Fee Schedule, of this Code.)
C. Security Deposit. Individual Bow Residents and Non-Bow Organizations/Individuals
shall pay a Security Deposit established by the Board of Selectmen (Chapter 124, Fee
Schedule, of this Code), refundable after inspection of the facility after the event has been
concluded. The deposit is subject to forfeiture, all or in part, if it is necessary to repair
any damages to the facility or to engage town staff or commercial firms to clean the
facility.
TOWN BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS
15905 3/8/2017
§ 159-6. Use regulations. [Amended by Board of Selectmen by Ord. No. 17-02, 2-15-2017.]
A. Parking. Automobiles shall be parked in the Bow Community Building parking lot on
the Town Pond side only; any additional cars may be parked on the Knox Road side of
the Bandstand lot only. No cars may be parked on the fire station side of the Community
Building. That parking area is reserved for use by firefighters responding to calls or
training meetings.
B. Decorations. Decorations shall be emplaced in the Community Building and/or the
Bandstand in a manner that does not alter the facilities in any way. The use of nails,
staples, or any other fasteners which cause damage are specifically prohibited.
C. Cleaning. The renter shall be responsible for returning the facility to the same condition
it was in prior to the beginning of each use. Tables shall be cleaned and tables and chairs
returned to their proper storage areas. Trash must be removed, decorations taken down,
Bandstand floor swept, Community Building floor swept and wet-mopped, and
everything put back in its proper place. Lights should be turned off and windows and
doors shut and secured at the Bow Community Building following use. Trash must be
removed and put in the dumpster. If renters are unable to attend to the clean-up
responsibilities, renters shall inform the Bow Parks and Recreation Department and make
arrangements for clean-up. Water (both inside and outside) must be turned off. Failure to
fully comply may result in forfeiture of the security deposit.
D. Yard Sales and Fundraisers. In the event a yard sale or fundraiser is held, no items or
trash shall be deposited or left in or about the Bow Bandstand, Bow Community
Building, its parking lot, the dumpster, or clothing collection boxes. Renters shall not fill
the dumpster with unsold yard sale/fundraiser items but shall instead remove them from
the premises for disposal.
E. Serving and consumption of alcohol. If alcoholic beverages are to be served and
consumed in the Community Building, all renters must provide proof of liquor liability
insurance accordance with the provisions of § 159-1.2. of this Chapter. Renters will also
be required to provide evidence that all State of New Hampshire requirements have been
met and may be required to bear the cost of hiring at least one paid police officer for the
function. No alcoholic beverages will be allowed outside of the building. No alcohol
possession or consumption is allowed on the Bandstand property.
§ 159-6.1. Posting of signs at bandstand. [Amended by Board of Selectmen 10-14-2014, Ord.
No. 14-04]
A. The posting of signs on the bandstand property shall be limited to:
(1) Town of Bow municipal or school government bodies performing necessary, required
government duties and/or
(2) Bow community interest groups devoted to meeting the educational, social, or
recreational needs and the development and betterment of Bow residents.
TOWN OF BOW
15906 3/8/2017
B. Organizations wanting to post a sign must apply for and receive a permit from the Parks
and Recreation Department. Seasonal signs or repeat signs will require a permit each
time; however an extended seasonal permit may be used.
C. The Town of Bow may limit how many signs may be allowed at a certain time to prevent
crowding.
D. Signs will only be allowed in areas approved by the Town of Bow. A map is available
explaining where the signs may be placed.
E. The maximum size of each sign shall be 32 sq. ft. and the maximum height of each sign
shall be 8 ft. Any requests for a sign larger than 32 sq. ft. shall be submitted in writing to
the Board of Selectmen for its review and decision.
F. Signs may be inserted in the ground by ground stakes only, unless an alternative method
is approved. After removing the sign stakes, all holes need to be filled in.
G. No lighting of signs or use of electricity is allowed.
TOWN BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS
15907 3/8/2017
Article IV
Old Town Hall
[Amended by Board of Selectmen by Ord. No. 15-06 6-30-15.]
§ 159-7. Use of Old Town Hall. [Amended by Board of Selectmen by Ord. No. 15-06, 6-30-
2015.]
It is the intent of the Board of Selectmen to permit use of the Old Town Hall on a not-to-interfere
basis with official municipal activities. Therefore, the use of the Bow Community Building and
Bandstand will be limited to:
A. Town of Bow municipal government bodies or departments. The Town of Bow shall
always have precedence for use of the facility at any time and reserves the right to void
any reservation by other parties at any time. The Town will not exercise this right except
in instances where the greater public good will be served, such as the unexpected need to
open an emergency shelter, or when a Town-sponsored event for the entire community
requires the use of the facility.
B. Bow School District bodies performing necessary, required duties
C. Designated Bow Organizations
F. Bow Community Interest Groups/Organizations
G. Individual Bow Residents
H. Non-Bow Organizations/Individuals
§ 159-8. Rental.
A. Prior to use, a reservation must be made with the Town Manager’s Office and a written
rental agreement must be executed.
B. Rental limit. The facility may not be reserved for more than two consecutive calendar
days by any user or renter. Designated Bow Organizations and Bow Community Interest
Groups/Organizations may schedule multiple events throughout a calendar year
depending upon availability. Renters must specify a beginning time and an ending time
and this time period must include any set-up and clean-up time in addition to the time of
the actual event. The rental fees are established by the Board of Selectmen (Chapter 124,
Fee Schedule, of this Code.)
C. Security Deposit. Individual Bow Residents and Non-Bow Organizations/Individuals
shall pay a Security Deposit established by the Board of Selectmen (Chapter 124, Fee
Schedule, of this Code), refundable after inspection of the facility after the event has been
concluded. The deposit is subject to forfeiture, all or in part, if it is necessary to repair
any damages to the facility or to engage town staff or commercial firms to clean the
facility.
TOWN OF BOW
15908 3/8/2017
§159-9. Use regulations. [Amended by Board of Selectmen by Ord. No. 17-02, 2-15-2017.]
A. Damage. The renter shall be responsible for all damages done to the premises. All
renters shall agree to make immediate restitution for any damages done by persons
known or unknown during the time of rental. Due to the aged structural condition of the
floor, dancing is prohibited in the facility, as is any other physical activity which places
more stress upon the floor than does standing and walking. Tables, chairs, and any other
sharp or heavy objects must be moved by carrying rather than dragging across the floor.
The piano and the kitchen table shall not be moved under any circumstances. The
American flag is not to be removed from the function room.
B. Serving and consumption of alcohol. If alcoholic beverages are to be served and
consumed in the Old Town Hall, all renters must provide proof of liquor liability
insurance in accordance with the provisions of § 159-1.2. of this Chapter. Renters will
also be required to provide evidence that all State of New Hampshire requirements have
been met and may be required to bear the cost of hiring at least one paid police officer for
the function. No alcoholic beverages will be allowed outside of the building.
C. Smoking. Smoking is prohibited inside the building.
D. Parking. Parking is permitted in the parking lot only.
E. Decorations. No decorations will be attached to the walls or ceilings. There shall be no
use of nails, staples, tacks, tape, or any glues in the arrangement of decorations.
F. Cleanup. Cleanup immediately after the event is required. Cleanup includes, but is not
limited to, resetting tables and chairs where they were originally located, sweeping floors
(wet mop if needed), cleaning any kitchen equipment used including stove and ovens,
and checking rest rooms for neatness or abuse. All materials brought in for the event
shall be removed. Failure to comply with these requirements will result in forfeiture of
the security deposit.
TOWN BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS
15909 3/8/2017
Article V
Bow Bog Meeting House
[Amended by Board of Selectmen by Ord. No. 15-06, 6-30-2015.]
§ 159-10. Use of Bow Bog Meeting House
It is the intent of the Board of Selectmen to permit use of the Bow Bog Meeting House on a notto-
interfere basis with official municipal activities. Therefore, the use of the Bow Bog Meeting
House will be limited to:
A. Town of Bow municipal government bodies or departments. The Town of Bow shall
always have precedence for use of the facility at any time and reserves the right to void
any reservation by other parties at any time. The Town will not exercise this right except
in instances where the greater public good will be served, such as the unexpected need to
open an emergency shelter, or when a Town-sponsored event for the entire community
requires the use of the facility.
B. Bow School District bodies performing necessary, required duties.
C. Designated Bow Organizations.
D. Bow Community Interest Groups/Organizations.
E. Individual Bow Residents
F. Non-Bow Organizations/Individuals
§ 159-11. Rental.
A. Prior to use, a reservation must be made with the Town Manager’s Office and a written
rental agreement must be executed.
B. Rental limit. The facility may not be reserved for more than two consecutive calendar
days by any user or renter. Designated Bow Organizations and Bow Community Interest
Groups/Organizations may schedule multiple events throughout a calendar year
depending upon availability. Renters must specify a beginning time and an ending time
and this time period must include any set-up and clean-up time in addition to the time of
the actual event. The rental fees are established by the Board of Selectmen (Chapter 124,
Fee Schedule, of this Code.)
C. Security Deposit. Individual Bow Residents and Non-Bow Organizations/Individuals
shall pay a Security Deposit established by the Board of Selectmen (Chapter 124, Fee
Schedule, of this Code), refundable after inspection of the facility after the event has been
concluded. The deposit is subject to forfeiture, all or in part, if it is necessary to repair
any damages to the facility or to engage town staff or commercial firms to clean the
facility.
TOWN OF BOW
15910 3/8/2017
§ 159-12. Use regulations.
A. Alcohol: The consumption of alcohol by anyone on these premises or the adjoining Town
of Bow property surrounding said premises is strictly prohibited. The consumption of
alcoholic beverages in any type of vehicle on these premises or the surrounding Townowned
property is also strictly prohibited.
B. Smoking: Absolutely no smoking is allowed in the building or on the surrounding Town
owned property.
C. Noise: The renter is responsible to maintain all noise to a reasonable level so as not to
disturb the surrounding neighbors.
D. Parking: Parking shall be in areas designated. It shall be done so as to not impede
emergency vehicles from performing their duties.
E. All entry and exit doors shall remain free from obstacles which would impede safe entry
and egress from the building.
F. Nothing within the Bow Bog Meeting House shall be moved or utilized to place upon or
hold any object or thing which would cause damage to the surface of said historical item.
G. Decorations: Absolutely no decorations will be attached to any walls, ceilings or other
items of a historical nature. There shall be no nails, staples, tacks, glues, and tape used to
secure any decorations within the interior or exterior of said Bow Bog Meeting House.
H. Do not drag tables, chairs or sharp and heavy objects across the floor.
I. The balcony area is not to be used for any purpose.
J. Cleanup: Proper cleanup immediately after any event is required. If the town custodian is
not hired, you must completely clean the areas used. Sweeping of floors and wet mopping
if needed.
K. Any and all materials belonging to the renter or user must be removed from the premises
immediately upon the completion of the activity. If not so removed they will be removed
at the renters expense.
L. The bell is not to be rung by renters for safety reasons. If renters wish to have the bell
rung, they may hire a bell ringer, provided by the Town, based upon availability.
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
16401 1/19/2016
Chapter 164
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Article I
General Provisions
§ 164-1. Definitions.
Article II
Traffic Regulations
§ 164-2. Stop intersections.
§ 164-3. Yield intersections.
§ 164-4. Truck exclusions.
§ 164-5. Trucks - Covered Loads.
Article III
Parking/Standing Regulations
§ 164-6. Prohibited stopping, standing or parking.
§ 164-7. Emergency restriction on parking.
§ 164-8. Construction area parking.
§ 164-9. Winter parking.
§ 164-10. Owner responsibility for illegal parking.
§ 164-11. Towing of illegally parked vehicles.
§ 164-12. Impounded vehicles.
§ 164-13. Parking violation penalties.
Article IV
Seasonal Load Limits
§ 164-14. Criteria for seasonal load limiting.
§ 164-15. Placement of seasonal load limit restrictions.
§ 164-16. Removal of seasonal load limits.
TOWN OF BOW
16402
1/19/2016
§ 164-17. Appeals.
§164-18. Penalty.
Article V
Bridge Weight Limits
§ 164-19. Load limits for bridges.
§ 164-20. Posting of load limits.
§ 164-21. Penalty.
Article VI
Schedules
§ 164-22. Schedule I: Stop Intersections
§ 164-23. Schedule II: Yield Intersections
§ 164-24. Schedule III: Truck Exclusions
§ 164-25. Schedule IV: Parking Prohibited at All Times
[HISTORY. Adopted by the Board of Selectmen on April 3, 1987. Amendments noted
where applicable.]
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
16403 1/19/2016
Article I
General Provisions
§ 164-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases use herein shall have the following
meanings:
BOARD - The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow.
GENERAL PUBLIC - Any person or organization not employed by the Town. Town employees
must be in the performance of their official duties so as to not be included in the general public.
PERMIT - Any written authority issued by the Board of Selectmen or under the authority of the
Board.
POLICE OFFICER - A law enforcement officer as defined by NH RSA 259:78.
ROAD OR HIGHWAY - Any public way as defined in NH RSA 259:125.
TOWN - Town of Bow, New Hampshire.
TRUCKS - Any motor vehicle greater than 18,000 pounds gross weight that is intended,
designed, or constructed for the transportation of freight or merchandise, or any motor vehicle
equipped with other than pneumatic tires.
Article II
Traffic Regulations
[Amended by Board of Selectmen 9-24-2013.]
§164-2. Stop intersections.
A. The intersections described in Schedule I (§164-21), attached to and made part of this
chapter, are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided herein.
B. Violations of this section shall result in a fine not to exceed $500.
§164-3. Yield intersections.
A. The intersections described in Schedule II (§164-22), attached to and made part of this
chapter, are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed as
provided herein.
B. Violation of this section shall result in a fine not to exceed $500.
TOWN OF BOW
16404
1/19/2016
§164-4. Truck exclusions.
A. Trucks are hereby excluded from the streets or portions of streets described in said
Schedule III (§164-23), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
B. Through trucking is defined as traveling a road while having no destination on that road
and making no stops while enroute.
C. Violation of this section shall result in a fine not to exceed $500.
§ 164-5. Trucks - Covered Loads.
A. No person shall operate on any road in the Town any open vehicle loaded with earth,
sand, asphalt, stone gravel or other particulate substance unless said vehicle is equipped
with and said vehicle is covered and secured by a close fitting tarpaulin which prevents
the escape of any substance from said load onto the road.
B. This requirement shall not apply to the operation of Town of Bow and State of New
Hampshire highway maintenance equipment.
C. Violation of this section shall result in a fine not to exceed $500.
Article III
Parking/Standing Regulations
[Amended by Board of Selectmen 9-24-2013.]
§164-6. Prohibited stopping, standing or parking.
A. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with law or the direction of a police officer, traffic
violation officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
(1) Any vehicle parked at any time upon any of the streets or parts thereof described in
Schedule IV (§164-24), attached to and made part of this chapter.
(2) Fire Lanes. When signs are erected and the road surface clearly marked giving
notice thereof no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any road or way
described as a fire lane.
(3) No parking in areas designated as Police Vehicles Only.
(4) In areas around the parking lot of the Town Hall that are posted as no parking zones.
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
16405 1/19/2016
(5) In any areas on public or private property specifically designated for the physically
handicapped, marked in accordance with state law, without a permit.
§164-7. Emergency restriction on parking.
The Chief of Police may restrict or prohibit parking or travel on any public road in the Town
whenever the ordinary uses of same become hazardous because of the existence of some
emergency condition.
§164-8. Construction area parking.
All vehicles in a construction area on a public way or private property shall be parked in such a
manner as to allow vehicles to pass safely and unobstructed.
§164-9. Winter parking.
No vehicle shall park on any road or right of way in the Town in a manner so as to hamper the
removal of snow from the roads or right of way, and may be towed at the discretion of the
Director of Public Works or any police officer.
§164-10. Owner responsibility for illegal parking.
A person shall not allow or permit a vehicle registered in his name to park in violation of any of
the ordinances of this Town controlling the parking of vehicles. The owner or person in whose
name such vehicle is registered shall be held responsible for such violation.
§164-11. Towing of illegally parked vehicles.
A. Any vehicle found to be illegally parked on any road or right of way or in violation of
any of the ordinances controlling parking, may be towed at the discretion of any Town
Police Officer.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or the registrant of the said vehicle, to pay any
and all towing and storage fees due.
C. All towing will be done by a private commercial towing service recognized by the Bow
Police Department.
§164-12. Impounded vehicles.
A. Any vehicle or any other item impounded by any authorized person employed by the
Town and stored on or in Town property shall be assessed a fee for storage on a daily
basis. The amount of storage fee shall be determined by the Chief of Police with the
approval of the Town Manager and the Board.
TOWN OF BOW
16406
1/19/2016
B. Payment of any fee due shall be the responsibility of the registered owner, or the last
known owner of record for any vehicle. Items stored shall be the responsibility of the
owner of the item. Where a juvenile is found to be the owner, the parents or legal
guardian will be responsible for the payment of any fee due.
C. When the owner of any vehicle or item cannot be located the Town may dispose of the
vehicle or item in a manner approved by the Board.
D. No vehicle shall be impounded for a period longer than thirty (30) days. No other item
shall be-held-for a period longer than sixty (60) days. These periods may be extended at
the Police Chief’s discretion if reasons warrant an extension.
E. No fee shall be required on any vehicle or item that must be kept by the Bow Police
Department as evidence.
F. Neither the Town nor any employees of the Town shall be responsible for any towing
charges that are due, unless the Town agrees to pay such charges.
G. The Town shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner of any vehicle or item
impounded. However, the Town shall not incur any expense in its attempt to locate the
owner.
H. The Town shall not be responsible for any damage to a vehicle or item it has impounded.
§164-13. Parking violation penalties.
A person violating any provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$200.00 for each offense, except that the following optional procedure may be used in lieu of
court proceedings.
A. The owner or registrant of the said vehicle may, within an initial 72 hours grace period
from the time a notice of violation was attached to the vehicle, pay to the Bow Police
Department the sum of $25.00 as a penalty in lieu of court proceedings.
B. If the initial fine is not paid within the 72 hours, a $10.00 penalty assessment is charged.
C. After 10 days, the Bow Police Department will send a courtesy letter of reminder to the
owner or registrant extending a final 72 hour grace period from the date of the letter
received for the payment of a fine totaling $35.00. Once the 72 hour grace period expires,
a summons shall be issued to the registrant of the vehicle to appear in the court of
jurisdiction.
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
16407 1/19/2016
Article IV
Seasonal Load Limits
[Amended by Board of Selectmen 3-25-2002.]
§ 164-14. Criteria for seasonal load limiting.
A. Seasonal load limit regulations will be placed on roadways carrying less than 5,000
vehicles per day and that are subject to excessive damage during periods of thawing.
These roads will be identified by the Director of the Department of Public Works, on an
annual basis.
B. Factors to be considered. The following factors will be considered by highway
maintenance personnel prior to enacting a seasonal load limit regulation on a particular
road:
(1) The historical performance of the road during similar environmental conditions.
(2) The structural sufficiency of the materials providing the roadway’s foundation.
(3) Current environment conditions (i.e. depth of frost, weather forecast, snow depth).
(4) The frequency, size and number of trips heavy vehicles are making or are projected to
make over the roadway.
(5) Availability of alternative routes if highway is posted with weight limits.
(6) Connecting road network in the immediate area that is free of seasonal load limit
regulations.
(7) The projected roadway damages and cost to repair if a ban is not imposed, as well as
the economic hardship on the highway user if it is imposed.
§ 164-15. Placement of seasonal load limit restrictions.
The Director of Public Works shall:
A. Provide notification to highway users prior to placing seasonal load limit regulations.
Notification will be through press releases or by letter.
B. Erect temporary signs on all roadways that meet criteria for seasonal load limit
regulations. Highway users shall be advised of seasonal load limit regulations on the
road ahead by using supplemental signing as appropriate to avoid the dead-ending of
trucks.
TOWN OF BOW
16408
1/19/2016
C. Maintain a record of the effective date of the posting as well as the date removed.
Transmit information to the Town Manager and the Police Chief.
D. Constantly monitor roadway conditions to allow the earliest practical removal of the
seasonal load limit regulations.
E. Maintain all signs throughout the duration of the seasonal load limit regulations.
F. Evaluate individual requests for exceptions as specified. (i.e. travel when road solidly
frozen, milk transporters, fuel oil deliveries, etc.)
§ 164-16. Removal of seasonal load limits.
The Director of Public Works shall:
A. Visually observe roadways to detect the presence of water. Seasonal load limit
regulations will be continued until the roadway base materials are drained and capable of
supporting heavy vehicle loads.
B. Determine the depth of thawed material beneath the pavement (i.e. By digging a hole,
driving a stake in on the shoulder, or observing excavations by others).
C. Remove signs when conditions have returned to normal and a roadway is in a stable
condition.
§ 164-17. Appeals.
Notification of appeal shall be made to the Director of Public Works. The Director of Public
Works shall consider each appeal on its merits with emphasis upon what weight is being
requested for the road to carry and at what frequency. If the DPW Director approves the waiver,
written notice shall be provided to the requestor, the Bow Police Department, and the Town
Manager. If the issue cannot be resolved at that level, the appeal shall progress to the Town
Manager and then to the Board of Selectmen. This procedure is for short term, temporary
waivers. Waivers for the entire load limit season shall be submitted in writing directly to the
Board of Selectmen.
§164-18. Penalty. [Amended by Board of Selectmen 01-12-2016.]
Whoever shall fail to comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation and
subject to a fine up to $1,000. For the purposes of this article, each time a vehicle is operated on
a highway in excess of that which is posted shall constitute a separate offense.
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
16409 1/19/2016
Article V
Bridge Weight Limits
[Added by Board of Selectmen 01-12-2016.]
§ 164-19. Load limits for bridges.
In accordance with the provisions of RSA 234:39, load limits for bridges are established as
follows:
(1) Page Road Bridge over Bela Brook - Twenty-five (25) tons
§ 164-20. Posting of load limits.
Notice of such load limits shall be posted at or near the entrance of said bridges.
§164-21. Penalty.
Whoever shall fail to comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation and
subject to a fine of $100. For the purposes of this article, each time a vehicle is operated on a
highway in excess of that which is posted shall constitute a separate offense.
TOWN OF BOW
16410
1/19/2016
Article VI
Schedules
§164-23. Schedule I: Stop Intersections
In accordance with the provisions of Article II (§164-2), the following described intersections are
hereby designated as stop intersections, and stop signs shall be installed as follows:
Direction
Stop Sign On of travel At Intersection of
Abbey Lane north Allen Road
Alexander Lane east Knox Road
Allen Road north Bow Bog Road
Allen Road south South Bow Road
Arnold Drive east Stoneybrook Road
Arrowhead Drive north Branch Londonderry Tpke East
Asa Drive north Morgan Drive
Asa Drive south Bow Bog Road
Audley Divide east Putney Road
Auras Way east Mountain Farm Road
Beaver Brook Drive north Page Road
Bent Road north Eastview Drive
Betty Lane south Ridgewood Drive
Birchdale Road south Page Road
Blevens Drive south Putney Road
Blueberry Lane north Shore View Drive
Blueberry Lane south Rocky Point Drive
Bona Vista Drive north Van Ger Drive
Bona Vista Drive south Brown Hill Road
Branch-Londonderry Tpke
West west Page Road
Branch-Londonderry Tpke
West west Page Road
Briarwood Drive north Robinson Road
Brown Hill Road south Dunbarton Center Road
Brown Hill Road north Page Road
Buckingham Drive north Hop Kiln Road
Buckingham Drive south Putney Road
Cardinal Drive north Quimby Road
Carriage Road west Grandview Road
Cedar Lane north Hooksett Turnpike
Cedar Lane east Hooksett Turnpike
Chandler Circle east Birchdale Road
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
16411 1/19/2016
Chelsea Drive south South Bow Dunbarton Road
Clearview Drive south Robinson Road
Clement Road south Bona Vista Drive
Clement Road north Brown Hill Road
Cob Road west Birchdale Road
Cob Road west Birchdale Road
Colby Lane north Allen Road
Colonial Terrace south Woodland Circle
Crescent Drive south South Bow Road
Crockett Drive east Laurel Drive
Currier Drive west Timmins Road
Dean Avenue north Robinson Road
Dean Avenue south Bow Bog Road
Dow Road west Knox Road
Dunklee Road east River Road
Dunnmoore Drive south Bow Bog Road
Edgewood Drive west Page Road
Erin Drive south Dean Avenue
Essex Drive south Fernwood Place
Everett Avenue south Grandview Road
Falcon Way east White Rock Hill Road
Fernwood Place south Bela View Drive
Ferry Road south River Road
Fieldstone Drive north Robinson Road
Foote Road north Page Road
Fox Meadow Drive west Albin Road
Hampshire Hills Drive west Brown Hill Road
Hampshire Hills Drive south Hampshire Hills Drive
Heather Lane south Dow Road
Heidi Lane east Ridgewood Drive
Heidi Lane east Jonathan Lane
Heidi Lane west Jonathan Lane
Heidi Lane west Knox Road
Hemlock Road east Old Coach Road
Hemlock Road west Surrey Drive
Hidden Forest Drive south Hooksett Turnpike
Hollow Road north Bow Bog Road
Hooksett Turnpike south Page Road
Hop Kiln Road west Putney Road
Hope Lane north Bow Bog Road
Hunter Drive east Risingwood Drive
TOWN OF BOW
16412
1/19/2016
Jonathan Lane east Risingwood Drive
Juniper Lane west Lincoln Drive
Knox Road east Robinson Road
Knox Road west Dow Road
Longview Drive east Tonga Drive
Longview Drive west Foote Road
McNichol Lane north Allen Road
Meadow Lane north Knox Road
Melanie Lane north Albin Road
Merrill Crossing south South Bow
Morgan Drive south Bow Bog Road
Mountain Farm Road north Quimby Road
Nancy Drive north Page Road
Nathaniel Drive north Woodhill Hooksett Road
Nesbitt Drive west Bow Bog Road
Noyes Lane South Gordon Road
Oak Ridge Drive east Rocky Point Drive
Oak Ridge Drive west Surrey Coach Lane
Ogden Road north Smokey Road
Ogden Road south Nesbitt Drive
Old Coach Road south Rocky Point Drive
Ordway Lane south South Bow Road
Page Road east White Rock Hill Road
Peaslee Road north Bow Bog Road
Pepin Drive south Page Road
Pepin Drive south Page Road
Pine Crest Drive south Page Road
Poor Richards Drive north Betty Lane
Poor Richards Drive west Ridgewood Drive
Putney Road north Buckingham Drive
Quimby Road north South Bow Dunbarton Road
Rand Road north Clough Street
Red Pine Drive south Page Road
Ridgewood Drive north Grandview Road
Ridgewood Drive south Knox Road
Risingwood Drive east Woodhill Road
Robinson Road south Bow Bog Road
Robinson Road north Bow Bog Road
Rocky Point Drive south White Rock Hill Road
Rollins Road south Pepin Drive
Rosewood Drive north Bow Bog Road
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
16413 1/19/2016
Ryan Road south Dunklee Road
South Bow Dunbarton Road north South Bow Road
Saltmarsh Circle east Meadow Lane
Saltmarsh Circle east Meadow Lane
Sharon Drive north Laurel Drive
Shaw Divide north Page Road
Shore View Drive north Rocky Point Drive
Shore View Drive south White Rock Hill Road
Short Street east Grandview Road
South Bow Road west Woodhill Road
Stack Drive east Page Road
Stack Drive north Stack Drive
Stack Drive south Foote Road
Sterling Place north Brown Hill Road
Stoneybrook Road south Allen Road
Stoneybrook Road south Allen Road
Sullivan Drive south Essex Drive
Sundance Lane east Brown Hill Road
Surrey Drive south Rocky Point Drive
Tally Ho Lane north Albin Road
Terrace Hill Road east Cedar Lane
Timmins Road north White Rock Hill Road
Tonga Drive east Brown Hill Road
Tonga Drive east Brown Hill Road
Tower Hill Drive north Woodhill Hooksett Road
Turee Pond Road east White Rock Hill Road
Van Ger Drive south Clement Road
Vaughn Road east River Road
Village Road south Page Road
West Gate Drive east Surrey Coach Lane
Wheeler Road west Timmins Road
Wheeler Road west Wheeler Road
Wheeler Road east White Rock Hill Road
Whittier Drive west Knox Road
Wilderness Lane west Woodland Circle
Windsor Drive south Buckingham
Woodhill Hooksett Road west Allen Road
Woodhill Hooksett Road east Allen Road
Woodland Circle south Albin Road
Woodland Circle south Albin Road
TOWN OF BOW
16414
1/19/2016
§164-23. Schedule II: Yield Intersections
In accordance with the provisions of Article II, (§164-3), the following described intersections
are hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs shall be installed as follows:
Direction
Yield Sign On of travel At Intersection of
Brown Hill Road north Putney Road
Short Street east Grandview Road
Albin Road west Logging Hill Road
§164-24. Schedule III: Truck Exclusions
In accordance with the provisions of Article II, §164-4, trucks are hereby excluded from the
following streets of parts of streets described:
Name of Street Location
Grandview Road [Added 7-12-05] From Short Street to Route 3A
§164-25. Schedule IV: Parking Prohibited at All Times
In accordance with Article III, (§164-6), no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of
the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Albin Road east
200 feet south of Woodlawn Circle
northerly for a distance of 1,000 feet
Albin Road west
200 feet south of Woodlawn Circle
northerly for a distance of 1,000 feet
Bow Center Road east
From Knox Road south for a distance
of 72 feet
Grandview Road [Added 4-10-
90] east
From Route 3A northerly for a
distance of 500 feet
Grandview Road [Added 4-10-
90] west
From Route 3A northerly for a
distance of 1,000 feet
Northeast Avenue south
From South Street easterly for a
distance of 300 feet
Route 3A east
300 feet south of Grandview Road
northerly for a distance of 700 feet
Route 3A [Added 4-28-98] west
From the Concord/Bow town line
southerly for a distance of 300 feet
South Street east
From Northeast Avenue southerly for
a distance of 150 feet
South Street [Added 4-28-98] east From southerly entrance of gas station
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
16415 1/19/2016
northerly for a distance of 300 feet
Tallwood Drive [Added 4-28-98] north
From Route 3A easterly for a distance
of 300 feet
VEHICLE USE
16701
Chapter 167
VEHICLE USE POLICY
§ 167-1. Purpose.
§ 167-2. Departments affected.
§ 167-3. Definitions.
§ 167-4. Policy.
§ 167-5. Procedures.
§ 167-6. Failure to comply.
[HISTORY. Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow on 3-24-2015, Ord.
No. 15-03.]
§ 167-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this policy is to set forth the guidelines for reimbursement or compensation for
employees use of personal vehicles; the guidelines under which Town vehicles will be
authorized to Town Personnel; and the guidelines under which Town vehicles may be used.
§ 167-2. Departments affected.
The provisions of this policy apply to all Town employees.
§ 167-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the words used herein shall have the following meanings:
AUTOMOBILE ALLOWANCE – The amount approved by the Town Manager to compensate
an employee for regular and routine use of a personal automobile. Automobile allowance is
considered to be a salary item and, as such, is subject to taxation.
EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT – The payment for approved expenses relating to personal
automobile use upon receipt of written documentation. Expense reimbursement is not considered
to be a salary item.
MUNICIPAL VEHICLE - Those automobiles, trucks, vans, or other self-propelled equipment
owned, rented, or leased by the Town of Bow and licensed for travel on a public way.
April 1, 2015
VEHICLE USE
16702
PERSONAL AUTOMOBILE - That automobile owned or available for private use by the
employee.
§ 167-4. Policy.
A. Municipal Vehicles: It is the policy of the Town of Bow that certain positions require
employee access to municipal vehicles, either during the work shift or on a 24 hour oncall
basis. Town vehicles are not personal vehicles and are not for personal use. Town
vehicles should be viewed as belonging to the citizens of Bow and are assigned solely for
purposes consistent with providing services to those citizens.
B. Expense Reimbursement: The Town will reimburse employees for reasonable expenses
(as defined in § 167-5. A. (3)) which they incur as a result of personal automobile use on
behalf of the Town. Receipts and the Local Travel or Purchase Voucher Form must be
submitted in order for an employee to be reimbursed for such expenses.
C. Automobile Allowance: It is the policy of the Town of Bow that in event that an
employee is required to use his or her personal automobile extensively on a year-round
basis, and that employee has not been assigned a municipal vehicle, the Town Manager
may authorize the payment of an automobile allowance. Such stipend may be rescinded
with 90 days’ notice, and will not be paid in combination with personal automobile
expense reimbursement unless authorized by the Town Manager.
D. An employee who operates an assigned vehicle or a private vehicle for Town business
must have the appropriate valid driver’s license, a current state safety inspection sticker
and current license plates for the vehicle.
§ 167-5. Procedures.
A. Expense Reimbursement - Personal Vehicles
(1) Expense reimbursement is intended for travel outside the Town of Bow. Employees
will not be reimbursed for personal automobile use within the Town of Bow without
advance approval of the Town Manager. The Town Manager shall maintain a list of
positions approved for reimbursement under this section.
(2) When an employee is authorized to use a personal automobile for work-related travel,
he or she shall be reimbursed at the business mileage rate as determined by the
Internal Revenue Service. The mileage rate is intended to include the costs of
gasoline, repairs, insurance, and general wear and tear on the automobile.
(3) In addition to the mileage rate, the Town will reimburse employees authorized to
travel outside of Bow, driving personal or municipal vehicles, for tolls and reasonable
parking expenses, when receipts are provided. Employees receiving automobile
allowances will not be reimbursed for tolls but may be reimbursed for reasonable
April 1, 2015
VEHICLE USE
16703
parking expenses. Employees will not be reimbursed for tolls which would normally
be paid by the employee during his or her normal commute to work.
(4) Employees who are reimbursed for work related travel, or who receive an automobile
allowance, shall provide a copy of a valid driver’s license, and a vehicle registration
and proof of automobile insurance coverage for the vehicle that they are driving.
(5) An employee who uses his or her personal automobile to travel from home to a
temporary assignment, rather than his or her regularly assigned work location, shall
be allowed personal automobile expenses between home and the temporary
assignment, or between the temporary assignment and the regular work location,
whichever is less.
(6) Employees will not be reimbursed for commuting between their homes and offices or
other regular work locations.
(7) In order to be reimbursed for personal automobile use, employees must complete the
Local Travel or Purchase Voucher Form. This form should be submitted to the
department head for approval prior to submission to the Finance Director for
payment.
(8) Automobile Accidents: In the event that an employee’s personal vehicle is damaged
during an approved, work-related trip, and the damage is not due to the gross
negligence of the employee, the Town will reimburse the employee, upon receipt of
verification of payment of a deductible (comprehensive or collision) to cover part of
the cost of repair, up to a maximum of $250 or the amount of the deductible,
whichever is less, per occurrence.
B. Assignment of Municipal Vehicles
(1) The assignment of municipal vehicles during work time is based upon job
description. Municipal vehicles available for this purpose will be assigned by the
department head in a manner consistent with departmental workload and employee
function. The assignment of vehicles may be rescinded at any time by the Town
Manager. The list of assigned vehicles will be maintained by the Town Manager.
(2) Assigned and take home vehicles shall not be used on a non-Town part-time job or
driven to and from a part-time job not associated with the Town organization.
C. Assignment of Municipal Vehicles for 24 Hour Use (Vehicle Use Approved for
Commuting Purposes).
(1) The assignment of vehicles for 24 hour use will be made in writing by the Town
Manager, and will only be considered for employees who require a vehicle for the
ordinary and necessary discharge of their job functions. Criteria which will be used in
the determination of eligibility for 24-hour vehicle use include: Officially designated
April 1, 2015
VEHICLE USE
16704
on-call status; Requirement for frequent emergency availability; Issuance of a pager
or other communication device; Emergency or other equipment pertinent to the
position contained in the vehicle; and/or if no Town facility is available for garaging
the vehicle in a safe and convenient location. Such assignment may be rescinded in
writing at any time by the Town Manager.
(2) Vehicle use is limited to travel to and from the residence and place of work. Town
vehicles shall not be used for private or personal business, except for incidental stops
during travel to and from the work place. The vehicle should be driven over the most
direct route taking into account road and traffic conditions.
(3) Whenever a position becomes vacant, the authorization for 24 hour use shall be
reevaluated. The Town Manager will maintain the listing of assigned and take home
vehicles.
(4) Employees assigned vehicles for 24 hour use involving a commute of more than 25
miles one way shall reimburse the Town for the additional fuel cost as determined by
the Finance Director.
(5) Employees’ assigned municipal vehicles on a 24 hour basis will be given a copy of
this policy and will be required to sign a confirmation of receipt. The Town Manager
will maintain an electronic listing of employees assigned take-home vehicles by
department. The list shall be updated and forwarded to Finance in early December to
insure the appropriate amount is deducted from each employee’s paycheck in
accordance with IRS requirements. The determination of this taxable benefit is made
by Finance based on the rules set forth by the IRS in Publication 15-B, Employer’s
Tax Guide to Fringe Benefits.
(6) Imputed Income Taxation: Employees who are assigned marked and unmarked police
vehicles, and/or marked municipal vehicles carrying tools and meeting certain other
eligibility criteria will not be subject to imputed income taxation as a result of the
vehicle assignment.
(7) Other employees authorized to commute in a Town vehicle may be subject to
imputed income regulations as set forth by the Internal Revenue Service, which
considers a certain portion of the vehicle use (namely the commute) to be income for
the purposes of income taxation. The Finance Department shall be responsible for
determining any tax liability and will be provided with the names of all employees
authorized to use Town vehicles for commuting purposes, and the normal, one-way
commuting distance, each December 1st.
D. General Rules Governing Municipal Vehicle Use
(1) Municipal vehicles may only be used for legitimate municipal business.
April 1, 2015
VEHICLE USE
16705
(2) Municipal vehicles will not be used to transport any individual who is not directly or
indirectly related to municipal business. Passengers shall be limited to Town
employees and individuals who are directly associated with Town work activity
(committee members, consultants, contractors, etc.) or those participating in the
Public Works Snow Plow Ride-Along Program, Police Department Citizen Observer/
Ride-Along program and the Fire Department Observer Program.
(3) Vehicles should contain only those items for which the vehicle is designed. The Town
shall not be liable for the loss or damage of any personal property transported in the
vehicle.
(4) Employees are expected to keep municipal vehicles clean, and to report any
malfunction or damage to their supervisors immediately.
(5) Employees’ assigned vehicles for commuting purposes are expected to park such
vehicles in safe locations.
(6) Employees must wear seatbelts in vehicles so equipped during operation of the
vehicle.
(7) Employees may not operate municipal vehicles under the influence of alcohol, illegal
drugs, or prescription drugs or medications which may interfere with effective and
safe operation.
(8) Employees driving municipal vehicles shall obey all applicable traffic and parking
regulations, ordinances, and laws. Employees who incur parking or other fines in
municipal vehicles will generally be personally responsible for payment of such fines
unless the payment of such fines by the Town is approved by the Town Manager.
(9) Employees who are issued citations for any offense while using a municipal vehicle
must notify their supervisor immediately when practicable, but in no case later than
24 hours. Failure to provide such notice will be grounds for disciplinary action.
(10) An employee who is assigned a municipal vehicle and who is arrested for or charged
with a motor vehicle offense for which the punishment includes suspension or
revocation of the motor vehicle license, whether in his or her personal vehicle or in a
municipal vehicle, must notify his or her supervisor immediately when practicable,
but in no case later than 24 hours. Conviction for such an offense may be grounds for
loss of municipal vehicle privileges and/or further disciplinary action.
(11) No employee may use a municipal vehicle for out of state use without advance
approval of the Town Manager.
April 1, 2015
VEHICLE USE
16706
E. Special Circumstances
This policy is intended to provide a basic framework governing the use of personal and
municipal vehicles in the Town of Bow, and, as such, cannot contain procedures governing
every situation that might arise. Employees seeking clarification of or exemption from the
provisions of this policy should contact the Town Manager who will provide such
clarification and may authorize exceptions to the policy under mitigating circumstances.
§ 167-6. Failure to comply.
Failure to comply with any and all provisions of this policy may result in disciplinary action up
to and including removal of Town vehicle privileges, suspension, and/or termination from Town
service.
April 1, 2015
WATER SYSTEM
17401
Chapter 174
WATER SYSTEM
§ 174-1. Authority.
§ 174-2. Definitions and abbreviations.
§ 174-3. Water system responsibility and ownership.
§ 174-4. Customer responsibilities and liabilities.
§ 174-5. General responsibilities.
§ 174-6. Town of Bow disclaimer of liabilities.
§ 174-7. Procedures for service installation and use.
§ 174-8. Billing for services.
§ 174-9. Penalties.
Appendix A, Fee Schedule
Appendix B, Typical Water Supply Installation Diagram
Appendix C, Application Forms
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow 5-29-2012.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 174-1. Authority.
A. By virtue of statutory and other authority, and powers as authorized by NH RSA 38, the
Bow Board of Selectman of Bow, New Hampshire establishes the following rules and
regulations, fees and charges related to providing potable water from the Bow Municipal
Water System.
B. The Bow Water System will be operated and maintained by the Town of Bow or its
designee and contractors through a water system operator and manager as defined by
the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services under the direction of the
Bow Board of Selectman.
C. The Water System's approval of an application for service binds the customer to
current and future rules and regulations and to current and future payment of all
applicable fees, rates and charges.
D. The Town of Bow may enact changes to the Policy, Rules, Regulations and Fees
contained herein only after a Public Hearing.
TOWN OF BOW
17402
§ 174-2. Definitions and abbreviations.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: The Backflow Prevention Device is a device that is
designed to, and which in practice does, prohibit unwanted substances from flowing into the
water distribution pipes of a potable supply of water. See Appendix B.
BASE SERVICE FEE (BSF): The fee is assessed on every Water Use bill regardless of amount
of water used or the use of the property.
BOARD OF SELECTMAN (BOS): Shall mean the Selectmen in the Town of Bow who are
responsible for operation and maintenance of the Water System to ensure compliance with all
local, state and federal requirements, including enforcement of this regulation.
BOW MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM (Water System or BMWS): Shall mean the piped water
distribution system and all capital facilities draw water from Town-owned wells located in Bow,
NH. The Water System also includes water treatment facilities, water mains, water services,
water meters and a water storage tank to facilitate distribution and hydrants to provide fire
protection.
CUSTOMER: The word "Customer" shall mean any person, partnership, firm, corporation, or
organization of any type that is supplied with water by the Water System. The Customer shall
customarily be the owner of record per the Town's Property Assessor’s current records or the
duly authorized representative of the property being supplied with water.
CORPORATION STOP: A water service shutoff valve located at a street water main. This
valve cannot be operated from the ground surface because it is buried and there is no
access.
CROSS CONNECTION: A Cross Connection is any actual or potential physical connection or
arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable water and
the other which contains water of unknown or questionable safety or steam, chemicals, gases, or
other contaminants, whereby there may be a flow of unwanted substances into the potable water
supply system.
CURB BOX: See CURB STOP.
CURB STOP: The curb stop is inside an in-ground structure called a CURB BOX located at
(or near) the property line. The CURB STOP is the connecting point between the service line
(from the water main) and the service line into the building receiving the water. The curb stop
is the property of and maintenance responsibility of the Town (see Appendix B).
FULL FLOW CONTROL VALVE: The Full Flow Control Valve is a water flow control valve
located inside the foundation of a building, between the end of the service pipe and the water
meter (see Appendix B).
WATER SYSTEM
17403
LIEN: The word lien shall mean the statutory claim the town may impose as defined
in RSA 38:22.
MANAGER: See Water System Manager.
METER PIT, READER BOX: A meter pit or reader box must be constructed to house the water
meter for buildings without basements or greater than 100 feet from the Curb Stop. The meters
must be located in an approved meter pit at least 4.5 feet below ground to prevent freezing. The
customer owns the meter pit.
NEW HAMPSHIRE DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES (NH DES):
State regulating authority of the Water System.
OPERATOR: See Water System Operator.
PROPERTY OWNER: Per the Town's Property Assessor's current records.
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE WAY: A public or private way is the Town-owned or privatelyowned
road or street improved and open to the public as a throughway.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY (PWS): Shall have the meaning provided in RSA 38.
SERVICE LINE: The service line is a pipe that connects the water supply main through the
Curb Stop to inside the building receiving the water or to a fire hydrant. The service line
between the water main and the Curb Stop is the property and responsibility of the Town. The
service line into the building from the Curb Stop is owned by, and the responsibility of, the
Customer (See Appendix B).
SERVICE PIPE: See SERVICE LINE.
SITE PLAN: When applying for a new service connection or alteration, a drawing is required
to show a) location of existing drinking water source, b) building's location, c) septic location
d) location of underground utility lines (electric, gas, etc.), e) proposed location of the water
service pipes, water meter, Meter Pit if any, valves, backflow prevention device and any other
required components between the curb stop and into the building. The Site Plan must be
included with an application for a new connection and approved by the Town. In most
instances, a copy of a Plot Plan or Septic Plan with notation to show all the required Site Plan
items is acceptable.
TIE SHEET: A drawing showing the locations of the pipes, meter, meter pit (if applicable),
with respect to the septic system, buildings, underground utilities and any other aspect of the
water service going into a building from the water main. A Tie Sheet is prepared after an
installation is completed. The Tie Sheet must be provided to the PWS before service is
commenced. The tie sheet is usually prepared by the contractor who installs the new water
service between the curb stop and the building. Sometimes it is called an "As Built"
drawing.
TOWN OF BOW
17404
WATER METER: The water meter is a device for measuring and recording the flow of water
from the municipal water supply to the Customer's building. In some cases the meter is located
within the Customer's building or structure and in other cases, in a Meter Pit elsewhere on the
Customer's property. Regardless of the location, the meter is provided and owned by the Water
System. It may be repaired, tested, calibrated, improved or replaced by the Town, for which
purpose the Customer must permit entry with reasonable advance notice. The Customer is
responsible for reasonable care and use of the meter.
WATER SUPPLY MAIN: The water supply main is the municipal water pipe (usually located
in the street), to which a service line or pipe is connected to supply water to buildings (See
Appendix B).
WATER SYSTEM MANAGER: The Water System Manager oversees the day-to-day
operation and is responsible for the Water System's operation and maintenance and reports to
the BOS.
Additional definitions as applicable are adopted as set forth by the NH DES, New Hampshire
Building Codes and New Hampshire Division of Fire Safety.
ABBREVIATIONS:
BMWS: Bow Municipal Water System (otherwise called Water System)
NH DES: New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services
EPA: United States Environmental Protection Agency
GPD: Gallons per day
PWS: Public Water System
§ 174-3. Water system responsibility and ownership.
A. The Town shall be responsible for overseeing the repairs, maintenance, construction, and
reconstruction of the existing Town-owned capital facilities. For the purposes of this
regulation, "capital facilities" shall mean water storage tanks, pump stations and
appurtenances, treatment facilities, water mains, gate valves, water meters, fire hydrants
and appurtenances in public ways and private ways where system components are
located.
B. The Water service lines from the curb stop to the individual buildings are the
responsibility of the property owner for new and existing water service installations
including repairs, alterations and maintenance. (See Appendix B).
C. All Town-owned water mains that are in public or private streets are the responsibility of
the Town.
D. All Customers of the Water System will be charged according to the approved fee
schedule (Chapter 124, § 124-10. of this Code).
WATER SYSTEM
17405
E. The Town may declare water restrictions or a STATE OF WATER EMERGENCY if it
finds there exists a water shortage or an impending water shortage; and/or a Declaration
of Water Emergency has been made by the NH DES as it is deemed essential to the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare. In so doing, the Town may establish
priorities for the distribution of water or water use by a specified amount or to share
water with other water systems. The Town may also choose to develop a drought
management or contingency plan and institute a conservation program for public and
private use.
§ 174-4. Customer responsibilities and liabilities.
A. Damage to the water meter. Customers will be held responsible for Water Meter care
and protection from damage as a result of freezing, hot water, or other external causes.
When damage occurs, the Town will furnish and set another Meter or repair the
damaged one. The cost of such replacement or repairs shall be charged to the Customer
on the basis of cost of materials and labor.
B. Tampering with the water meter. It is illegal to tamper with a Water Meter. Written
authorization must be obtained from the Town to install, alter or remove a Meter.
Violations are subject fines as set forth in the Rate Schedule (Chapter 124, § 124-10. of
this Code).
C. Ownership of pipes, valves and taps. All pipes, valves, taps and other appurtenances
between the Municipal Water Main and the outlet of the Curb Stop inclusive, are the
property and responsibility of the Town. All piping, valves, equipment and any other
appurtenances between the Curb Stop and the Customer's building are the property and
responsibility of the Customer; although such items are required to meet standards and
specifications of the Water System. An exception to the above is the water meter, which
will always be the property of the Water System.
D. Requirement for control valves. Requirements established by the Town for
Customer- owned portions of the system include (but are not limited to) one (1)
Full Flow Control Valve located at the point of entry of the service pipe through the
building or structure wall.
E. New Hampshire regulations. Valves and other appurtenances shall conform to New
Hampshire Plumbing Code Regulations and Water System specifications. All plumbing
installations shall be performed by a licensed plumber in accordance with New
Hampshire Plumbing Code and any other applicable regulations and to the satisfaction of
the Town. If any defects in workmanship or materials are found or if the Customer's
service has not been installed in accordance with the requirements defined in the Rules
and other Water System specifications, the water service will either not be turned on or
will be discontinued if such defects are not remedied within a specific time set by the
Town. The Town will not be held liable for any defects in such workmanship or material.
A Customer must apply to the Town to alter in any way a previously installed and
approved water service connection.
TOWN OF BOW
17406
F. Maintenance of customer’s plumbing. All Customers shall maintain the plumbing and
fixtures within their own building(s) in good repair and protected from freezing at their
own expense. Customers shall make any repairs that shall be necessary to prevent
damage or leaks. All plumbing must conform to New Hampshire Plumbing Codes, NH
DES regulations and all other applicable federal, State and municipal regulations.
G. Backflow prevention device. As part of connecting the Customer's property to the Water
System and pursuant to New Hampshire Regulations (Env-Ws 364) all water service
Customers are financially and legally responsible for the installation of an approved
reduced pressure backflow prevention device or other approved backflow prevention
device approved by the Water System Manager immediately "downstream" of the water
meter or as specified by the Town (see Appendix B).
H. Leaks. The Town shall have the right to shut off water supplied to any property where a
leak exists or is believed to exist at any point beyond the Curb Stop. The Town will make
a reasonable attempt to contact the property owner or authorized representative as soon as
a leak is discovered. Any such leaks must be repaired and pass inspection by the Town
before water service will be restored. Customer shall be responsible for the cost of any
repairs from the curb stop into the building.
I. Safeguarding of hot water tanks. All Customers having boilers and/or hot water tanks
are responsible for the installation of appropriate vacuum breaker(s), relief valve(s)
and/or expansion tank(s) within the piping system. This is necessary to prevent any
damage to such tanks and to protect against damage from other sources, if it becomes
necessary to shut off the water at the water main in the street. The Water System will
not supply water to buildings where boilers, hot water tanks or other appliances are used
without these protective devices in accordance with New Hampshire Plumbing Codes,
NH DES regulations and all other applicable federal, State and municipal regulations.
J. Liability for interruption of water. The Town, its employees, officials and contractors
shall not be liable for loss or damage from any excess or deficiency in water pressure and
any circumstances beyond the control of the Water System. Prior to the interruption of
service to allow repairs, modifications or maintenance to the water distribution system,
the Town will endeavor to notify affected water service Customers, whenever practical.
However, nothing in this section shall be construed that such notice is required.
K. Liability for water discoloration. Neither the Town, nor the BOS, including contractors
and employees shall be held liable or responsible for loss or damage from discolored
water resulting from repairs, modifications, hydrant flushing or maintenance to the water
distribution system, or any other reason.
L. Liability for frozen water service components. It is the responsibility of all water
service Customers to ensure that all plumbing, fixtures, water meters and appliances
are protected from freezing. The Town, its employees, officials and contractors shall
not be liable for loss or damage to any plumbing, fixtures, water meters or appliances
due to freezing. The Customer is financially responsible for any repairs that may be
necessary to prevent leaks and damage.
WATER SYSTEM
17407
§ 174-5. General responsibilities.
A. Curb box. The curb box shall contain curb stop which must be readily available to the
Town should it be necessary to turn off the water supply.
B. Resale of water. The Customer will not be permitted to resell water to the property or
parcel of another person.
C. Meter. The meter is sized, provided, owned and installed by the Town. It may be
repaired, tested, calibrated, improved or replaced by the Town, for which purpose the
Customer must permit entry with reasonable advance notice. In some cases the meter is
located within the Customer's building or structure and in other cases, in a box or vault
elsewhere on the Customer's property. Regardless of the location, the Customer is
responsible for reasonable care and use of the meter. No meter shall be moved or
disturbed without permission of the Town.
D. Meter repair. The Town will have the right to remove, repair or replace any meter. The
cost of meter repairs or replacements due to defects will be paid by the Town. The costs
of repairs, maintenance and/or replacement caused by freezing, hot water, or unknown
causes, whether internal or external, will be charged to the Customer.
E. Sub-metering. Sub-metering is allowed with prior written approval from the Water
System Manager and properly permitted through the Town permitting procedures.
All sub-meters once approved for use and installation are owned and maintained by
the property owner in accordance with the NH Plumbing Code, NH DES regulations
and all other federal, State and municipal regulations.
F. Shut off or turn off service. Except in the case of emergencies, all water shut-offs and
turn-ons requested by a Customer require advance notice through a process of
scheduling an appointment for service with the Water System Manager with at least 24
hours during normal business days and billed according to the fee schedule (Chapter
124, § 124-10. of this Code).
§ 174-6. Town of Bow disclaimer of liabilities.
A. Guarantees. Constant water pressure and uninterrupted service are not guaranteed.
Further, the Customer is not assured a full volume of water or the required pressure per
square inch necessary to effectively operate any appliances and/or fixture. The same rule
holds true of all variable conditions that may take place in the use of water from the
water supply mains. The Town will use all reasonable care and diligence to avoid
interruptions and fluctuations in the service. The Town, its employees, officials and
contractors shall not be liable for any loss or damage from any excess or deficiency in
the pressure or volume or supply of water.
TOWN OF BOW
17408
B. Repairs. The Town, its employees, officials and contractors shall not be liable for
conditions in the Customer's plumbing or appliances associated with or following
installation, repairs or flushing to any part of the system and shall not be responsible for
damages caused by dirty water resulting from the opening or closing of any valves for
repairs or any other reasons, or the breaking of any supply lines.
C. Due notice. The Town will endeavor to give due notice to as many of the affected
Customers whenever it may become necessary to shut off the water supply to any section
of the system, to make repairs or changes or because of a broken main or service, and
will, as far as practical, use every effort to prevent damage or inconvenience. The Town,
its employees, officials and contractors shall not be liable for damage arising from the
shutting off of the water supply, in the event prior notice is not given by the Town or
received by the Customer.
D. Shut offs. The Town reserves the right at any time, without notice, to shut off the water
supply for the purpose of making repairs, extensions or other reasons. Customers having
boilers, hot water tanks or other appliances on their premises are hereby warned against
the danger of collapse or damage from the shutoff, and are required to provide safety
devices as described in the New Hampshire Plumbing Code, for their protection. The
Town, the BOS, water system contractors and employees shall not be liable for damages
resulting from the shutoff.
E. Existing connected equipment: All existing equipment connected to a new service shall
be in compliance with the current NH Plumbing Code, NH DES regulations and all other
applicable federal, State and municipal regulations as if a new installation and inspected
by the Town and/or certified by a licensed NH plumber.
§ 174-7. Procedures for service installation and use.
A. Contractual agreement. Acceptance of service shall bind the Customer to the laws,
rules, regulations and policies of New Hampshire, the Town of Bow, and the Rules and
Regulations as adopted, amended and approved by the BOS. Acceptance of service
shall form a part of the contract with every water system Customer and shall govern
their relations.
B. Applications for water service. All applications for any new installations, alterations,
replacements or change of ownership of a water service shall be submitted to the Town
by the owner of the property or duly authorized representative on the approved
application form (Appendix C). When applying for a new service connection or
alteration, a Site Plan and Tie Sheet are required. The application and Tie Sheet must be
approved by the Town.
C. Responsibility for charges. Customers of water shall be charged with and held
responsible for all water passing through their water meter. Exceptions may be granted
only by the BOS.
WATER SYSTEM
17409
D. Extending mains. Water Main Extension Applications (Appendix C) for new
service(s) will be accepted for review, subject to the existence of a municipal water
main in a street or right-of-way abutting the property to be served AND the existence
of sufficient water capacity. Approval of an application shall in no way obligate the
Town or the owner/applicant to extend the water main.
E. Alterations and modifications to connected systems. The Owner of a property that
is already connected with the Water System and desiring construction, alterations or
attachments to an existing structure where the Customer desires expansion of water
service or quantity of water shall submit plans and specifications for the proposed
work to the Town, for approval, inspection, and for a determination as to whether
water service will be provided to the Customer. The Town or its designated
representatives shall determine the terms, charges and conditions under which the
requested water use shall be permitted in accordance with these rules and regulations.
F. Water service inspections. The Customer, or Customer's authorized representative, shall
notify the Town prior to commencing work on any alteration or modification to an
existing water service, once plans and specifications have been approved. Upon said
notification, the Town will designate the requirements for inspections during construction
as approval may be required at different stages of work. No construction relating to the
interconnection with the Water System shall be covered or enclosed until inspected and
approved. Water System inspections will be scheduled during normal working hours. If
by mutual agreement inspections are scheduled for other than normal working hours, the
Customer will be responsible for paying any and all extra costs. A licensed plumber or
contractor approved by the Town and paid for by the Customer will coordinate and
perform all required inspections as well as provide a "TIE SHEET" or "AS BUILT"
diagram to the Water System Manager.
G. Private well. The Town has the responsibility to control all cross connections for the
safety of the Water System. Except where denied by local or State Regulations, a
property that is connected to the Water System may retain a private well for non-potable
uses.
H. Right of entry. The Owner or occupants of any premises served by the Water System
shall, upon presentation by Water System personnel of their credentials, authorize entry
to their building(s) without a warrant for the purpose of inspecting and surveying their
water system for new installation, cross connection, leak detection or to remove, repair,
read or replace any water meter at anytime the Town deems necessary. When such
access is refused, the water may be shut off and may not be turned on until such access
has been allowed and fees have been paid for shutting off and turning on the water.
TOWN OF BOW
17410
I. Full flow control valve and anti-backflow prevention devices. Full Flow Control
Valve at the meter inlet shall be the first fitting inside of a serviced building and shall
be inspected and approved by the Town. There must also be a backflow prevention
device installed to permit removal of the meter without backflow from the internal
water systems (see Appendix B). The meter shall be located in a clean, dry, warm and
accessible location. The Town will complete the meter installation and final
inspection.
J. Meter pits and remote reader boxes. When it is necessary or expedient to locate the
meter in an underground box or vault, it must be approved by the Town and the
Customer shall bear the expense of same and shall bear the responsibility of reasonable
care and maintenance of said box or vault such as keeping it clean and dry. In those
instances where the service line from the curb stop to the dwelling or structure is more
than 100 feet, a Meter Pit is required. All remote reader boxes located on the property
shall be the responsibility of the Town. In the event that they must be moved or removed
or if the remote reader is damaged or missing, the Customer shall notify the Town. If the
Customer does not notify the Town, any costs associated with the replacement of a
missing or damaged remote reader will be paid by the Customer. The Customer shall not
install a permanent cover to a Meter Pit or otherwise hinder access to the water meter in
any way. Covers must remain exposed at all times. Pits shall be furnished with inlet and
outlet connections.
K. Right to change meters. If, in the opinion of the Town, a meter does not fit the
conditions of the service installation, the Town has the right to change such meter. Such
a change shall be made in accordance with current regulations and costs are the
responsibility of the Customer. There is no charge to the Customer, if the Town replaces
a meter (with no change in size) as part of maintenance or improvements to the Water
System.
L. Repairing or replacing or removing meters. The Town shall have the right to
remove, repair or replace any meter at anytime it so determines. No meters shall be
removed by the Customer or their Plumber without written permission from the Town.
M. Fire services. Public fire service is provided through Town-owned fire hydrants
connected to Town-owned water mains located within Town-owned property or approved
right-of-ways. Private fire service(s) can be provided once approved by the Town through
private fire hydrants and/or private fire services. Private fire hydrants and Private Fire
Services shall be located on private property. Private Fire Service applications (Appendix
C) must be submitted to the Town for review and approval. All Private Fire Services
require a separate and individually approved connection and service line to the water
main. All Private Fire Services require backflow prevention devices equipped with a
detector meter set-up.
WATER SYSTEM
17411
N. Potable water service lines greater than two inch (>2”). Any potable water service line
greater than 2” will be considered a large service line. The location of the service and
required apparatus will be determined by the Town and/or its representative during the
review process. The requirements of these lines will differ from the standard service line
based on size, demand and location. This line will at a minimum have a working shutoff
valve near the property line so it can be controlled by the Town. All large service lines
will be subject to annual leak detection inspections and may be tested at the expense of
the owner if the Town and/or its representative warrant. The installation of this line will
follow standard construction practices and be subject to inspection by the Town and/or its
representative. [Amended 9-25-2012 by Board of Selectmen]
O. Temporary hydrant connections (THC).Temporary Hydrant Connections (THC) must
be installed by the Town of Bow or their representative. Prior to utilizing the THC the
contractor or party utilizing this connection must file an application with the Town along
with payment for the fee and deposit (Chapter 124, § 124-10. of this Code). The
following rules must be adhered to during the use of these temporary connections:
[Amended 4-23-2013 by Board of Selectmen.]
(1) Before installing the THC visually inspect the unit to confirm that it is in good
working condition.
(2) The THC must have a meter and reduced pressure backflow device approved or
supplied by the Town’s water manager.
(3) Record the initial meter reading. Meter readings must then be taken weekly on
Friday’s and submitted to the Town.
(4) Once installed, the hydrant must be fully opened, do not partially open the
hydrant or the in line gate valve. The THC shall be operated by a ball valve
installed just downstream of the meter and backflow device. Do not throttle the
hydrant operating valve or hydrant branch valve.
(5) The protection of the THC and fire hydrant being used is the responsibility of the
individual or company that files the application. If used in the winter time, the
THC and hydrant must be protected from freezing. In the event the THC or
hydrant becomes damaged due to neglect, the individual and/or company will be
responsible for the repair or replacement of the Town owned equipment.
(6) All TCH must be removed by 4:30pm, unless prior authorization is obtained.
TOWN OF BOW
17412
§ 174-8. Billing for services.
A. Meter reading and base service fee. Water use charges will be billed in accordance with
the current fee schedule (Chapter 124, § 124-10. of this Code). In addition to any water
use charges, a monthly Base Service Fee will be added to each bill starting with the first
month of service and continuing until the meter is removed. The BSF Fee ceases only
when the meter is removed from a property and water services are terminated.
B. Bills payable. Bills may be delivered either electronically or as a printed statement, as
determined by the Town. Bills are payable to the "Town of Bow" or its designee for bill
processing and will be sent to the Customer of Record (or duly appointed
representative), to the address provided on the Application for Service or provided by
the Customer. Customer shall notify the Town promptly of any change of mailing
address. If a bill is not paid in full within 30 days of the billing date, the account will be
considered delinquent.
C. Failure to receive a bill. Failure of the Customer (or duly appointed representative),
to receive a bill does not relieve the Customer of the obligation of payment, nor from
the consequences of nonpayment.
D. Delinquency notice. When bills are not paid in full on or before the due date specified
on the Customer's invoice, reminder notices will be sent. Notices shall be sent to the
Customer after 30 and 45days have elapsed from the due date and full payment has not
been received. Failure to pay the delinquent amount specified, after a final notice has
been sent to the Customer via certified mail, will subject the property to municipal
water lien processing. The delinquent amount shall be certified by the Town and
delivered to the Assessor for commitment to the Collector to be added to the property
tax to which it relates, as provided under RSA 38:22. For bills which are already
delinquent beyond these time periods, certification proceedings shall begin immediately
with or without such notice, In the event a Customer fails or refuses to pay the water
charges, such unpaid charges shall result in a lien on the property in accordance with
RSA 38:22. Interest at the rate of 1% per month computed monthly (12% per annum),
from and after the date fees are assessed by the Town, shall be charged on all fees
which remain unpaid 30 days after notification by the Town. The person against whom
fees are assessed shall be responsible for all costs of collection, including reasonable
attorney fees.
E. Termination and restoration of water service for non-payment. Service rendered
under any application, contract or agreement may be discontinued by the Town, after
reasonable notice, for any of the following reasons: a.) willful or indifferent waste of
water due to any cause, such as failure to repair service leaks within the Customer's
own property line, b.) misrepresentation in an application, contract or agreement and
c.) nonpayment of any account for water supplied or water service. When water service
WATER SYSTEM
17413
has been terminated for any reason other than temporary vacancy it will be renewed
only after the acceptance of a new application and when the conditions, circumstances
satisfaction of the Town, and upon payment of all charges due and payable by the
Customer in accordance with the approved rates, fees and regulations.
F. Sale or transfer of property. The Town must be notified prior to the sale, transfer or
any change in ownership of a property currently serviced by the Water System. A final
meter reading and a water service turn off must be scheduled with the Town, coincident
with the transfer. A turn-off of a fire service must be approved in writing by the Fire
Department. The Town will provide to the previous owner (or legal representative) a
statement of water usage within the then current billing cycle. The new owner must
complete an Application for Water Service and follow the process of transferring the
ownership of the connection to the new owner and the reinstatement of service. Bills will
continue to be rendered by the Town on a monthly basis, with any adjustment or pro
ration of fees between the prior and new owner being the responsibility of the Customer.
Changes to a Customer's address and billing will become effective at the next regular
billing date following the date of notice. A Customer remains responsible for all fees and
charges until the Town is notified of a change of ownership. All charges for any billing
period are against the property and will be the responsibility of the customer of record at
the time a bill is rendered.
G. Meter malfunction. All water passing through a Meter must be paid for by the
Customer. If the Town determines that a Meter has malfunctioned or failed to register
usage, the Customer will be charged at the average daily consumption recorded over the
prior two years, or shorter period if the in-service duration is less than two years.
H. Water meter. For each property connected to the Water System, there is a single (or
main) water meter. This Water Meter is the property of the Town. It provides the water
usage in gallons or cubic feet for billing the Customer (or duly appointed representative).
If a Customer with multiple units wants water meters for each unit, the additional water
meters (and any additional plumbing charges) is the sole responsibility of the parcel
owner and must be installed downstream of the Main Water Meter by a licensed plumber.
The additional water meter(s) or sub-meter(s) will not be read, supplied, or maintained by
the Town. [Amended 9-25-2013 by Board of Selectmen.]
(1) All initial meters two inch (2”) in size or smaller will be supplied by the Town
at no cost to the property owner. All meter sizes will be determined by the
Town and/or its representative during the service approval process.
(2) All meters greater than two inch (2”) in size will be paid for by the property
owner and become the property of the Town. The property owner will be
provided a credit for the cost of a two inch (2”) meter. The meter
manufacturer, model, type, and size will be specified by the Town and/or its
representative during the service approval process.
TOWN OF BOW
17414
(3) Meter Testing. All water meters will be tested in accordance with AWWA
Standard C705-60, Testing Cold-Water Meters. In addition all meters greater
than 2” in size will be installed with proper testing ports for accuracy testing
in place. These tests will also be subjected to and be in accordance with
AWWA Standards.
(4) If any water meter becomes inoperable due to neglect on the part of the
property owner, a new meter will be installed at the current cost of a direct
replacement meter plus ten percent (10%) and the current labor rates on a time
and materials basis. The property owner will be invoiced for these services.
[Amended 4-23-2013 by Board of Selectmen.]
I. Abatement and adjustments. Abatements will be made for clerical errors, misreads or
failure of Water System equipment. Abatements will not be issued for water leaks, unless
expressly granted by the Town. The Abatement Procedure for Water Bills is:
(1) All claims for adjustments of water bills shall be made within thirty (30) days
of the billing date.
(2) The Town shall, upon written request, consider an abatement of a previously
paid water bill.
(3) The Town shall hold a meeting with Customer within forty five (45) days
of receipt of a request for abatement and shall render a decision within
forty five (45) days of the meeting.
(4) A Customer may seek an abatement or adjustment by requesting a hearing
before the BOS, after first completing the informal meeting process set
forth in this section.
J. Disconnect from water system. A Customer may disconnect from the Water System by
completing the process set forth in this section. A written request form (see Appendix C)
must be submitted to the Town. If a property receives fire service from the water system the
Fire Department and Building Department will need to approve the disconnection in advance
in writing. Upon review and approval of this request by the Town, the Customer must hire an
approved contractor to disconnect their water service at the water main. The Town is to be
notified of the time and day when the disconnection will occur, and the Town may provide a
monitor to be present when the disconnection occurs. Once inspected and approved, the
water meter must be returned to the Town. A final bill for water use must be paid before the
account will be closed. The Customer is not entitled to a refund of the connection fee. If the
property owner wishes to connect at a later time, costs, terms and procedures in effect at that
future time, will apply.
WATER SYSTEM
17415
§ 174-9. Penalties.
Penalties are hereby established for violations not already defined in the Rate Schedule
(Chapter 124, § 124-10., of this Code) as follows:
(1) First Violation: Penalty applicable upon written notice of violation to Customer:
$50.00
(2) Subsequent Violations: Penalty applicable upon and after the eleventh day
following written notice of first violation. If a violation remains uncorrected
after the tenth day following the original notice, each day after the tenth day
shall constitute a separate violation. $100.00 each violation
Attachments:
Appendix A, Fee Schedule
Appendix B, Typical Water Supply Installation Diagram
Appendix C, Application Forms
APPENDIX A
(Source: Chapter 124-10, Fees, Code Town of Bow)
§ 124-10. Water rates and fees. [Amended 5-14-2013 by Board of Selectmen]
Water rates and fees are set as follows:
A. Water Rates
(1) Monthly Service Charge (based on meter size):
*Meter sizes determined by Water System Manager
**Service charge for meters >2” to be determined following the receipt of the
application for service by the Board of Selectmen
(2) Monthly Metered Consumption Charge = $5.65/1,000 gallons
B. Annual Fire Service Fee (based on tap size at the water main):
Fire Service Size (inches)* Annual Fire Service Fee
</= 4” $670
6” $1,125
8” $1,655
> 8” $2,125
*Fire service size based on the size of the tap/connection at the water main
**Fire service charge for services > 8” to be determined following the receipt of the
application for service by the Board of Selectmen
C. Fire Hydrant Fees
(1) Private Fire Hydrants: $620 annually per fire hydrant
(Located on private property and not owned by the Bow Water System)
(2) Public Fire Hydrants: $330 annually per fire hydrant
(Located on Town owned property and owned by the Bow Water System)
Ch. 174 Appendix A
A-1
Meter Size (Inches)* Service Charge
5/8” $25.00
1” $40.00
1-1/2” $80.00
2” $125.00
> 2” $250.00
D. System Development Fee (based on meter size for each meter to be installed, paid in full in
advance):
SDC Meter Size (inches)* Amount
5/8” $695
1” $2,360
1-1/2” $5,690
2” $11,240
3” $20,525
4” $32,350
6” $40,550
8” $48,475
>8” $58,550
*Meter sizes determined by Water System Manager
**Service charge for meters >2” to be determined following the receipt of the
application for service by the Board of Selectman.
E. Fees for temporary hydrant connections (THC):
(1) Fee for service: $100
(2) Refundable deposit for meter and equipment: $200
F. Other/Miscellaneous Fees:
(1) Turn-on Fee, normal business hours (Monday-Friday, non-holiday, 8:00 a.m. – 4:00
p.m.): $40
(2) Turn-on Fee, after-hours (Monday- Friday, 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m., weekends and
holidays): $160
(3) Collection Charge: $75
(4) Backflow device testing fee: $75 per test
(5) Replace damaged or missing meter: $75 plus actual cost of meter assembly
(6) Late payment charge: 5% of any unpaid balance after 30 days
(7) Seasonal meter use: additional $75 to existing approved rates and fees
(8) Meter tampering charge: $500
(9) Return check fee:$25
(10) Final water meter read/final bill generation: $75
G. Water Main Extension Program Fees
(1) Application Fee: $150
(2) Bond 100% of estimated project expense including Water System reviews (legal,
engineering and inspectional services).
Ch. 174 Appendix A
A-2
APPENDIX B
Ch. 174 Appendix B
B-1
APPENDIX C
Ch. 174 Appendix C
C-1
Ch. 174 Appendix C
C-2
Ch. 174 Appendix C
C-3
.
Ch. 174 Appendix C
C-4
DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS
20401 12/22/2015
Chapter 204
DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS
Article I
General Provisions
§ 204-1. Authority.
§ 204-2. Title.
§ 204-3. Purpose.
§ 204-4. Adoption of RSA 236:13.
§ 204-5. Jurisdiction.
§ 204-6. Severability.
Article II
Word Usage and Definitions
§ 204-7. Word usage.
§ 204-8. Terms defined.
Article III
General Requirements and Design Standards
§ 204-9. Permits.
§ 204-10. Driveway permit application.
§ 204-11. Driveways.
§ 204-12. Temporary driveways.
Article IV
Administrative Procedures
§ 204-13. Establishment of fees.
§ 204-14. Collection of fees.
§ 204-15. Driveway approval.
TOWN OF BOW
20402 12/22/2015
§ 204-16. Enforcement.
§ 204-17. Civil enforcement.
§ 204-18. Violations and penalties.
§ 204-19. Waivers.
§ 204-20. Appeals.
§ 204-21. Appendices.
§ 204-22. Typical Drawings.
[HISTORY. Adopted by the Planning Board on 6-4-2015. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 204-1. Authority.
These regulations are adopted pursuant to the authority invested in the Bow Planning Board by
Chapter 236, Sections 13-14, New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, as amended; and the
Town of Bow Subdivision Regulations (authorized by 3/8/1960 Town Meeting, originally
adopted 5/18/1967); Zoning Ordinance (originally adopted 3/8/1955); and the Site Plan Review
Regulations (originally adopted 5/5/1986); all as from time to time amended.
§ 204-2. Title.
This chapter shall hereafter be known, cited and referred to as the "Driveway Regulations of the
Town of Bow," hereinafter referred to as "these regulations."
§ 204-3. Purpose.
The purpose of these regulations is to establish the criteria, standards, application forms and fees
charged for the location and design of driveways within the Town of Bow.
§ 204-4. Adoption of RSA 236:13.
In addition to the standards contained herein all driveways shall also conform to the standards
found within RSA 236:13, as amended, except where modified herein.
DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS
20403 12/22/2015
§ 204-5. Jurisdiction.
These regulations shall apply to the installation of all temporary and permanent access points
onto the Town of Bow roads, including any changes to existing driveways beyond normal
maintenance. In general, the provisions contained herein apply primarily, but not exclusively, to
the improvements within the public road right of way. All developments located on a state road
shall obtain a driveway permit from the New Hampshire Department of Transportation prior to
the issuance of a building permit for new construction or final acceptance for existing
construction.
§ 204-6. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate any other section or
provision thereof.
Article II
Word Usage and Definitions
§ 204-7. Word usage.
For purposes of these regulations, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms and words used herein
shall be used, interpreted and defined as set forth in this section.
A. Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense shall
include the future tense; words used in the plural number shall include the singular; words
used in the singular shall include the plural; the word "herein" shall mean "in these
regulations"; the word "regulations" shall mean "these regulations"; the word "shall" or "will"
is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
B. A "person" shall include natural persons as well as a corporation, a partnership and/or an
incorporated association of persons such as a club; "used" or "occupied" as applied to any
land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be
used or occupied."
C. The terms "drive", "driveway" or "access point" mean a driveway and the terms shall be used
interchangeably.
D. Words not specifically defined herein shall have their common meaning.
TOWN OF BOW
20404 12/22/2015
§ 204-8. Terms defined.
The following definitions, in addition to the definitions found within the Town of Bow's Zoning
Ordinance, Subdivision Regulations, and Site Plan Review Regulations, are hereby adopted for
the purpose of these regulations:
APPLICATION - An application for a driveway permit.
BOARD - The Planning Board for the Town of Bow.
DRIVEWAY - A private entrance, exit, or approach providing vehicular access to a street or
highway.
POINT OF TANGENCY - The point at which the curb radius ends and the ramp begins. (See
Appendix B.) Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of the chapter.
RAMP - That portion of a driveway located between the point of tangency and the property line.
RESURFACED - The installation of a new layer of bituminous pavement. The definition of
"resurfacing" shall not include the addition of sealcoating to a driveway.
RIGHT-OF-WAY (ROW) - Town-owned property, easements or other interests therein,
dedicated for municipal highway purposes.
SINGLE DRIVEWAY - A driveway serving one (1) lot or use.
TEMPORARY DRIVEWAY - A driveway which is only to be used for a period of six (6)
months or less.
ARTICLE III
General Requirements and Design Standards
§ 204-9. Permits.
No driveway shall be constructed, modified, resurfaced or moved without obtaining a driveway
permit from the Public Works Director (PWD), or his/her authorized agent. Through its
authority, the Planning Board is authorized to approve the general location of a driveway via
subdivision approval and specific driveway design via site plan approval. Such approvals by the
Planning Board shall be interpreted as authorizing the PWD to approve modifications that are
consistent with Planning Board approval.
§ 204-10. Driveway permit application.
The application for a driveway permit shall be made on the application form as shown in
Appendix A included at the end of the chapter. The Public Works Director may require
additional information or plans depending on the location and design of the driveway.
DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS
20405 12/22/2015
§ 204-11. Driveways.
All driveways shall conform to the Town of Bow Subdivision Regulations (including, but not
limited to 3.02K & 8.01K), Zoning Ordinance (including, but not limited to 6.06 & 6.07), Site
Plan Review Regulations (including, but not limited to 5.02S & Appendix A.04G), and the
following requirements:
A. Driveways shall not be placed within fifty (50) feet of a street right of way intersection.
B. For driveways with a grade in excess of ten percent (10%), a twenty-foot-long flat
platform with a maximum grade of 2% approaching the street is required.
C. Driveway construction shall be approved by the Public Works Director after
consultation with Fire, Police, and Planning Departments.
D. The driveway shall be graded so that water from the lot does not flow onto the street:
(1) Commercial lots located above the street may require a grate across the driveway
entrance in order to divert the water and prevent it from adversely affecting the road
or ROW.
(2) Any driveway located over a culvert shall slope to drain into the culvert.
(3) All curbed driveways shall have catch basins at the back of the sidewalk.
E. Any culvert within the road right-of-way shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) inches in
diameter, unless otherwise approved, and shall have at least twelve (12) inches of
cover. The culvert inverts shall match the bottom of the ditch. The PWD may require
approved geotextile fabric be installed beneath paved areas. The culvert shall be
bedded in compacted 3/4” minus stone which shall extend from 6” below the pipe to
halfway up the pipe.
F. The driveway pavement shall match the grade at edge of pavement, shall not block
street drainage, and shall drain away from the street.
G. On corner lots, driveways shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from the street ROW
intersection. In conformance with the Subdivision Regulations, a Temporary
Turnaround shall be treated as an intersection and driveways shall not be located within
fifty (50) feet of the end or the ear of the turnaround. See Appendix C.
H. A permanent residential one or two-family driveway shall be paved from the edge of
the town roadway pavement with a maximum width of twenty (20) feet, measured at
the ramp or throat, not the curved radius. Driveways for multi-family residential and
non-residential uses may be approved by the Planning Board via site plan approval.
The driveway shall be paved for a minimum length of five (5) feet from the edge of
TOWN OF BOW
20406 12/22/2015
pavement of the roadway. The driveway construction shall be complete before
issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
I. The number of driveways per lot shall be as governed by RSA 236:13, as amended, and
the Public Works Director. Only drives which provide safe access to the streets shall be
permitted.
J. The driveway shall connect to the street at a right angle, if possible. However in no case
shall the driveway intersect the street at less than a sixty (60) degree angle.
K. Adequate all season safe sight distance in each direction shall be present. In cases
where the Planning Board has not determined the minimum adequate sight distance via
subdivision or site plan review, all season safe site distance for Arterial (Class A) and
Collector (Class B) Streets shall comply with the recommendations of the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) in A Policy on
Geometric Design of Highways and Streets. For driveways for one and two-family
dwellings on a Local (Class C) Street, a minimum of 275 feet of all season safe sight
distance shall be present. Unless all season safe sight distance can be obtained, the
driveway shall be located at that location that the Public Works Director determines to
be safest.
L. Driveways shall be placed a minimum of ten (10) feet from any property line.
M. Driveways for one and two-family residential shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in
width with a desirable width of fifteen (15) feet. Driveway width shall be measured at
the ramp or throat. Minimum driveway width for multi-family and non-residential uses
shall conform to conditions of Planning Board approval of subdivision and/or site plan.
N. The radius of a driveway meeting a street shall not extend beyond the applicant's
frontage without notarized permission from the abutter.
O. Prior to issuance of a driveway permit, the Public Works Director shall be authorized to
require an acceptable financial guarantee to ensure that the Town ROW and roadway
are in as good condition following driveway construction as were found prior to
construction. Documentation of the amount and purpose of the financial guarantee
shall be placed in the applicable building permit and Planning Board files, and shall be
provided to the Finance Department.
§ 204-12. Temporary driveways.
Except where otherwise approved by the PWD, temporary driveways shall conform to the
standards in § 204-11. In addition, all temporary driveways shall conform to the following
requirements:
A. Temporary driveways shall require a permit from the Public Works Director.
B. No more than one (1) temporary driveway shall be permitted per lot.
DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS
20407 12/22/2015
C. Temporary driveway permits are valid for a period of six (6) months. The Public Works
Director may, at his discretion, extend that permit for a six (6) month period and require
a five (5) foot paved apron to protect the town roadway.
D. Temporary driveways used in conjunction with construction, logging or other activities
on Class V and VI roads may be required to post a bond or other surety in order to
ensure that any damage done to public streets is covered. The Board of Selectmen has
the authority to determine the amount of the financial guarantee required and the form
of the surety.
Article IV
Administrative Procedures
§ 204-13. Establishment of fees.
It shall be the responsibility of the Board of Selectmen to establish a fee for a driveway permit
pursuant to these regulations. Once adopted that fee schedule shall be considered part of these
regulations.
§ 204-14. Collection of fees.
An applicant for a driveway permit shall submit the required fee to the PWD. It shall be the
responsibility of the Public Works Director, or designee, to collect the appropriate fee for all
driveway permits within the Town of Bow.
§ 204-15. Driveway approval.
A completed driveway shall be approved by the Public Works Director prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy for new construction or final acceptance for existing construction.
§ 204-16. Enforcement.
The Public Works Director is charged with enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
§ 204-17. Civil enforcement.
Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by law or in equity to prevent unlawful
construction, to recover damages, to restrain, correct or abate a violation, to prevent illegal
occupancy of a building, structure or premises, and these remedies shall be in addition to the
penalties as set forth below.
§ 204-18. Violations and penalties.
The town adopts the provisions of RSA 236:14, as amended, in the enforcement of any
violations of these regulations. Any person, corporation or other entity who fails to comply with
TOWN OF BOW
20408 12/22/2015
or violates any of these regulations shall be subject to prosecution as a misdemeanor. In addition
the cost of restoring the road to its preexisting condition shall be borne by the violator.
§ 204-19. Waivers.
Upon receipt of a written request, the Public Works Director (PWD) has the authority to waive
or modify the provisions of this chapter except for those required by RSA 236:13, as amended,
or those related to Planning Board conditions of approval. The written request for waiver shall
provide written justification and documentation for all waivers. For such waivers and
modifications approved, the PWD shall provide the decision in writing and shall include
justification and documentation. All appeals of any action of the Public Works Director
pertaining to driveways and these regulations shall be made in writing to the Planning Board,
which shall issue a written decision within 60 days.
§ 204-20. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by an official action of the Planning Board may appeal to the Superior
Court as provided by New Hampshire RSA 677:15, as amended
Article V
Metal Detecting on Town Property
§ 159-13. Metal detecting permitted.
The practice of metal detecting is permitted on or in Town-owned property, in accordance with
the procedures and restrictions contained within this article.
§ 159-13. Metal detecting prohibited.
A. The practice of metal detection is prohibited on or in all Town-owned property if the site
is an “historic property,” as defined by New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated
(RSA) 227-C:1, VI.
B. The Town of Bow reserves the right to prohibit metal detecting on certain of its
properties as it sees fit. The Town Manager, in consultation with the appropriate boards
and committees, shall make such determinations.
§ 159-15. Permission request.
A. A formal request for metal detection activities must first be filed with and approved by
the Town Manager. The Manager shall ensure the application does not involve an historic
property or other Town parcel where metal detecting is prohibited and that the applicant
understands the restrictions that are in effect in Bow as described herein.
B. Any person receiving permission under this subsection shall, at the completion of the
work, restore the Town property to its previous condition.
§ 159-16. Legal ownership of found items.
A. Any items found while metal detecting shall be promptly reported to the Town.
B. Unless otherwise exempted herein, any items discovered through this practice are and
shall be the property of the Town or released by the Board of Selectmen of Bow.
C. If the found item in question is an “historic resource”, as defined by New Hampshire
Revised Statutes Annotated (RSA) 227-C:1, VII, the person finding or discovering shall
take no further action to remove, dislodge, or uncover the item, shall leave it in its present
condition, and shall report the discovery of the found item and its location to the Town of
Bow and the New Hampshire Department of Cultural Resources.
§ 159-17. Exemption to the Town’s legal right of ownership.
Permission may be obtained from the Town Manager to use a metal detector on Town property
to locate and recover a specific item of personal property which has been lost by the person
requesting the permission. He or she shall present to the Town Manager an accurate description
of said item and attest to its ownership and loss. If the owner of the lost item then locates said
item as a result of metal detection, then he or she shall bring the item to the Town Manager, who
shall determine whether the finder may take possession of it. If the person who finds or locates
said item can accurately describe said item and attests to those facts, the finder may take
possession of the item.
§ 186-18 Depositing of debris on town streets, sidewalks or
ORDINANCE NO. 19-08
TOWN OF BOW, NH
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND the Code of the Town of Bow, Chapter 164, Vehicles and
Traffic, to add a new section prohibiting overnight parking on Town owned property.
Be it enacted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow as follows:
Section 1. Chapter 164, Vehicles and Traffic, is amended to add a new section, §164-6.1.
Overnight parking prohibited on Town-owned property., to read as follows:
§164-6.1. Overnight parking prohibited on Town-owned property.
There shall be no overnight parking upon any public property, including any Town-owned
building or facility parking lot, park, common, playground or recreational area, between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless permission is granted by the Town.
Section 2. Effective date. This ordinance shall take effect on August 1, 2019.
Adopted by Board of Selectmen: July 16, 2019.
Z O N I N G O R D I N A N C E
T O W N of B O W , N E W H A M P S H I R E
Article 15. Business Development District
and
Article 16 Impact Fee Ordinance and Methodology Reports
ARE PUBLISHED SEPARATELY
ADOPTED AND REVISED THROUGH MARCH, 2016
ADOPTIONS AND REVISIONS AS OUTLINED BY THE
NEW HAMPSHIRE REVISED STATUES ANNOTATED CHAPTERS 674 - 677
BE IT ORDAINED BY TOWN MEETING OF THE TOWN OF BOW, PURSUANT TO ALL
RELEVANT RSA'S, THAT THIS ORDINANCE BE ADOPTED AND FROM TIME TO TIME
AMENDED AS NEEDED TO MAINTAIN ITS INTEGRITY.
ADOPTED ----- March 8, 1955
AMENDED ----- March 8, 1958
AMENDED ----- March 8, 1960
AMENDED ----- March 13, 1962
AMENDED ----- March 12, 1963
Enlarged Residential and Residential Agricultural Districts.
AMENDED ----- November 7, 1972
AMENDED ----- March 4, 1975
Minimum lot size from one acre to two acres; minimum lot frontage from 150' to
200'; and sign heights not to exceed 25'.
AMENDED ----- March 2, 1976
AMENDED ----- March 8, 1977
AMENDED ----- March 13, 1979
Compliance with National Flood Insurance Program.
AMENDED ----- March 11, 1980
AMENDED ----- October 6, 1981
Added Civic Zone; increased Commercial Zone; limits only 1 one-family dwelling on
approved lot; accessory dwelling units must meet same requirements of frontage and area
as if on own lot; increased required distance from commercial kennels / animal hospitals
from dwellings or residential districts; restricted recreation vehicles as living quarters;
added method of complaints; building inspector’s duties to include building code
enforcement; building permits good for 1 year; defined/redefined: Family, Residential Lot,
Lot, Duplex, Relative’s Apartment, and Required Building Permits.
AMENDED ----- March 9, 1982
AMENDED ----- March 8, 1983
Allows special exception for having less than required frontage but having required
area for 1 one-family dwellings.
AMENDED ----- March 13, 1984
Added Cluster Development regulations (but not allowed in Residential or Rural
Districts); added Institutional Zone and its uses; permit elderly housing in same zones as
hospitals and nursing homes; defined Day Care Center and permitted them by special
exception; changed 2 lots on South St/Valley Rd from Residential to Commercial District.
AMENDED ----- March 12, 1986
Added numerous definitions; if more than one use on lot then all zoning
requirements must be met; established Permit and Application Fee Procedure; regulated
size, height, type, and placement of signs; require 1 parking space per 80 SF; authorized
to fine at $100 per day for violations; ZBA to determine bonds to restore gravel pits.
AMENDED ----- March 10, 1987
Allows relatives apartments by special exception in Rural Zone; allows indoor
commercial recreation by special exception in the Limited and General Industrial Zones;
allows Manufactured in Commercial Zone by special exception; Essential Public Services
(radio and T.V. towers) by special exception; prohibits cemeteries in R, C, I-1, & I-2 Zones,
RU by special exception.
AMENDED ----- March 9, 1988
Replaced Environmental Protection Areas with Floodplain Development Ordinance.
AMENDED ----- March 14, 1989
Defined / redefined: Manufactured Housing, Condominiums, Buildable Land;
changed Off-Street Parking; prohibit radio and T.V. towers in Rural Zone.
AMENDED ----- March 13, 1990
Added Wetlands and Aquifer Protection Ordinances; amended agricultural uses;
amended zoning districts boundaries to conform with lot lines; conditions to remove sand
and gravel.
AMENDED ----- March 12, 1991
New sign regulations; allow off-street parking and driveways in certain setbacks and
access ways.
AMENDED ----- March 10, 1992
Changed Table of Use for hospital, nursing home, elderly housing, and clinic from
special exception to variance.
AMENDED ----- March 9, 1993
Changed Block 1, lots 49 & 114 from Residential to Commercial Zone; added day
care regulations.
AMENDED ----- March 9, 1994
Redefined Recreational Vehicle and established regulations for RVs in Floodplain
Zones.
AMENDED ----- March 14, 1995
Redefined Change in Use, Gasoline Station; included accessory buildings and
structures in the Golf Course, Country Club & Tennis category; Established new
Transitional Screening standards; allow temporary subdivision sale signs in new
subdivisions; added Sexually Oriented Businesses - allowed in I-2 district, established
definitions, restrictions, and regulations; recodified to include building permit applications,
fees, requirements, responsibilities of Building Inspector, violation penalties, and
requirements for chimneys and blasting.
AMENDED ----- March 12, 1996
Added Planned Open Space - Residential Development (POS-RD); block 1, lot 91
changed from Residential to Commercial Zone.
AMENDED ----- March 11, 1997
Added Growth Management Ordinance (GMO); block 1, lot 90 changed from
Residential to Commercial Zone.
AMENDED ----- March 10, 1998
(Comprehensive revision)
AMENDED ----- March 9, 1999
Updated GMO; expanded uses in C, I-1, I-2, Civ, and Inst zones; permit more
agricultural uses in non-residential zones.
AMENDED ----- March 14, 2000
Created an Interim GMO - no residential subdivisions for 1 year; updated current
GMO; Planning Board to approve Planned Business Subdivisions in the Commercial and
Limited Industrial Zones to include lots without minimum area, frontage, or setbacks;
clarified that non-elderly housing units within elderly housing developments must meet
minimum lot size requirements; clarify wetland buffers in regard to waste disposal systems
in prime wetlands; create administrative procedures for minor wetland CUPs; authorized
ZBA to grant equitable waivers of dimensional requirements.
AMENDED ----- March 13, 2001
Added Impact Fee Ordinance and Business Development District; updated GMO;
limits storage of unregistered vehicle to one; defined Habitable Floor Area; requires
additional information on applications for wireless communication facilities; setbacks for rail
lines & spurs; hiring of Land Surveyor optional; and vernal pools.
AMENDED ----- March 12, 2002
Eliminated IFO waiver for those in building process prior to its adoption; permit
Planned Business Subdivisions in the BDD; updated GMO; Planning Board to regulate and
permit small scale pre-development excavations; updated definition of Hardship; clarified
required acreage and frontage of Multiple Principal Uses on a Single Lot; clarified 75'
buffer for all streams; Manufactured Housing Subdivisions permitted in RU Zone; clarified
administrative procedures for minor wetland CUPs; regulate unregistered vehicles and
trailers; prevents long-term living in boats, RVs, campers, etc; defined Zoning
Administrator and Building Inspector; and increased private wells setback to 75'.
AMENDED ----- March 11, 2003
Updated GMO; require that POS-RD buffer be marked; allow the Planning Board to
hear requests for exceptions to wetland ordinance; require new development to mark
wetland buffers; add tables for wetland buffers and uses prohibited, permitted, and
requiring a CUP; regulate High Risk Pollution Generating Activities in the AP District;
substitute the BDD Sign code for the Article 8 sign existing regulations for non-residential
use signs; and increase penalties for violations.
AMENDED ----- March 9, 2004
Updated GMO; revised GMO to permit up to 20 multi-family units per year in one
development; clarified 14.07 A to require that complaints be submitted in writing; moved
Appendix A Recommended Plants for Semi-Opaque Screens to the Site Plan Review
Regulations; permit Accessory Apartments in the Rural District; amended 7.15 to increase
the limit for Minor Pre-development Excavations from 2000 to 10,000 cubic yards in the C,
I-1, I-2 and BD districts; and exempting certain elderly developments from school impact
fees and permitting waivers of school impact fees for subsidized, affordable housing.
AMENDED ----- March 8, 2005
Updated GMO; created an Interim GMO - no elderly housing for 1 year unless it
complies with minimum standards for lot sizes of Article 6.07; modified 4.02 A 4 to adjust
the Aquifer Protection District Overlay Map to include new areas identified as stratified drift
aquifers; amended 5.11 H 10 and 7.13 to remove Laboratory and Research Centers,
Corporate Office Headquarters, and Data Processing Centers as allowed uses in the
Residential (R) and Rural (RU) Districts; renamed 7.02 Planned Open Space - Residential
Development (POS-RD) Subdivision to “Open Space Residential Development” and
amended several sections of the Article; amended Article 8. Sign Regulations to place a
thirty day time limit on a Temporary Sign, to require that a Portable Sign comply with
location requirements and to require a permit for either type sign; amended 13.03 H to
change the time limit to request a rehearing of a Zoning Board of Adjustment decision to
within 30 days of the date of the meeting (to comply with the current statute RSA 677:2);
increased the penalties for second zoning violations of 14.07 to $550 per day (per RSA
676:17 I b); and changed the zone district of Lot 108, Block 1located at 2 Old Hill Road
from Residential (R) to Commercial (C).
AMENDED ----- May 9, 2006
Revised 5.11 Table of Uses for non-residential districts; replaced 7.10 with
expanded Personal Wireless Service Facility regulations and permitting cell towers in all
districts by CUP; revised 7.05 Elderly, Duplex, and Multi-Family to increase the lot size
required for elderly housing developments and to change the way minimum lot size is
calculated for multi-family; updated GMO; revised 8. Sign Regulations and 15.13 Signage
Requirements to make the ordinance consistent with the Town right of way ordinance,
replace the appeal process for temporary signs, and permit hanging signs; added
10.02C.5. to require a waiver of liability before issuing building permits in the Flood District;
revised 13.02B.2.a. to update the hardship criteria for variances; revised 13.03G. Issuance
of Decision to require that notices of ZBA decisions be recorded at the MCRD; updated the
Bow Building Code to adopt the State Building Codes and the International Residential
Code; and revised the Table of Uses to permit indoor commercial recreational facilities in
the Civic District by conditional use permit.
AMENDED ----- May 8, 2007
Updated GMO; revised Article 7.02 Open Space - Residential Development (OSRD)
to direct the Planning Board to adopt criteria for establishing the number of units
permitted in an OS-RD and to clarify that required buffers shall not be used to comply with
setbacks and lot area; revised Article 8 Sign Ordinance to add “sandwich boards”, to allow
separate for sale signs for condominium units, to clarify “work / trade / contractor” sign
provisions, and to clarify the minimum 10 feet sign setback; changed Lots 106, 108, 148,
148-A, in Block 3 and Lot 65 in Block 4 to Civic (CV) District; revised Article 11.03 D
Expansion or change in non-conforming use to remove a conflict that prevented the
enlargement of a structure or outside improvements; and revised Article 14.07 Violations
by adding new sub-section F Imminent Hazards.
AMENDED ----- May 13, 2008
Updated GMO and removed the exemption for Housing for the Elderly; added new
section 2.11 to clarify that materials submitted with permit applications may not contain
prohibitions against copying; added new paragraph to section 14.06 B to require that
applicants for Certificates of Occupancy provide an affidavit of compliance; updated
Section 10.02 Floodplain ordinance and related section 4.01 B to maintain eligibility for
flood insurance and disaster assistance; adopted the provisions of the New Hampshire
Building Code (NH RSA 155-A), as may be amended from time to time, for enforcement
within the Town to be perpetually consistent with the State Building Code; and added
provisions to Article 8 Signs for Flags and Banners on Outdoor Display Lots and a new
section 15.13 A 1 c limiting free standing signs to one per lot, except for directory signs for
business areas off of Route 3-A.
AMENDED ----- May 12, 2009
Updated Article 10.03 Aquifer Protection District ordinance with related revisions to
Articles 4.02 and 7.14 by replacing most of the text with text from the 2006 NHDES Model
Groundwater Protection Ordinance; updated Article 10.01 Wetlands Conservation District
and related Articles 3.02 and 4.01 B to correct the wetlands definition, clarify that surface
waters continue to be protected, update statutory citations - NHDES rule citations -
references to agencies - wetland assessment methodology, and modify the standards for
granting a CUP; added Small Wind Energy Systems as an accessory use in all districts
along with a new Supplementary Regulations section 7.25; and modified criteria B of
Article 7.06 Home Occupation to permit sales incidental to the home occupation.
AMENDED ----- March 9, 2010
Revised Article 7.10 Radio/TV Tower or Antenna and Personal Wireless Service
Facility (PWSF) by reducing or eliminating requirements for antenna only installations;
revised Articles 7.14D3 Duration of Permit and 14.05B Duration of Permits and Approvals
to authorize the ZBA to grant excavation permit extensions for up to five years; revised
13.02B2a Unnecessary Hardship for Variance to update the definition of a hardship to
conform to the new definition in RSA 674:33, I(b); revised 10.02A Authority for the
Floodplain District to apply floodplain maps as adopted by the Select Board; revised
14.05A Duration of Building Permits and Approvals to add provisions for one six-month
extension of a building permit; and added building code provisions to 14.01A for
emergency escape from basements, smoke alarms / carbon monoxide detectors, and
potable water.
AMENDED ----- March 8, 2011
Revised Article 16 Impact Fee Ordinance to clarify Planning Board authority to
suspend impact fees (new section 16.01 M) and to add authority for the Planning Board to
grant waivers; added a definition (3.02) of temporary structure and use to clarify when,
where, and for how long temporary structures and uses may be in place; added definitions
(3.02) for commercial and small electricity generation and revised 5.11 Table of Uses to
permit commercial generators as a principal use in certain districts and to permit small
producers from renewable sources as an accessory use in all districts; revised 5.06 Uses
Not Permitted to add procedures for Uses Not Specified in 5.11 Table of Use Regulations;
revised 7.04 Accessory Dwelling Units such that the size limitation will be calculated based
on Habitable Floor Area and revised the definition of Habitable Floor Area regarding clear
height; revised 7.06 Home Occupation to clarify the definition of and limitations on Home
Occupations; revised 7.14 Excavation E. 2. to clarify that performance bonds and other
sureties are as approved by the Board of Selectmen and to clarify that the Zoning Board of
Adjustment can hire independent experts to assist in the review of excavation applications;
revised definitions (3.02) of Basement and Story and added definitions for Grade Plane
and Story Above Grade Plane to clarify the definition of Story and the calculation of
number of stories; and, revised 10.01 Wetlands B. 3. and F. 2. e. to update references to
NHDES Rules Citation for Wetlands, specifically for stream crossings.
AMENDED ----- March 13, 2012
Established a new Residential One Family (R-1) district (4.01 & 5.11) and changed
the Residential (R) District located generally north of Vaughn Road to the new R-1 District;
expanded the AP Overlay District to include the Well Head Protection Area for the new
Bow Municipal Water System; revised 10.02 F Floodplain District Design Standards to
require that new construction and substantial improvements be built at least two feet above
the base flood elevation; modified BDD 15.17 D Waivers to allow requests for waivers to
be submitted via a Conditional Use Permit application; modified 15.11 Table of Uses,
Principal Uses H. 9. Contractor’s Yard and Tradesman’s Shop to separate the two uses,
add definitions for each, and allow Tradesman’s Shop in two more Districts; revised 7.16
B Transitional Screening to provide residential districts in abutting towns with the same
protection as residential districts in Bow from commercial and industrial uses; revised
11.01 B and 11.02 B.1 to remove the provisions for automatic merger of substandard lots;
and modified 7.18 Livestock to reduce the standards required to have Small Backyard
Flocks of chicken hens.
AMENDED ----- March 12, 2013
Added the Residential One Family (R-1) Zoning District to sections 6.07 Table of
Dimensional Regulations; 7.16 B Screening Standards; 7.25 C 3 Small Wind Energy
Systems noise standards; and 8.07 Signs Permitted in Residential Districts; revised
section 7.14 Excavation of Earth Materials by adding the R-1 District to the definition for
Minor / Pre-development Excavations, replacing the citations to regulatory agencies,
adding a PA-38 citation, and clarifying the requirement for other permits; deleted the
existing 3.02 definition of Habitable Floor Area and inserted a reference to the appropriate
section of the State Building Code; expanded the locations where flags and banners are
permitted for business promotions in Article 8 Sign Regulations; inserted the reference to
the 2011 US Army Corps of Engineers Regional Supplement for wetland delineation and
corrected the reference to the citation of the Wetland Determination Data Form in 10.01 B
3 wetland boundary; and, revised the performance standards in Business Development
District sections 15.09 through 15.12 for landscaping, screening, exterior building facade,
and parking.
AMENDED ----- March 11, 2014
Revised 7.02 B 4. Open Space Residential Development (OS-RD) to clarify that
only single family and accessory dwelling units are permitted in an OS-RD and revised
15.13 A 1 a to allow the maximum height of free-standing signs to be measured from the
road centerline on sites lower than streets (greater height).
AMENDED ----- March 10, 2015
Revised 7.05 to add a requirement for standby emergency electricity generators for
Elderly and Multi-Family Residential Dwellings and 3.02 to add a definition for Multi-Family
Dwelling; updated 7.10 Personal Wireless Service Facility (PWSF) to bring provisions for
PWSF into compliance with the statutory authority of RSA 12:K; adopted Supplementary
Regulations and Standards 7.26 to add criteria for Dwelling Unit for Resident Caretaker or
Security Personnel; and, revised 10.01 E Uses Prohibited, Permitted, and Requiring a
Conditional Use Permit in the Wetlands Conservation District to exempt logging operations
in Prime Wetlands and buffers from Planning Board review.
AMENDED ----- March 8, 2016
Revised Section 5.11, Table of Uses to permit cottage industries in all Zone Districts
by special exception; permit the keeping of livestock in the Commercial Zone District by
special exception; permit an accessory dwelling units by right in all Zone Districts; and
permit motor vehicle repair, gasoline sales, car and truck wash, motor or rail freight
terminals, bus or train stations, and marinas by special exception in the Limited Industrial
(I-1) Zone District. Changed the Zone District designation from Rural (RU) to Limited
Industrial (I-1) for Block 5, Lots 47, 48, and 49-A.


i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1. TITLE, PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY 0
1.01 Title 0
1.02 Purpose 0
1.03 Authority 0
ARTICLE 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS 1
2.01 Jurisdiction 1
2.02 Effective Date 1
2.03 Applicability 1
2.04 Relationship to Existing Zoning Ordinance 1
2.05 Relationship to Other Land Use Regulation 1
2.06 Relationship to the Master Plan 1
2.07 Severability 1
2.08 Computation of Time 1
2.09 Lots Recorded Prior to the Adoption of this Ordinance 2
2.10 Nuisance Provisions 2
2.11 Copyright and other Restrictions on Reproduction 2
ARTICLE 3. DEFINITIONS 3
3.01 Word Usage 3
3.02 Words and Phrases not Defined 3
ARTICLE 4. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP 10
4.01 Establishment of Districts and Statement of Purpose of Each 10
A. Base Districts 10
B. Overlay Districts 11
1. Wetlands Conservation (WC) District 11
2. Floodplain (F) District 11
3. Aquifer Protection (AP) District 12
4.02 Zoning Map 12
ii
ARTICLE 5: USE REGULATIONS 14
5.01 Uses Permitted by Right 14
5.02 Uses Permitted by Special Exception 14
5.03 Uses Permitted by Conditional Use Permit 14
5.04 Supplementary Regulations 14
5.05 All Uses Subject to Overlay District Regulations 14
5.06 Uses Not Permitted and Uses Not Specified 14
5.07 Site Plan Review Regulations 15
5.08 Subdivision Regulations 15
5.09 Change of Use 15
5.10 Multiple Principal Uses on a Single Lot 15
5.11 Table of Use Regulations 16-25
ARTICLE 6. DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS 26
6.01 Minimum Lot Size 26
6.02 Minimum Lot Frontage 26
6.03 Minimum Yard Requirements 26
6.04 Maximum Lot Coverage 27
6.05 Maximum Number of Stories and Height of Structures 27
6.06 Driveways 27
6.07 Table of Dimensional Regulations 28
ARTICLE 7. SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS 29
7.01 Applicability 29
7.02 Open Space Residential Development 29
7.03 Manufactured Housing Parks and Subdivisions 32
7.04 Accessory Dwelling Units 33
7.05 Elderly, Duplex, and Multi-Family Dwellings 34
7.06 Home Occupation 36
7.07 Cottage Industry 37
7.08 Day Care Centers 39
7.09 Animal Hospital or Commercial Kennel 39
iii
7.10 Radio/TV Tower or Antenna and Personal Wireless Service Facility (PWSF) 39
7.11 Sexually Oriented Businesses 50
7.12 Industrial and Utility Uses 53
7.13 Planing Mills, Sawmills and Similar Uses 54
7.14 Excavation of Earth Materials 54
7.15 Accessory Buildings 60
7.16 Screening Standards 60
7.17 Outdoor Storage of Boat, Recreational Vehicle, Camping Trailer, Motor Vehicle 61
7.18 Grazing, Care, Raising, or Keeping of Livestock 61
7.19 Heliports and Airstrips 63
7.20 Location of Privately Owned Water Supplies 63
7.21 Campgrounds 63
7.22 Off-Site Parking Allowed by Special Exception 63
7.23 Planned Business Subdivision 64
7.24 Semi-Opaque Screens 64
7.25 Small Wind Energy Systems 64
ARTICLE 8. SIGN REGULATIONS 70
8.01 Purposes of Sign Regulations 70
8.02 Permit Required for Signs 71
8.03 Signs Allowed and Exempted from Permit Requirements 71
8.04 Design, Construction, and Maintenance of Signs 72
8.05 Sign Area Computation 72
8.06 Signs Prohibited Under This Ordinance 72
8.07 Signs Permitted in Residential Districts 73
8.08 Signs Permitted in Non-Residential Districts 73
8.09 Status of Non-Conforming Signs 74
8.10 Other Signs Non-Residential Districts 74
ARTICLE 9. OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS 76
iv
ARTICLE 10. OVERLAY DISTRICTS 77
10.01 Wetlands Conservation (WC) District 77
A. Authority for the WC District 77
B. Establishment of the WC District 77
C. Prime Wetlands 78
D. Buffers to Wetlands and Setbacks from Wetlands 79
E. Uses Prohibited, Permitted, & Requiring Conditional Use Permit in the WC District 80
F. Standards for Granting of a Conditional Use Permit in the WC District 81
G. Subsurface Disposal Systems in the WC District 82
H. Non-Conforming Structures and Uses in the WC District 83
10.02 Floodplain (F) District 84
A. Authority for the F District 87
B. Establishment of the F District 87
C. General Requirements for the F District 87
D. Alteration or Relocation of Watercourses 88
E. Determination of 100-year Flood Levels in the F District 89
F. Design Standards in the F District 89
G. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) in the F District 90
10.03 Aquifer Protection (AP) District 92
A. Authority for the AP District 93
B. Establishment of the AP District 93
C. Applicability 93
D. Performance Standards 93
E. Permitted Uses 95
F. Prohibited Uses 95
G. Conditional Uses 95
H. Existing Nonconforming Uses 96
I. Exemptions 97
J. Relationship between State and Local Requirements 97
K. Maintenance and Inspection 97
L. Enforcement Procedures and Penalties 98
M. State Rules, Regulations, and Statutes 98
ARTICLE 11. NON-CONFORMING LOTS, USES AND STRUCTURES 99
11.01 Determination and Status of Non-conforming Property. 99
11.02 Non-Conforming Lots 100
11.03 Non-Conforming Uses 101
11.04 Non-conforming structures 102
v
11.05 Abandonment and termination of nonconformity 103
ARTICLE 12. CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS 105
12.01 Planning Board To Administer 105
12.02 Application and Review Procedure 105
12.03 Burden of Persuasion 105
12.04 Standards of Review 106
12.05 Hearing and Decision 106
12.06 Stipulations of Approval 107
12.07 Appeals 107
ARTICLE 13. APPEALS TO THE ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 108
13.01 Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) 108
13.02 Powers and Duties of the ZBA 108
13.03 Application Procedure for the ZBA 110
ARTICLE 14. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 113
14.01 Administrative Official 113
14.02 Permits Required 114
14.03 Content of Application 115
14.04 Previously Approved Permit 115
14.05 Duration of Permits and Approvals 115
14.06 Certificate of Use and Occupancy 116
14.07 Violations 117
14.08 Land Use Fees 118
14.09 Conflict of Laws 118
ARTICLE 15. BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT PUBLISHED SEPARATELY
ARTICLE 16. IMPACT FEES AND METHODOLOGY REPORTS
PUBLISHED SEPARATELY
INDEX
1
ARTICLE 1. TITLE, PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY
1.01 Title
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the Town of
Bow, New Hampshire" referred to herein as "this Ordinance".
1.02 Purpose
This Ordinance is designed and adopted for the following purposes:
A. To lessen congestion in the streets;
B. To secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers;
C. To promote health and the general welfare;
D. To promote adequate light and air;
E. To prevent the overcrowding of land;
F. To avoid undue concentration of population;
G. To facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and
other public requirements;
H. To prevent pollution of air and water;
I. To conserve property values and encourage the most appropriate use of land; and
J. To allow for planned and orderly growth as envisioned by the Master Plan and the Capital
Improvements Program.
1.03 Authority
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by Title LXIV, Planning and
Zoning, New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, as most recently amended. Authority
for this Ordinance includes the power to adopt innovative land use controls pursuant to RSA
674:16, II, Grant of Power including but not limited to the specific methods of innovative land
use controls contained in RSA 674:21, Innovative Land Use Controls.
2
ARTICLE 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
2.01 Jurisdiction
This Ordinance shall be effective within the corporate boundaries of the Town of Bow, New
Hampshire.
2.02 Effective Date
The Zoning Ordinance was originally adopted and became effective on March 8, 1955, and
has been amended periodically through March 8, 2016. This Ordinance shall take effect on
March 8, 2016.
2.03 Applicability
No person may use or occupy any land or buildings, or authorize or permit the use or
occupancy of land or buildings under their control except in accordance with all of the
applicable provisions of this Ordinance. For the purposes of this Section, the "use" or
"occupancy" of a building or land relates to anything and everything that is done in, on, or to
that building or land.
2.04 Relationship to Existing Zoning Ordinance
To the extent that the provisions of this Ordinance are the same in substance as the previously
adopted provisions that they replace in the Town's Zoning Ordinance, they shall be considered
as continuations thereof and not as new enactments, unless otherwise specifically provided.
2.05 Relationship to Other Land Use Regulation
Wherever the provisions of this Ordinance come in conflict with any other ordinance or duly
promulgated rules or regulations, the most restrictive or the higher standards shall apply.
2.06 Relationship to the Master Plan
It is intended that this Ordinance implement the planning policies as reflected in the Master
Plan of the Town of Bow, New Hampshire.
2.07 Severability
It is hereby declared to be the intention of this Ordinance that the sections, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Ordinance are severable, and if any such section,
paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any
court of competent jurisdiction in a valid judgement or decree, such unconstitutionality or
invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or
phrases of this Ordinance.
2.08 Computation of Time
Unless otherwise specifically provided, the time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If the last day is a Saturday,
Sunday, or legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
3
2.09 Lots Recorded Prior to the Adoption of this Ordinance
Any lot as herein defined, which was legally recorded at the time of adoption or amendment of
this Ordinance, which was a buildable lot under the Ordinance in effect immediately prior to the
adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, and which meets current requirements for frontage,
shall be deemed a buildable lot. In addition, lots created by subdivisions approved by the
Planning Board, which were buildable lots at the time of subdivision, and which have frontage
on a public street shall be deemed a buildable lot.
2.10 Nuisance Provisions
Land shall not be used in any manner that is noxious, offensive, or deleterious to the public or
the owners or occupants of adjacent property, causes a diminution in the value of nearby
property, or is prejudicial to the general welfare of the community.
2.11 Copyright and other Restrictions on Reproduction
Plans, reports, documents, and other materials submitted to the Town of Bow or any board,
commission, or department to fulfill the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, including, but
not limited to applications for building permits, variances, special exceptions, or conditional use
permits, shall be free of any restrictions on reproduction. Proximate to any copyright symbols,
reservations of rights, or statements of ownership, shall be an affirmative statement which
expressly agrees to reproduction.
4
ARTICLE 3. DEFINITIONS
3.01 Word Usage
For the purposes of this Ordinance, words used in the present tense include the future; the
singular number includes plural, and the plural includes singular. The word "used" shall
include arranged, designed, rented, leased, intended to be used, and occupied. The word
"shall" is mandatory; and the word "may" is permissive.
3.02 Words and Phrases not Defined
Words and phrases not defined in this Article shall have their common meaning unless
otherwise stated.
Abutter: As defined in RSA 672:3
Accessory: Customarily incidental, related and clearly subordinate to a principal use on the
same lot.
Adult Day Care Facility: Licensed facilities, as described in RSA 151:2 I (f), offering medical
supervision, care or treatment, or providing assistance in daily living activities, to 3 or more
individuals, whether operated for profit or not.
Basement: That portion of a building that is partly or completely below grade (see story above
grade). For the administration of flood hazard area regulations, "basement" means any area
of building having its floor subgrade on all sides.
Buildable Land: Buildable land includes the total land area of a lot except:
a. land with slopes in excess of thirty-three percent (33%), or ledge which is exposed or
lying within four (4) feet of the soil surface; or
b. wetlands as defined in this Ordinance; or
c. land which is subject to an easement or a right-of-way in favor of the Town, County,
State, Federal Government, or any third party; or
d. land necessary for the protection of aquifers which may serve as future sources of
drinking water for the Town; or
e. land of such character that it cannot be safely used for building purposes because of
danger to health or peril from fire, flood or other hazard or the use of which would tend to
increase the danger to health, life or property or aggravate the flood hazard; or
f. land subject to periodic flooding, poor drainage or other hazardous conditions; or
g. land with unsuitable soil or inadequate capacity for individual sanitary sewerage
disposal systems unless the improvements will be connected to a common sewer system; or
h. land included in the Floodplain District or shown to be bog, marsh, swamp area, area of
high water table or any similar situation;
5
Building: See structure
Building Code: Entire adopted text of each national, state or local code relating to or
regulating buildings, uses, occupancies, and the like which has been legally adopted by the
Town. NH RSA 155-A mandates that all municipalities within the State of New Hampshire
shall be subject to the requirements of the New Hampshire Building Code and in accordance
with statute shall be included within this definition of the Building Code.
Commercial Recreation Facility, Indoor: A building used principally for indoor commercial
recreation, such as a gymnasium, roller or ice skating rink, dance floor, swimming pool, tennis
courts, function rooms, and the like.
Commercial Recreation Facility, Outdoor: A parcel of land with or without a structure used
principally for outdoor recreation, such as batting cages, athletic fields, pitch & putt golf,
miniature golf, fish and game clubs, tennis courts and swimming pools, go-cart tracks, outdoor
movie theaters and the like.
Condominium: The form of ownership of real property, and any interests therein, lawfully
submitted to the provisions of RSA 356-B, in which individual owners own or lease separate
units but together, or through an owners' association, own the common areas appurtenant to
the units.
Conversion Condominium: An existing use or structure which is being converted from a noncondominium
form of ownership to the condominium form of ownership.
Cone of Depression: A three-dimensional conical concavity produced in a water table by the
pumping of a well.
Contiguous: Land whose perimeter can be circumscribed without interruption, except by roads
or other easements, in common ownership.
Contractor’s Yard: An area of open storage for materials used for construction and for
construction equipment that is not typically licensed for travel on a public highway. The
materials and equipment are typically employed in the course of the contractor’s business or
may be available for sale or rent.
Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but
not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation
or drilling operations.
Discharge: The accidental spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, or dumping
of toxic or hazardous materials upon or into any land or waters in the Town of Bow. Discharge
includes, without limitations, leakage of such materials from failed or discarded containers or
storage systems, and disposal of such materials into any on-site sewage disposal system, dry
well, catch basin, or unapproved landfill.
Dwelling Unit: Within a structure, housekeeping quarters with cooking, living, sanitary and
sleeping facilities for one (1) family.
Dwelling, Single Family: Occupied exclusively by one (1) family. Does not include
6
Manufactured Housing as defined in section 7.03 and RSA 674:31.
Dwelling, Two Family: A structure designed for or occupied exclusively by two (2) families
living independently of one another.
Dwelling, Multi-Family: A structure designed for or occupied exclusively by three (3) or more
families living independently of one another.
Electricity Generation, Commercial: A small power production facility with a total installed
power production capacity of not more than thirty (30) megawatts designed for distribution to
the electric grid or to four (4) or more offsite customers.
Electricity Generation, Small: A producer of power, as defined in RSA 362-A:1-a, II-b “Eligible
customer-generator”, generated by solar, wind, or other renewable energy systems that will be
used primarily onsite or sold to not more than three (3) abutting customers or sold within an
approved Site Plan or Subdivision. As defined in the above statute, such generators shall
have a total peak generating capacity of not more than 100 kilowatts. Small wind energy
systems shall comply with section 7.25.
Family: One (1) or more persons related by blood or marriage or recognized by other state
statutes occupying a single housekeeping unit.
Frontage: The length of the lot bordering on a public street or a non-interstate highway
categorized as Class I, Class II or Class V pursuant to RSA 229.
Fuel Station: Building and premises where gasoline, propane, diesel fuel, oil. grease,
batteries, tires, automobile accessories and incidentals are sold at retail and where minor
servicing and repairs take place. Major mechanical and body work, straightening of body
parts, painting, welding, storage of automobiles not in operating condition, or other work
involving noise, glare, fumes, or smoke are not included in this definition.
Golf Course: The term shall include standard courses and executive par three courses. The
term does not include miniature golf.
Green Space: Land not built upon or not covered by gravel or impervious cover which is
planted with, or can support grass, flowers, shrubs, plants, trees or similar ground cover.
Groundwater: The slowly moving subsurface water present in aquifers and recharge areas.
Habitable Floor Area: Shall be as defined in the International Residential Code for One- and
Two-Family Dwellings, 2009 Edition, Section R202 Habitable Space, as adopted in the State
Building Code, as may be amended by the State of NH, (refer to 14.01 A 1 of the Zoning
Ordinance).
Height: The vertical distance between the mean elevation of the finished grade surrounding
the structure to the highest point of the roof of a building or structure.
High Risk Pollution Generating Activities: Includes fueling operations; truck or rail loading or
unloading of non-containerized bulk liquids at commercial or industrial facilities; outside
storage of portable containers of liquids, food wastes, or dangerous wastes; outside storage of
non-containerized materials, by-products, or finished products including non-liquid pesticides
7
or fertilizers, contaminated soil, food products or wastes, metals, building materials (including
lumber, roofing material, insulation, piping, and concrete products), and erodible materials;
outside manufacturing activity including processing, fabrication, repair or maintenance (of
vehicles, products, and equipment), mixing, milling, refining, or sand blasting, painting, or
finishing of vehicles, products, and equipment.
Housing for the Elderly - Housing that qualifies as “Housing for Older Persons” pursuant to NH
RSA 354-A:15, as it may be amended.
Impervious Surface: Material placed on a lot that substantially prevents water from penetrating
into the soil.
Kennel, Commercial: A place where dogs are housed and/or bred on the premises as all or
part of a business.
Loam or top soil: Where this ordinance requires the use of loam or top soil, the material shall
meet NH Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, section 641, as from time to time amended.
Lot: An area of land, with ascertainable boundaries, established by deed(s) of record or an
approved subdivision plat.
Lot Coverage: The ratio of the total of the ground floor area of buildings and structures,
together with the area of other impervious surfaces, to the total area of the lot, expressed as a
percentage.
Lot Depth: The average distance from the front lot line to the rear lot line.
Master Plan: The document most recently prepared and/or adopted by the Planning Board,
pursuant to RSA 674:2 to 674:4 as amended, to guide the long-range development of the
Town.
Motel: A building or group of buildings, other than private homestead, containing guest rooms
designed and used primarily for the accommodation of travelers (hotel, tourist, cottage, etc.).
Municipal System: A water and/or sewerage system that is owned and operated by the Town
of Bow.
Non-conforming Use: A use which lawfully existed at the time this Ordinance or amendment
became effective but which does not conform to the regulations for the district in which it is
located.
Open Space: Recreational area that includes either private or public facilities for both active
and passive types of recreation including playgrounds, parks, and undeveloped land of all
types.
Outdoor Display Lot - a defined area on a Site Plan approved by the Planning Board for
outdoor display of items for sale, rent, or lease including, but not limited to, produce, livestock
and pets, motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, camping trailers, boats, aircraft, construction
equipment and materials, lumber, and building supplies, and including Commercial Outdoor
Recreational Facility.
8
Personal Wireless Service Facility: As defined in RSA 12-J:2 XI, including, but not limited to
antennas, dishes, other signal transmission devices, and the towers or structures which
support the antennas, dishes, and signal transmission devices. An “equipment shelter”, as
defined in RSA 12-J VII, shall be included within the definition of structure contained herein.
Pre-site Built Housing: Any structure designed primarily for residential occupancy which is
wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in off-site manufacturing
facilities in conformance with the United States Department of Housing and Urban
development minimum property standards and local building codes, for installation, or
assembly and installation, on the building site. Pre-site built housing shall not include
manufactured housing as defined in this Ordinance.
Primary Floor: The floor of a building or structure which provides the main or principal
entrance to the building or structure from the adjacent public street.
Primary Recharge Areas: Areas that collect precipitation or surface water and transmit it into
the cone of depression of existing or potential water supply wells. Primary recharge areas are
mapped unconsolidated aquifer areas surrounding existing or potential water supply well sites.
Prime Wetlands: Those areas designated Prime Wetlands within the scope of RSA 482-A,
and N.H. Code of Administrative Rules Env-Wt 700.
Principal Use: The principal purpose for which a lot or a building thereon is designed,
occupied, maintained or intended to be used.
Residential Care Facility: Licensed facilities, as described in RSA 151:2 I (e), providing
residential care and offering services beyond room and board.
Right-of-Way: A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription, or
condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric
transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, storm sewer and other similar uses.
Sanitary Waste: Wastewater arising from ordinary domestic water use as from toilets, sinks,
bathing facilities, etc., and containing such concentrations and types of pollutants as to be
considered normal wastes.
Setback: A line beyond which the foundation wall and/or any covered porch or other portion of
a building or any other surface or above surface improvement shall not project.
Silviculture: The art and science of growing trees, in accordance with best management
practices. Silvicultural operations include planting, thinning, cultivating, and harvesting trees,
as well as preparing and conditioning the ground as needed to grow trees.
Social Facility: A structure and/or lot used principally by clubs of a fraternal, social or nonprofit
nature to provide a meeting place and to conduct the business of said club.
Solid Waste: Useless, unwanted, or discarded solid material with insufficient liquid content to
be free-flowing. This includes, but is not limited to, rubbish, garbage, scrap materials, junk,
refuse, inert fill material, and landscape refuse.
Special Exception: A use which may be approved by the Zoning Board of Adjustment in
9
districts where the use is specifically authorized by the Ordinance, and where the Zoning
Board of Adjustment finds that such use can be developed in accordance with the provisions
of Article 13, APPEALS TO THE ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
Story: That portion of a building included between a floor and the floor or roof next above.
Basements shall be considered with the criteria of story above grade plane definition. A halfstory
is a partial story under a sloping roof, the wall plates of which on two (2) exterior walls
are not more than two (2) feet above the floor of such partial story.
Story Above Grade Plane: Any story having its finished floor surface entirely above grade
plane, except that a basement shall be considered as a story above grade plane where the
finished surface of the floor above the basement meets any one of the following:
a. Is more than 6 feet above grade plane;
b. Is more than 6 feet above the finished ground level for more than 50% of the total
building perimeter; or
c. Is more than12 feet above the finished ground level at any point.
Grade plane: A reference plane representing the average of the finished ground level adjoining
the building at all exterior walls. Where the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior
walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between
the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than 6 feet from the building between
the structure and a point 6 feet from the building.
Stream: A perennial or intermittent watercourse which flows for sufficient time to remove or
prevent the growth of vegetation or to develop and maintain a defined, scoured channel.
Street: A public way established by and maintained under public authority and currently
maintained for vehicular travel, or private way open for public use, or private way plotted for
acceptance as a public street, whether or not constructed.
Street Center Line: A line equidistant from each street line; or if no street line is evident, the
centerline of the traveled way.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, except a boundary wall or fence, the use of which
requires location on the ground or attachment to something on the ground. The word
"structure" shall include the word building, where the context requires. For floodplain
management purposes, a structure is a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. Structure also
includes trailers, storage units, recreational vehicles and other portable devices.
Surface Waters: Those portions of waters of the state as defined by RSA 485-A:2, XIV.
Temporary Structures and Uses: Structures and uses shall be limited to 180 consecutive days
and 180 days in any calendar year. The Building Inspector is authorized to issue permits for
temporary structures and uses in conformance with Section R107 of the current International
Residential Code and Section 108 of the current International Building Code, as applicable.
Temporary Structures and their uses that are erected and used no more than 16 days in one
calendar year shall not be subject to the Zoning Ordinance. Temporary structures include
tents, fabric shelters, portable shelters, construction trailers during permitted construction, and
similar structures. Manufactured Housing as defined in section 7.03 and RSA 674:31 may be
used as temporary housing on the same parcel during reconstruction of a Dwelling Unit
10
destroyed by casualty. Except for Manufactured Housing, temporary structures may be
permitted to be located with a minimum 10' Side or Rear Yard. Only uses listed as a permitted
use in 5.11 Table of Use Regulations are permitted as a Temporary Use, except for events
and other temporary uses permitted by the Board of Selectmen.
Toxic or Hazardous Materials: Any substance or mixture of such physical, chemical or
infectious characteristics as to pose a significant, actual or potential hazard to water supplies,
or other hazard to human health, if such substance or mixture were discharged to land or
waters of this Town. Toxic or hazardous materials includes, without limitation, organic
chemicals, petroleum products, heavy metals, radioactive or infectious wastes, acids and
alkalies, and include products such as pesticides, herbicides, solvents and thinners.
Tract: An area, parcel, site, piece of land, or property that is the subject of a development
application.
Tradesman’s Shop: A building that houses the offices or equipment or materials storage
related to, but not limited to, electricians, plumbers, carpenters, or other similar construction
trades. A Tradesman’s shop does not include outside storage of materials or equipment other
than vehicles licensed for travel on a public highway.
Travel Trailer: A vehicular, portable structure designed to be used as a temporary dwelling.
Variance: A permit which may be granted, under special circumstances, by the Zoning Board
of Adjustment in accordance with Article 13, APPEALS TO THE ZONING BOARD OF
ADJUSTMENT.
Vernal Pool: a body of water that provides essential breeding habitat for certain amphibians
and invertebrates, does not support fish, and meets the criteria established by the New
Hampshire Fish and Game Department, Nongame and Endangered Wildlife Program,
Identification and Documentation of Vernal Pools in New Hampshire, second edition, 2004.
Wetland: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal conditions does support a
prevalence of vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.
Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA): The Zoning Board of Adjustment of the Town of Bow.
11
ARTICLE 4. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
4.01 Establishment of Districts and Statement of Purpose of Each
A. Base Districts
All of the land in the Town of Bow is hereby divided into the following Base Districts for the
purposes so stated, and as shown on the Official Zoning Map (Section 4.02A):
1. Rural (RU) District - The Rural District is designed to accommodate a range of
residential uses at low densities in a rural environment where sewer service is not available or
anticipated, as indicated in the Master Plan, Agriculture, forestry, recreation, and other low
intensity uses are permissible in the RU District.
2. Residential (R) District - The Residential District is designed to accommodate a range
of residential uses at low densities in areas where sewer service is available or the extension
of such is anticipated at some future time, as indicated in the Master Plan.
3. Residential One Family (R-1) District - The Residential One District is designed to
accommodate one-family residential uses at low densities.
4. Commercial (C) District - The Commercial District is designed to allow a broad range of
commercial uses including retail, service, offices, restaurants, recreational, institutional, and
transportation-related uses in areas along arterial roads where sewer service is available or
the extension of such is anticipated at some future time, as indicated in the Master Plan.
5. Limited Industrial (I-1) District - The Limited Industrial District is intended to
accommodate office and industrial uses in areas where sewer service is available or the
extension of such is anticipated at some future time, as indicated in the Master Plan.
6. General Industrial (I-2) District - The General Industrial District is designed to include
offices and industrial uses, and some limited commercial uses, in an area in which the
extension of sewer service is anticipated at some future time, as indicated in the Master Plan.
7. Civic (CV) District - The Civic District is intended to define a town center which will
accommodate institutional office uses together with small retail and service uses in an area
where sewer service is available or the extension of such is anticipated at some future time, as
indicated in the Master Plan.
8. Institutional (IN) District - The Institutional District is designed to accommodate office
and institutional uses in an area where sewer service is available.
9. Business Development (BD) District [ARTICLE 16 – PUBLISHED SEPARATELY] - The
purpose of the Business Development District Ordinance is to attract environmentally
acceptable commercial, industrial, recreational, and institutional uses to the District; to
encourage diversity in the community tax base through appropriate flexibility in land use and
land use development; to optimize financial return on public infrastructure investments and
expenditures, including municipal sewer, municipal water supply, and public highways; to
minimize adverse traffic impacts on Route 3-A, future interstate highway interchanges, and
surrounding local streets and roadways; and to preserve valuable historical, cultural, and
natural features within the District and to minimize adverse environmental impacts to water
12
and air, while reducing light and noise pollution, flooding, clear cutting of vegetation, and the
blocking of scenic views.
B. Overlay Districts
Certain lands within the Town of Bow are hereby included in the following Overlay Districts for
the purposes so stated, and as shown on the Official Zoning Map (Section 4.02A). The
Overlay Districts are superimposed upon the Base Districts so that the regulations pertaining
to the Overlay Districts shall be in addition to the regulations of the Base Districts such that
land so encumbered may be used if and to the extent that such use is permitted in the
applicable Base and Overlay Districts. Where regulations differ between the Base and
Overlay Districts, the regulations that are more restrictive or impose the higher standards shall
control.
1. Wetlands Conservation (WC) District - The purpose of the Wetlands Conservation
District, in the interest of the public health and welfare, is to protect and regulate the use of
wetlands and wetland buffer areas in the Town of Bow. The WC District is intended to:
a. Control the development of structures and land uses within the WC District that would
contribute to the pollution of surface waters and groundwater;
b. Prevent the destruction of wetlands which provide flood protections, ground water recharge,
pollution abatement, and the augmentation of stream flow during dry periods, and which are
important for such other reasons cited in RSA 482-A:1;
c. Prevent unnecessary or excessive expenses to the Town to provide and maintain essential
services and utilities which arise because of unwise use of water resources;
d. Encourage those uses that can be appropriately and safely located in the WC District;
e. Protect potential water supplies and existing aquifers (water bearing stratum) and aquifer
recharge areas;
f. Preserve and enhance those aesthetic values associated with the Surface Waters and
Wetlands of the Town;
g. Protect wildlife habitats and maintain ecological balances; and
h. Protect unique and unusual natural areas.
2. Floodplain (F) District - Certain areas of the Town of Bow, New Hampshire are subject
to periodic flooding, causing serious damages to properties within these areas. Relief is
available in the form of flood insurance as authorized by the National Flood Insurance Act of
1968. Therefore, the Town of Bow, New Hampshire has chosen to become a participating
community in the National Flood Insurance Program, and agrees to comply with the
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended) as
detailed in this Floodplain Management Ordinance.
The Floodplain District is established for the following purposes:
a. To reduce the hazards of floods upon the public health, safety, and welfare;
13
b. To protect floodplain occupants from a flood that is or may be caused by their own land
use;
c. To protect the public from the burden of extraordinary financial expenditures for flood
control and relief; and
d. To protect the capacity of floodplain areas to absorb, transmit, and store runoff.
3. Aquifer Protection (AP) District - The Aquifer Protection District is established for the
following purposes:
a. To preserve and maintain the existing and potential groundwater supplies, aquifers, and
groundwater recharge areas of the Town, and protect them from adverse development or landuse
practices;
b. To preserve and protect present and potential sources of drinking water supply for the
public health and safety; and
c. To conserve the natural resources of the Town of Bow.
4.02 Zoning Map
A. Official Zoning Map
The Official Zoning Map shall consist of a set of maps that, taken together, display the
boundaries of all of the Districts within the Town of Bow. Individual maps that comprise the
Official Zoning Map are as follows:
1. The Zoning Map of the Town of Bow, N.H., displays the boundaries of all of the Base
Districts.
2. The Bow Wetlands Map displays the approximate boundaries of prime and other major
wetlands within the Wetlands Conservation (WC) District.
3. The Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency for the National Flood Insurance Program, effective on April 19, 2010
(adopted by Board of Selectmen on March 9, 2010 - Resolution 2010-1), display the
boundaries of, and special limits within, the Floodplain (F) District.
4. The Aquifer Protection (AP) District is displayed on “Aquifer Map of Bow New
Hampshire” produced by Cartographic Associates, Inc (CAI). The map is overlaid on the Town
Tax Map composite which is annually updated by CAI. The location and extent of aquifers in
Bow was taken from “Town of Bow, New Hampshire Proposed Aquifer Protection Overlay
District Map” as shown in the Bow Master Plan Future Land Use Chapter, produced by Central
NH Regional Planning Commission, September 2004. The Commission drew the aquifer
information from “Geohydrology and Water Quality of Stratified-Drift Aquifers in the Upper
Merrimack River Basin, South-Central New Hampshire” by US Geological Survey 95-4123 and
from “Aquifer Evaluation Investigation and Development of Groundwater Protection Program
Bow, New Hampshire” by SEA Consultants Inc, 1987. In addition, the AP District shall include
the area on the map identified as Proposed Wellhead Protection Area on Figure 11 of the
14
October 16, 2009 Final Report for Large Production Well for Community Water System (Env-
Ws 302 Final Report & Env-Ws 388 Large Withdrawal Permit application River Road Well) by
Stantec Consulting Services, Inc, such map having been overlaid on the Town Tax Map
composite by the Central NH Regional Planning Commission in October 2010 and included as
Figure 3-1 of the Well Head Protection Program Implementation Plan approved by the Board
of Selectmen on September 27, 2011. The Aquifer Protection Overlay District Map is hereby
adopted as part of this Ordinance and is on file at the Bow Municipal Building.
B. Amendments to the Official Zoning Map
Whenever amendments are adopted that change District boundaries, whether a Base or
Overlay District, the Official Zoning Map shall be revised to reflect such amendments, and the
date of adoption shall be duly noted on said Map.
C. Interpretation of District Boundaries
1. The location of District boundaries shall be as shown on the Official Zoning Map or as
otherwise described in this Ordinance.
2. Where any uncertainty exists with respect to the boundary of any District as shown on
the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
a. Where a boundary is indicated as a highway, street, alley, railroad, watercourse or Town
Boundary, it shall be construed to be the centerline thereof or such Town Boundary;
b. Where a boundary is indicated as approximately parallel to a highway, street, alley,
railroad, watercourse or Town Boundary, it shall be construed as parallel thereto and such
distance from the centerline thereof as shown on the Official Zoning Map;
c. If no dimension is given on the Official Zoning Map, the location of any boundary shall be
determined by use of the scale shown on the Official Zoning Map.
d. Where a boundary coincides within ten (10) feet or less with a lot line, the boundary shall
be construed to be the lot line; and
e. All boundary questions not covered by (a) through (d) above shall be resolved by the Board
of Adjustment.
15
ARTICLE 5: USE REGULATIONS
5.01 Uses Permitted by Right
A use denoted by the letter "P" in the Table of Use Regulations (Section 5.11), is permitted by
right in the Districts so indicated, subject to all other applicable sections of this Ordinance and
other local, state, and federal laws, rules, and regulations.
5.02 Uses Permitted by Special Exception
A use denoted by the letter "S" in the Table of Use Regulations (Section 5.11), may be
permitted as a Special Exception in the Districts so indicated. The Zoning Board of
Adjustment may grant Special Exceptions in accordance with the procedures and conditions
as specified in Article 13, APPEALS TO THE ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT, of this
Ordinance, subject to all other applicable sections of this Ordinance and other local, state, and
federal laws, rules and regulations.
5.03 Uses Permitted by Conditional Use Permit
A use denoted by the letter "C" in the Table of Use Regulations (Section 5.11), may be
permitted in the Districts so indicated by a conditional use permit. The Planning Board may
grant a conditional use permit in accordance with the procedures and conditions as specified
in Article 12, CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS, of this Ordinance, subject to all other applicable
sections of this Ordinance and other local, state, and federal laws, rules, and regulations.
5.04 Supplementary Regulations
Certain uses are subject to provisions contained in Article 7, SUPPLEMENTARY
REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES, of this Ordinance. The section
number of the applicable supplementary regulations is indicated in the extreme right hand
column of the Table of Use Regulations (Section 5.11), under the heading "Supplementary
Regulations Reference". Uses subject to supplementary regulations must comply with all
other applicable sections of this Ordinance and other local, state, and federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
5.05 All Uses Subject to Overlay District Regulations
All uses are subject to the provisions and regulations of the Overlay Districts as established in
Article 4, ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP, of this Ordinance,
and characterized in Article 10, OVERLAY DISTRICTS, of this Ordinance. Wherever there is
a conflict between the provisions of an Overlay District and a Base District, the provision which
imposes the greater restriction or higher standard shall control.
5.06 Uses Not Permitted and Uses Not Specified
A. Use Not Permitted
A use denoted by a dash (-) in the Table of Use Regulations (Section 5.11), is not permitted in
the Districts so indicated.
16
B. Use Not Specified
For land uses that are not listed in 5.11 Table of Use Regulations, the Zoning Administrator,
after consultation with the Building Inspector and Town Planner, may assign a proposed use to
an existing use category where the Zoning Administrator finds that the proposed use is related
to a specified use and is essentially the same as a specified use in terms of traffic, noise, odor,
other pollution, and likely impacts to abutting properties.
Where the Zoning Administrator finds that the proposed use is not sufficiently similar to a
specified use to assign it to an existing land use category, an owner of property in Bow or
designated agent may file an administrative appeal with the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The
ZBA, after consultation with the Planning Board, shall determine how the proposed use will be
permitted, if at all, including designation of districts and whether it shall require a Special
Exception or Conditional Use Permit. Annually, the Planning Board shall review such
proposed uses and consider proposing for Town Meeting adoption an amendment to the Table
of Use Regulations to address such uses.
5.07 Site Plan Review Regulations
The development, expansion, or change of a non-residential use or of a residential use that
includes multi-family dwelling units is subject to the approval of the Planning Board pursuant to
the Site Plan Review Regulations of the Town of Bow, N.H.
5.08 Subdivision Regulations
The development or change or expansion of any use that includes a subdivision of a lot, tract,
or parcel of land is subject to the approval of the Planning Board pursuant to the Land
Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Bow, N.H.
5.09 Change of Use
A change of use of a property shall be deemed to occur whenever there is a change from one
principal use as listed in the Table of Use Regulations (Section 5.11) to another principal use
as listed in said Table. If there are multiple principal uses of a property, a change shall be
deemed to occur whenever the mixture of types of principal uses changes, or whenever the
proportion of space devoted to individual principal uses changes to such an extent that the
number of required parking spaces pursuant to Article 9, OFF-STREET PARKING
REGULATIONS, of this Ordinance, is altered.
5.10 Multiple Principal Uses on a Single Lot
Multiple principal uses may be established on a single lot provided that all such uses are
permitted uses as indicated in the Table of Use Regulations (Section 5.11) for the District in
which the lot is located, and further provided that all requirements of this Ordinance must be
met for each individual use, including the granting of Special Exceptions and/or conditional use
permits if so required. Where multiple structures containing dwelling units are permitted on a
single lot, each structure containing dwelling units shall meet minimum lot size requirements
as if it were on a separate lot. Where approved by Site Plan Review, each structure on such
lot need not meet frontage requirements as if it were on a separate lot.
17
5.11 Table of Use Regulations
In the Base Districts as established in Article 4, ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
AND ZONING MAP, of this Ordinance, no building, structure or land shall be used or occupied
except as set forth in the following Table of Use Regulations, subject to all other provisions
and standards of this Ordinance, and other local, state, and federal laws, rules and
regulations. The Table of Use Regulations is divided into two parts, one for principal uses, and
the other for accessory uses.

18
PRINCIPAL USES
DISTRICTS
RU R R-1 C I-1 I-2 CV IN BD
Supplementary
Regulations
Reference
A. RESIDENTIAL
1. Single Family P P P - - - - - -
2. Duplex or Two-Family P P - - - - - - - Section 7.05
3. Multi-Family S S - - - - - - - Section 7.05
4. Housing for the Elderly P P P - - - P - - Section 7.05
5. Manufactured Housing Park C - - - - - - - - Section 7.03
6. Manufactured Housing Subdivision P - - - - - - - - Section 7.03
7. Boarding or Rooming House S S S - - - - - -
8. Open Space Residential
Development
P P P - - - - - - Section 7.02
B. PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL
1. Churches S S S S S S S S S
2. Public or Private Schools S S S S S S S S P
3. Hospitals - - - P P P - P P
4. Residential Care Facility S S S P P P P P P RSA 151:2 I(e)
5. Child Day Care Center - - - S S S P P P Section 7.08
6. Adult Day Care Facility - - - S S S - S P RSA 151:2 I (f)
7. Libraries and Museums - - - S P P P P P
8. Social, Fraternal Clubs and Lodges - - - P P P S S P
9. Municipal & Public Works Facilities S S S P P P P P P
10. Cemeteries S S S S S S S S S
11. Essential Public Utilities and
Appurtenances
S S S P P P P P P Section 7.12
12. Home Based Day Care (see RSA
672:1V-a)
P P P S S S S S S
Article 05 TABLE OF USE REGULATIONS Use Regulation
19
PRINCIPAL USES
DISTRICTS
RU R R-1 C I-1 I-2 CV IN BD
Supplementary
Regulations
Reference
C. RECREATION AND
ENTERTAINMENT
1. Publicly Owned Recreation Facility P P P P P P P P P
2. Commercial Outdoor Recreational
Facility
S S S P P P - - P
3. Indoor Commercial Recreational
Facility
- - - P P P C - P
4. Movie Theater or Concert Hall - - - P P P S S P
5. Campgrounds or Youth Camps S - - - - - - - - Section 7.21
6. Golf Courses S S S S S S - - S
D. OFFICES
1. General Professional, Business,
Financial, or Government Offices
- - - P P P P P P
2. Medical, Dental or Health Care
Offices
- - - P P P P P P
3. Banks - - - P P P P P P
Legend of Districts
RU = Rural
R = Residential
R-1 = Residential One Family
C = Commercial
CV = Civic
I-1 = Limited Industrial
I-2 = General Industrial
IN = Institutional
BD = Business Development
Legend of Uses
dash = Not permitted
C = Conditional Use Permit required
P = Permitted Use
S = Special Exception required
Article 05 TABLE OF USE REGULATIONS Use Regulations
20
PRINCIPAL USES
DISTRICTS
RU R R-1 C I-1 I-2 CV IN BD
Supplementary
Regulations
Reference
E. COMMERCIAL
1. Retail Sales and Rental of Goods
and Merchandise
a. Less than 6000 SF of floor area - - - P P P P P P
b. No floor area limit - - - P P P S S P
2. Personal and Business Services - - - P P P P P P
3. Hotels, Motels, and Inns - - - P P P S S P
4. Animal Hospital - - - P P P - - P Section 7.09
5. Commercial Kennels - - - S S S P P S Section 7.09
6. Mortuary or Funeral Homes - - - S - S - S S
7. Auction and Auction Houses - - - P P P S S P
8. Mini-Storage - - - S P P - - P
F. RESTAURANTS
1. Within a fully enclosed structure - - - P P P P P P
2. With service outside - - - P S P S S P
Legend of Districts
RU = Rural
R = Residential
R-1 = Residential One Family
C = Commercial
CV = Civic
I-1 = Limited Industrial
I-2 = General Industrial
IN = Institutional
BD = Business Development
Legend of Uses
dash = Not permitted
C = Conditional Use Permit required
P = Permitted Use
S = Special Exception required
Article 05 TABLE OF USE REGULATIONS Use Regulations
21
PRINCIPAL USES
DISTRICTS
RU R R-1 C I-1 I-2 CV IN BD
Supplementary
Regulations
Reference
G. AUTOMOTIVE & TRANSPORTATION
1. Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental - - - P S S - - S
2. Sales and Installation of Vehicle
Parts and Accessories
- - - P S P - - P
3. Motor Vehicle Repairs and
Maintenance
- - - P S P - - P
4. Gasoline Sales - - - P S S - - S
5. Car Wash and Truck Wash - - - P S S S S S
6. Motor or Rail Freight Terminal - - - S S P - - P
7. Bus or Train Station - - - P S P - - P
8. Sales or Rental of Recreational
Vehicles, Camping Trailers, or Boats,
including Servicing & Repair
- - - P S S - - S
9. Marina (including the servicing and
repair of boats)
- - - P S P - - P
10. Heliport and Airstrip - - - S S S S S S Section 7.19
Legend of Districts
RU = Rural
R = Residential
R-1 = Residential One Family
C = Commercial
CV = Civic
I-1 = Limited Industrial
I-2 = General Industrial
IN = Institutional
BD = Business Development
Legend of Uses
dash = Not permitted
C = Conditional Use Permit required
P = Permitted Use
S = Special Exception required
Article 05 TABLE OF USE REGULATIONS Use Regulations
22
PRINCIPAL USES
DISTRICTS
RU R R-1 C I-1 I-2 CV IN BD
Supplementary
Regulations
Reference
H. INDUSTRIAL
1. Manufacturing, Processing,
Repairing, and Assembling Goods and
Merchandise
- - - S P P - - P Section 7.12
2. Warehousing and Storage of Non-
Flammable, Non-Explosive Goods
- - - S P P - - P Section 7.12
3. Bulk Storage of Fuels, Chemicals,
or Flammable Materials
- - - - S S - - S Section 7.12
4a. Sales of Construction Equipment
and/or Materials with Outdoor Display or
Storage
- - - S - P - - P
4b. Sales of Construction Equipment
and/or Materials up to 15,000 SF with no
Outdoor Display or Storage
- - - P P P - - P
5. Materials Recycling Center - - - - S S - - S
6a. Removal and Excavation of Earth
Materials
S - - - S S - - S Section 7.14
6b. Minor / Pre-development
Excavation of Earth Materials
C C C C C C C C C Section 7.14
7. Processing of Earth Materials - - - - S S - - S
8. Planing Mill or Sawmill S - - - - S - - S Section 7.13
9a. Contractor’s Yard - - - - - P - - S
9b. Tradesman’s Shop - - - P P P - - P
10. Laboratory or Research Facility - - - P P P - - P
11. Junk Yard - - - - - S - - S Section 7.17
12. Commercial Electricity Generation - - - S S P S S P
Article 05 TABLE OF USE REGULATIONS Use Regulations
23
PRINCIPAL USES
DISTRICTS
RU R R-1 C I-1 I-2 CV IN BD
Supplementary
Regulations
Reference
I. AGRICULTURAL
1. Farming and Agricultural
Operations
a. Agricultural P S S S S S S S S
b. Horticultural P S S S S S S S S
c. Livestock P P P - - - - - - Section 7.18
2. Silvicultural Operations P P P P P P P P P
3. Stables and Equestrian Facilities C S S - - - - - - Section 7.18
4. Commercial Greenhouses
including Wholesale and Retail Sales
S S S P P P - - P
J. MISCELLANEOUS
1. Condominium Conversion S S S S S S S S S
2. Radio or Television Tower or
Antenna or Personal Wireless Service
Facility
C C C C C C C C C Section 7.10
3. Sexually Oriented Businesses - - - - - C - - - Section 7.11
Legend of Districts
RU = Rural
R = Residential
R-1 = Residential One Family
C = Commercial
CV = Civic
I-1 = Limited Industrial
I-2 = General Industrial
IN = Institutional
BD = Business Development
Legend of Uses
dash = Not permitted
C = Conditional Use Permit required
P = Permitted Use
S = Special Exception required
Article 05 TABLE OF USE REGULATIONS Use Regulations
24
ACCESSORY USES
DISTRICTS
RU R R-1 C I-1 I-2 CV IN BD
Supplementary
Regulations
Reference
A. RESIDENTIAL
1. Home Occupation P P P P P P P P P Section 7.06
2. Cottage Industry S S S S S S S S S Section 7.07
3. Storage of Equipment / Surplus
Associated with an Off-Premise
Occupation
S S S S S S - - S
4. Accessory Structures and
Facilities including but not limited to Tool
Sheds, Greenhouses, Swimming Pools,
and Tennis Courts
P P P P P P P P P Section 7.15
5. Grazing, Care, Raising, and/or
Keeping of Livestock for Personal Use
P P P S S S S S S Section 7.18
6. Accessory Dwelling Unit P P P P P P P P P Section 7.04
7. Home Based Day Care (RSA
672:1 V-a)
P P P P P P P P P Section 7.08
8. Storage and Use of a Registered
Boat, Recreational Vehicle, Camping
Trailer, or Motor Vehicle
P P P P P P P P P Section 7.17
B. NON-RESIDENTIAL
1. Drive In or Drive Through - - - S S S S S S
2. Dwelling Unit for Resident
Caretaker or Security Personnel
- - - S S S S S S Section 7.26
3. Farm or Roadside Stand P P P P P P - - P Section 7.15
Article 05 TABLE OF USE REGULATIONS Use Regulation
25
ACCESSORY USES
DISTRICTS
RU R R-1 C I-1 I-2 CV IN BD
Supplementary
Regulations
Reference
C. RESIDENTIAL AND NONRESIDENTIAL
1. Signs P P P P P P P P P Article 8
2. Child Day Care Center S S S P P P P P P Section 7.08
3. Small Wind Energy Systems P P P P P P P P P Section 7.25
4. Small Electricity Generation P P P P P P P P P
Legend of Districts
RU = Rural
R = Residential
R-1 = Residential One Family
C = Commercial
CV = Civic
I-1 = Limited Industrial
I-2 = General Industrial
IN = Institutional
BD = Business Development
Legend of Uses
dash = Not permitted
C = Conditional Use Permit required
P = Permitted Use
S = Special Exception required
26
ARTICLE 6. DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
6.01 Minimum Lot Size
Except as provided in Article 11, NON-CONFORMING LOTS, USES, AND STRUCTURES, of
this ordinance, no structures shall be constructed, and no use shall be established, on a lot
having less buildable land area than the minimum amount indicated in the Table of
Dimensional Regulations (Section 6.07). Where the lot is not served by a municipal sewer
system and an on-site subsurface disposal system is required, the lot size shall not be less
than the area required by the New Hampshire Water Supply and Pollution Control Commission
or as specified in the Table of Dimensional Regulations (Section 6.07), whichever is the
larger.
6.02 Minimum Lot Frontage
Except as provided in Article 11, NON-CONFORMING LOTS, USES, AND STRUCTURES, of
this Ordinance, no structures shall be constructed, and no use shall be established, on a lot
having less frontage than the minimum dimension indicated in the Table of Dimensional
Regulations (Section 6.07). Minimum lot frontage shall be a continuous, unbroken line along
one (1) street. The minimum lot frontage dimension must be maintained within the lot as a
minimum lot width to a depth of one hundred (100) feet from the front lot line. In the case of
lots fronting on a cul-de-sac, the minimum frontage may be reduced to fifty (50) feet, provided
that the required minimum frontage dimension for the applicable district is applied to the lot
width at a point one hundred (100) feet from the front lot line.
6.03 Minimum Yard Requirements
Except as provided in Article 11, NON-CONFORMING LOTS, USES AND STRUCTURES, of
this Ordinance, no structures shall be constructed on any portion of a lot that lies within a
minimum required front, rear, or side yard, the dimensions of which are indicated in the Table
of Dimensional Regulations (Section 6.07). As a part of a Site Plan Review Approval, the
Planning Board may reduce or eliminate yard requirements for structures necessary to utilize
rail lines or rail spurs.
A. Front Yard
The minimum front yard within a lot shall be determined by a line parallel to the front lot line at
a distance from said lot line as specified in the Table of Dimensional Regulations (Section
6.07). Where a lot is a corner lot or otherwise has multiple street frontages, front yards shall
be observed adjacent to all such frontages.
B. Rear Yard
The minimum rear yard within a lot shall be determined by a line parallel to the rear lot line at a
distance from said lot line as specified in the Table of Dimensional Regulations (section 6.07).
C. Side Yard
27
The minimum side yard within a lot shall be determined by lines parallel to the side lot lines at
a distance from said lot lines as specified in the Table of Dimensional Regulations (Section
6.07).
6.04 Maximum Lot Coverage
Except as provided in Article 11, NON-CONFORMING LOTS, USES, AND STRUCTURES, of
this Ordinance, no structures, or impervious surfaces shall be constructed on a lot such that
the area of the lot covered by such structures, and impervious surfaces when calculated as a
percentage of the total lot area, shall exceed the maximum percentage as specified in the
Table of Dimensional Regulations (Section 6.07). For the purpose of determining maximum lot
coverage, impervious areas are defined generally as areas the surface treatment of which
substantially restrict or prevent water from being absorbed into the underlying soils. In addition
to the areas under the roof line of structures and open patios, impervious areas include the
portion of a lot used for parking, maneuvering, vehicular access, outside storage, and
developed walkways. Landscaped areas which consist of plantings are not generally
considered impervious.
6.05 Maximum Number of Stories and Height of Structures
No structures shall be constructed in excess of the number of stories and the maximum height
as specified in the Table of Dimensional Regulations (Section 6.07). The height restrictions
shall not apply to necessary appurtenant structures not designed for human occupancy
including but not limited to spires, steeples, cupolas, domes, chimneys, smokestacks,
flagpoles, or antennae.
6.06 Driveways
All driveways shall have provisions for turnarounds which avoid backing onto public streets.
Vehicle access to all lots shall be from public rights-of-way. The location of driveways shall
minimize traffic hazards. No portion of any driveway shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to any
intersecting street, nor shall the maximum grade of the driveway exceed twelve (12) percent.
Common driveways providing access to two or more residential lots are prohibited.
28
6.07 
In the Base Districts, as established in Article 4, ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
AND ZONING MAPS, of this Ordinance, no structure, or impervious surface shall be
constructed except in conformance with the standards set forth in the following Table of
Dimensional Regulations (Section 6.07), subject to all other provisions and standards of this
Ordinance, and other local, state, and federal laws, rules, and regulations. Lots in planned
business subdivisions approved after March 15, 2000 may be permitted by the Planning
Board, in non-residential zone districts, which do not meet the minimum size or frontage
requirements. On such lots, the Planning Board may approve yard requirements which are
less than the minimum shown in the Table of Dimensional Regulations. See Section 7.23

Zone standards

District Minimum Lot Size Minimum Lot Frontage Front Rear Side Maximum Lot Coverage Maximum Height Stories
RU 2 acres 200 35 20 20 30 35 2 ½
RR 2 acres 200 35 20 20 30 35 2 ½
R-1 2 acres 200 35 20 20 30 35 2 ½
C 2 200 35 20 20 80 35 2 ½
I-1 5 300 50 30 30 80 40 3
I-2 2 200 50 30 30 80 40** 3
CV 1 200 35 20 20 60 40 3
IN 1 200 35 20 20 60 40 3
BD See Figure 15-1 of the Business Development District Ordinance [published separately]
for dimensional regulations
Notes:
* Off-street parking and loading spaces shall not be located within the minimum setback areas
in the R and RU districts. In the C, I-1, I-2, INST, and CIVIC districts, off-street parking and
loading spaces may be located within the setback areas provided the minimum distance
between the parking surface area and the property line is no less than ten (10) feet. Driveways
and similar access ways may be located within the side or rear setback area in any zone
provided the minimum distance between the driveway or access way and the property line is
no less than ten (10) feet.
** In the I-2 zone, structures up to 100' in height may be permitted by Special Exception.
29
ARTICLE 7. SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS
7.01 Applicability
This section contains supplementary provisions which pertain to specific uses as annotated in
Article 5, Section 5.11 Table of Use Regulations. The regulations and standards of Article 7
shall be applicable to the designated uses in any district, whether permitted by right, by special
exception or by conditional use permit. The applicability of these standards and regulations is
not intended to limit the authority of the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment
from applying other reasonable conditions to a development approval.
7.02 Open Space Residential Development
Definition Section
Homeowners Association - an organization of property or unit owners duly incorporated under
New Hampshire Law for the purpose of managing and maintaining common areas.
_________________________________________________________________
A. Authority and Purpose
The provisions of Section 7.02 are adopted as an innovative land use control as authorized by
RSA 674:21. The open space residential development allows for an alternative pattern of land
development without an overall increase in density. The purposes of this section are to further
the goals and objectives of the Master Plan by:
1. Facilitating the economical and efficient provision of public services;
2. Promoting open space conservation;
3. Protecting the natural and scenic attributes of the land;
4. Maintaining controls for the development of affordable housing in the Town of Bow;
5. Preserving open space while providing greater flexibility in the design of residential
subdivisions;
6. Encouraging diversity and originality in lot layout and individual building design to
achieve a harmonious relationship between development and the land; and
7. Promoting the functionality and livability of existing and new neighborhoods.
B. General Provisions and Restrictions
1. All Open Space Residential Developments shall comply with all provisions of this
Ordinance, except as herein provided, and shall be governed by the current Subdivision
Regulations of the Town of Bow except as modified herein.
30
2. Except as herein provided, there shall be no greater number of units than permitted by
the requirements of a non Open Space Residential Development. The Planning Board shall
adopt criteria in the Subdivision Regulations to ensure that the number of units is no more than
would be permitted in a traditional subdivision layout.
3. Common open space shall be so defined on a subdivision plan and shall be made
subject to a deed restriction or placed under a conservation easement which shall thereafter
prohibit further subdivision or development of the open space.
4. Only one Single Family Dwelling, with an Accessory Dwelling Unit as permitted in 7.04,
shall be permitted per lot.
C. Area Frontage and Setback Requirements
1. The minimum original tract size proposed for Open Space Residential Developments
shall be 10 acres.
2. Common open space shall consist of at least fifty percent (50%) of the total original
tract area, and at least twenty-five percent (25%) of this open space must be Buildable Land.
3. For the purpose of visual and/or aesthetic screening, a buffer zone having a minimum
depth of fifty (50) feet shall be provided inside and abutting the perimeter of the entire original
Open Space Residential Development tract. Where existing vegetation is not sufficient to
achieve adequate screening, the Planning Board may require additional plantings. To improve
neighborhood functionality or achieve continuity with similar neighborhoods, the Planning
Board may waive or modify the requirements for the buffer zone.
The buffer zone shall not be disturbed unless approved by the Planning Board. Prior to
commencement of construction activity on the parcel, the required buffer shall be marked at 50
feet intervals with signs approved by the Planning Board.
Prior to Subdivision approval, the Planning Board may approve modifications of the buffer
zone as provided in this section. After completion of the required public improvements and
occupation of dwelling units, the Planning Board may approve modifications of the buffer zone
by Conditional Use Permit (see 7.02 D 5 below).
4. The minimum lot size after subdivision shall be three-fourths (3/4) buildable acre for lots
with individual wells and on site sewage disposal. For Open Space Residential Developments
with municipal or community water supply or sewage disposal, the Planning Board may
approve lots with a minimum of one-half (½) buildable acre. Where the buffer required in 7.02
C 3 above is provided within individual lots, the area of the buffer shall not be counted towards
the requirement for minimum lot size.
5. Road and lot frontage in an Open Space Residential Development shall be a minimum
of one hundred (100) feet. Cul-de-sac lots shall have a minimum frontage of fifty (50) feet with
minimum lot width of one hundred (100) feet to exist at a distance of one hundred (100) feet
back from the road frontage.
For Open Space Residential Developments with municipal or community water supply or
sewage disposal, the Planning Board may approve lots with a minimum frontage of eighty (80)
31
feet, forty (40) feet on cul de sacs.
Where the Planning Board finds that the Purposes of Open Space Residential Development
would be furthered, the Board may approve common driveways providing access to two or
more residential lots (see Article 6.06).
6. To ensure the protection of existing homes, where a proposed Open Space Residential
Development lot would abut a non-Open Space Residential Development lot with an existing
residence built thereon, the Planning Board is empowered to require that the abutting Open
Space Residential Development lot conform to the minimum lot size and frontage
requirements of Article 6, Section 6.07 Table of Dimensional Regulations.
7. The minimum yard requirements contained within Article 6, Section 6.07 Table of
Dimensional Regulations shall apply to development within an Open Space Residential
Development. In Open Space Residential Developments with municipal or Community Water
Supply or Sewage Disposal Systems, the Planning Board may permit side setbacks of no less
than 15 feet for interior lot lines. Minimum yard requirements (setbacks) shall be measured
from the inside limit of the buffer required in 7.02 C 3 above to the drip line of the structure.
D. Approvals and Revisions
1. Proposed Articles of Association and by-laws must be approved in writing by the State
of New Hampshire (if applicable) and by the Planning Board prior to the granting of
development approval, but only after legal review by the Board's counsel. The cost of legal
review by the Board's legal counsel shall be borne by the developer. Any proposed changes
in such documents shall require the prior written approval of the Planning Board.
2. Membership in a Homeowners Association shall be mandatory for Open Space
Residential Development property owners and made a required covenant in all deeds issued
to lot or property owners. The Association shall provide voting and use rights in the open
space area(s) when applicable and shall charge dues or levy assessments to cover expenses
which may include tax liabilities of common areas, and for the maintenance of such common
open space areas, improvements, and rights-of-way, etc. The Association shall be
responsible for the perpetuation, maintenance, and function of all common open space lands,
uses and facilities. The Association shall be responsible for educating members of the
obligations for all buffers, common lands, uses, and facilities. Such association shall not be
dissolved, nor shall such Association dispose of any common open space or natural land by
sale or otherwise without prior written consent of the Planning Board. The developer of the
Open Space Residential Development shall be responsible for all obligations of the
Association until the Association is formed and in operation, including educating each
purchaser of the obligations for all buffers, common lands, uses, and facilities.
3. Any and all open space lands within the Open Space Residential Development tract
shall be held in common ownership by the dwelling unit owners or by the Homeowners
Association. The Planning Board may permit the transfer of conservation land and / or a
conservation easement to the Town of Bow, Bow Open Spaces, or other approved
conservation organization. No changes to the open space design or uses permitted are
allowed without prior approval of the Planning Board.
4. In the event that the Association established to own and maintain the open space
areas, or any successor Association, or the owner or owners of the dwelling units located
32
within the development who own said open space shall, for any reason, fail to maintain the
open space in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the final approved plan, the
Planning Board shall serve written notice upon such Association, successor Association, or
residents setting forth the deficiencies in the maintenance, order and condition of the open
space. Such notice shall include a demand that said deficiencies be cured forthwith and that a
statement of intent to comply and a date of compliance shall be filed with the Planning Board
within fourteen days of such notice. If the Association or owners of the dwelling units fail to
cure the deficiencies forthwith, the Association and each of the owners of the dwelling units
shall be liable for the fines and penalties provided for in RSA 676:17 et. seq. in addition to all
other legal and equitable remedies.
5. Following completion of required improvements and occupation of dwelling units in an
Open Space Residential Development, the Planning Board may approve, by Conditional Use
Permit, modifications to the required buffer zone. In determining whether to grant a conditional
use permit, the Planning Board shall, in addition to the standards set forth in Section 12.05 of
the Ordinance, take into consideration the existing condition of the buffer prior to disturbance,
the character and use of neighboring properties abutting the area of the buffer zone proposed
for disturbance, the impact of the proposed disturbance including any benefits or detriments to
properties abutting the affected buffer including lots in the Open Space Residential
Development, and whether the proposed plan enhances the function of the buffer zone.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the buffer zone may not be disturbed for the placement of
buildings.
7.03 Manufactured Housing Parks and Subdivisions
Definition Section
Manufactured Housing, Manufactured Home - any structure, transportable in one (1) or more
sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width and forty (40)
body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) square feet
or more, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities, which include
plumbing, heating, and electrical heating systems contained therein. Manufactured housing
shall not include pre-site built housing.
Manufactured Housing Park - a tract of land providing sites or lots, supported by required
improvements and utilities, that are leased for the long term placement of manufactured
housing, and that includes services and facilities for the residents. A manufactured housing
park does not include the parking of unoccupied manufactured housing units for inspection
and sale as a commercial business.
Manufactured Housing Subdivision - a subdivision to create lots for sale upon which
manufactured housing units may be placed.
__________________________________________________________________
The development of Manufactured Housing parks shall be subject to the following standards
and conditions:
A. Minimum tract size for a Manufactured Housing Park: five (5) acres
33
B. Minimum gross area per unit: three fourths (3/4) acre
C. Minimum tract frontage of Manufactured Housing Park: three hundred (300) feet
D. Minimum space between Manufactured Housing Units: fifty (50) feet
E. Minimum distance of nearest Manufactured Housing Unit to side and rear lot lines: fifty
(50) feet
F. Minimum distance of nearest Manufactured Housing Unit to right-of-way of any public
street: one hundred fifty (150) feet
G. All internal roadways shall be well drained, graveled, and hard surfaced or paved and
maintained in good condition and illuminated at night.
H. The maintenance of all common areas, water and sewer utilities, lighting, roadways,
drainage, recreation and other common areas and facilities shall be the responsibility of the
property owner or owners, or of a Homeowners Association formed for such purpose.
I. Where the site abuts a residential premise, public or institutional use, or public street or
way, a densely planted hedge screen, solid fence, wall or combination at least five (5) feet in
height shall be provided along the full length of the property line of such abutting use or way.
J. The applicable sanitary regulation promulgated by State Board of Health under
authority of Chapter 147, New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, as most recently
amended, shall be adhered to.
K. Connection to a municipally owned and operated sewer system or private system
approved by the New Hampshire Water Supply and Pollution Control Commission shall be
required.
7.04 Accessory Dwelling Units
Definition Section
Dwelling Unit, Accessory - a dwelling unit within a single family dwelling that is designed,
constructed, altered or converted for the express purpose of enabling a person or persons to
reside in the same residential structure but in separate living quarters.
__________________________________________________________________
Only one accessory dwelling unit per lot shall be permitted. An accessory dwelling unit may
be incorporated within a single family dwelling provided that:
A. The single family dwelling is located on a lot having at least the minimum lot area or
frontage required by the Ordinance, or is located on a non-conforming lot which is served by a
municipal sewer;
B. The single family dwelling is located on a lot either served by municipal sewer, or is
connected to a septic system with adequate capacity to service the total number of bedrooms
within the single family residence and the accessory dwelling unit;
34
C. The accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed 800 square feet of Habitable Floor Area;
D. One of the dwelling units shall be occupied by the owner of the property; and
E. Prior to occupancy of the second dwelling unit, the owner must record an approved
“Notice of Limited Occupancy” at the Merrimack County Registry of Deeds.
7.05 Elderly, Duplex, and Multi-Family Dwellings
A. Housing for the Elderly
1. Where the development is for housing for the elderly and municipal sewer is available,
the following minimum required acreage shall apply:
The minimum parcel size for the development shall be 4.0 buildable acres
a. Where the development has its access on Arterial or Collector Street
Single & Duplex Units* Multi-Family Units *
Units 1 - 8 4.0 Buildable Acres 4.0 Buildable Acres
Units 9 + 4.0 Buildable Acres for Units 1 - 8
+.5 Buildable Acres for each
additional Unit
4.0 Buildable Acres for Units 1 - 8
+ .5 Buildable Acres for each
additional Unit
* Minimum lot size shall be calculated based on the total number of units allowed for the entire
site, not calculated for individual buildings.
b. Where the development has its access on Local Street
Single & Duplex Units * Multi-Family Units *
Units 1 - 5 4.0 Buildable Acres 4.0 Buildable Acres
Units 6 + 4.0 Buildable Acres for Units 1 - 5
+.5 Buildable Acres for each
additional Unit
4.0 Buildable Acres for Units 1 - 5 +
.5 Buildable Acres for each
additional Unit
* Minimum lot size shall be calculated based on the total number of units allowed for the entire
site, not calculated for individual buildings.
2. Where municipal sewer is not available, the following minimum required acreage shall
apply:
The minimum parcel size for the development shall be 4.0 buildable acres
a. Where the development has its access on Arterial or Collector Street
Single & Duplex Units * Multi-Family Units *
Units 1 - 4 4.0 Buildable Acres 4.0 Buildable Acres
35
Units 5 - 10 4.0 Buildable Acres for Units 1 - 4 +
1.0 Buildable Acres for each
additional Unit
4.0 Buildable Acres for Units 1 - 4 +
.5 Buildable Acres for each
additional Unit
Units 11 + 10.0 Buildable Acres for Units 1 -
10 + 1.5 Buildable Acres for each
additional Unit
7.0 Buildable Acres for Units 1 - 10
+ .5 Buildable Acres for each
additional Unit
* Minimum lot size shall be calculated based on the total number of units allowed for the entire
site, not calculated for individual buildings.
b. Where the development has its access on Local Street
Single Family & Duplex Units * Multi-Family Units *
Units 1 - 3 4.0 Buildable Acres
Units 1 - 5 4.0 Buildable Acres
Units 4 - 10 4.0 Buildable Acres for Units 1 - 3 +
1.0 Buildable Acres for each
additional Unit
Units 6 - 10 4.0 Buildable Acres for Units 1 - 5 +
.75 Buildable Acres for each
additional Unit
Units 11 + 11.0 Buildable Acres for Units 1 -
10 + 1.5 Buildable Acres for each
additional Unit
7.75 Buildable Acres for Units 1 -
10 + 1.0 Buildable Acres for each
additional Unit
* Minimum lot size shall be calculated based on the total number of units allowed for the entire
site, not calculated for individual buildings.
3. All other dimensional regulations apply;
4. In developments of Housing for the Elderly where a proportion of the units could be
available to persons who do not qualify as elderly, the requirements of the Table of
Dimensional Regulations shall be applied to those units.
B. Duplex and multifamily dwellings in the "RU" and "R" Districts
1. The building height shall not exceed two (2) stories and
2. The minimum required acreage shall be two (2) acres of buildable land for the first
dwelling unit, plus one half (½) acre of buildable land for each additional dwelling unit.
Minimum lot size shall be calculated based on the total number of units allowed for the entire
site, not calculated for individual buildings. Multiple duplexes and/or multi-family structures are
permitted on a single parcel. Not more than five (5) multi-family dwelling units are permitted in
a structure. A Reasonable Exception for multi-family structures containing more than five (5)
units may be approved by Conditional Use Permit.
In addition to the criteria in Article 12.05, the applicant for a CUP for a Reasonable Exception
must demonstrate that the structures proposed [with more than five (5) units] have advantages
36
over structures with fewer units in terms of impacts to natural resources, public safety, and / or
municipal finances, and that the larger units are appropriately screened from abutting parcels
and public streets.
C. Special Provisions Applicable to Housing for the Elderly and multifamily dwellings in
all Districts
1. Standby emergency electricity generators shall be provided for all developments of
Housing for the Elderly and specified multifamily dwellings. These provisions shall apply to all
new developments and to renovations equal to or greater than 50% of structure value, that add
elevator or chair lift, or that provide for health and life sustaining appliances. Generators shall
provide electricity throughout periods of power outages and shall have sufficient fuel available
for two days of continuous operation. The generators shall provide sufficient supply of
electricity to operate emergency lighting, water supply system, elevators, (wheel) chair lifts,
and heating systems throughout the development, and operate appliances needed to sustain
life and health in individual dwelling units. The electrical system shall be constructed to deliver
the required electricity throughout the development. The owner or home owners association
shall submit provisions for maintenance of generation systems, including provisions for
refueling during extended power outages.
The requirement for standby emergency electricity generators shall only apply to multifamily
dwellings that exceed two floors above grade or that contain more than twelve (12) dwelling
units in a single structure.
2. The Planning Board shall adopt provisions in the Site Plan Review Regulations to
implement the requirements for standby generators and shall be authorized to approve the
design, installation, and provisions for maintenance of generation systems. The Board shall
be authorized to grant Waivers from the herein requirements through the Site Plan Review
Application process.
The Planning Board may grant such Waivers or partial Waivers where
a. each unit in the development has direct access to the outside within three (3)
vertical feet of adjacent grade;
b. no elevators or (wheel) chair lifts are constructed;
c. heating systems are designed to operate without electricity;
d. other provisions are made for life and health sustaining appliances; or,
e. in cases where the applicant demonstrates that installation of standby
generators would constitute a hardship.
7.06 Home Occupation
Definition Section
Home Occupation - A commercial activity that is conducted by a person entirely within a
dwelling unit on the same lot where such person resides, and is of a nature which does not
require the use of on-site advertising, frequent customer travel to the site, the on-site storage
of heavy equipment, or other exterior evidence of business use which differentiates the
appearance of the property from that of other dwellings used exclusively as residences.
________________________________________________________
The purpose of establishing conditions for home occupations is to ensure that such uses
37
remain subordinate to the principal use of the property as a residence. No home occupation
shall be permitted which would have a significant adverse impact on the surrounding
neighborhood. To be considered compatible with a residential neighborhood, a home
occupation must meet all of the following conditions:
A. No goods, stock in trade, or other commodities may be visible from outside the building;
and
B. There are no on-premise retail sales of goods or merchandise from inventory held on
the premises, with the exception of sales made via mail order, via telecommunication, or
incidental sales that are directly related and subordinate to the Home Occupation (such as hair
products at a salon) that do not generate separate trips to the home; and
C. The home occupation shall not employ more than two (2) persons who are not
residents on the premises; and
D. The use shall not create objectionable traffic, noise, fumes, odor, dust, vibration, heat,
glare, or electrical interference; and
E. Not more than 25% of the habitable floor area of the dwelling may be utilized by the
occupation; and
F. Except for permitted signs and required parking, there shall be no external evidence of
the occupation which differentiates the residence in appearance from other residential
properties similarly situated; and
G. Off-street parking shall be provided as specified in Article 9; and
H. A single sign is allowed as permitted in Article 8: and
I. The use is not one of the following, which are expressly prohibited as home
occupations:
1. Commercial kennels;
2. Uses involving the parking or storage of tractor trailers, or the parking or storage
of trucks with a gross vehicle weight (GVW) greater than 16,000 lbs.;
3. Auto or small engine repair or maintenance, welding, or other uses which involve
the visible storage on the property of automobiles or the parts thereof.
7.07 Cottage Industry
Definition Section
Cottage Industry - a type of home occupation that is conducted within a dwelling unit or its
accessory structures, in which a resident proprietor engages in an on-site business, the nature
of which may involve non-family employees, or may require frequent customer traffic, exterior
advertising or business identification signs, shipping and delivery of manufactured, assembled
or repaired products or an exterior appearance which otherwise deviates from that of other
38
dwellings used exclusively as residences.
__________________________________________________________________
In order to avoid adverse impacts on a neighborhood, a cottage industry shall not be
authorized unless it meets all of the following standards and conditions:
A. The cottage industry is subordinate to the principal use of the property as a residence;
B. Not more than 25 percent of the habitable floor area of the dwelling unit, plus not more
than 1,000 square feet of floor area in any accessory building, may be utilized by the cottage
industry;
C. The proprietor of the cottage industry is the owner-occupant of the property;
D. Not more than three persons who are not occupants of the residence may be employed
by the cottage industry;
E. The lot on which the cottage industry is to be located is a conforming lot under this
ordinance;
F. Retail sales shall be limited to incidental sales of goods which are manufactured,
assembled, or grown on site, or products which are directly related to the goods or services
rendered by the cottage industry;
G. The use shall not create objectionable traffic, noise, fumes, odor, dust, vibration, heat,
glare, or electrical interference. To assure that such conditions are met, additional conditions
limiting the hours of operation may be established as a further condition of the approval of a
cottage industry;
H. Off street parking shall be provided as specified in Article 9;
I. A single on-premise sign identifying the business which conforms to the limits of Article
8, Section 8.07, Signs permitted in Residential Districts, is allowed;
J. Any outside storage of materials, vehicles, or stock-in-trade of the cottage industry shall
be limited to 1,000 square feet and shall be screened from the view of surrounding properties;
K. The use is not one of the following uses, which are expressly prohibited as cottage
industries:
1. Commercial kennels;
2. Uses involving the parking or storage of tractor trailers, or the parking or storage
of trucks with a gross vehicle weight (GVW) greater than 16,000 lbs., or the regular delivery
and shipping of materials or goods by such vehicles;
3. Auto or small engine repair or maintenance, welding, or other uses which involve
the visible storage on the property of automobiles or the parts thereof; and
4. Warehousing and distribution uses.
39
7.08 Day Care Centers
Definition Section
Day Care Center - means either full-day or any portion thereof, care centers, for which
services are regularly provided for seven (7) or more unrelated children or adults.
Home Based Day Care - means child care services as defined in RSA 672:1 V-a which limits
providers to six (6) full-time preschool children and three (3) part-time school age children,
including the children domiciled at the home.
_________________________________________________________________
All day care centers and home based day care as defined herein shall be required to have
restrictive fencing, as approved by the Town of Bow permit issuing authority, enclosing all
outdoor play areas, for the safety of the children. Where a day care center is to be operated
as an accessory use to a principal residential use, the rules of Section 7.07, Cottage Industry,
shall also apply. The Building Inspector shall not issue a Certificate of Occupancy for such
use until the applicant files evidence of approval under state permitting and licensing of day
care providers issued in accordance with RSA 170-E:8, I through IV.
7.09 Animal Hospital or Commercial Kennel
No animal hospital or commercial kennel shall be located within one hundred and fifty (150)
feet of any off-site dwelling, nor within two hundred (200) feet of any residential zoning district
boundary. The kennel area shall be completely enclosed within a wall or fence, and shall meet
the standards of Article 7, Section 7.16 Screening Standards.
7.10 Radio/TV Tower or Antenna and Personal Wireless Service Facility (PWSF)
Definition Section
Antenna shall mean any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, television, personal
communications service (PCS), pager network, or any other communications through the
sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves of any frequency and bandwidth.
Antenna only applications shall mean proposed installations where antenna(s) are mounted on
an existing building or on an existing tower and where the ground level floor area of new
related structures is not more than 1200 square feet.
Average tree canopy height shall mean the average height above ground level of all trees over
a specified height within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the center of the mount of a
PWSF, such average to be determined by inventorying the trees to remain after the
construction of the PWSF.
Board or Planning Board shall mean the Town of Bow Planning Board, which shall be the
regulator of this Ordinance.
Camouflaged shall mean a personal wireless service facility that is disguised, hidden, part of
an existing or proposed building or structure, or placed within an existing or proposed building
or structure.
40
Collocation, as defined in RSA 12-K:2, X, as from time to time amended, shall mean the
placement or installation of new PWSFs on existing towers or mounts, including electrical
transmission towers and water towers, as well as existing buildings and other structures
capable of structurally supporting the attachment of PWSFs in compliance with applicable
codes. Collocation does not include a Substantial Modification.
Collocation Application, as defined in RSA 12-K:2, XI, as from time to time amended, shall
mean a request submitted by an applicant to an authority for collocation on a tower or mount.
FAA shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission.
Height shall mean, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from
ground level of the natural grade of a site to the highest point on the tower or other structure,
even if said highest point is an antenna.
Modification, as defined in RSA 12-K:2, XVIII, as from time to time amended, shall mean the
replacement or alteration of an existing PWSF within a previously approved equipment
compound or upon a previously approved mount. Routine maintenance of an approved PWSF
shall not be considered a modification.
Modification Application, as defined in RSA 12-K:2, XIX, as from time to time amended, shall
mean a request submitted by an applicant to an authority for modification of a PWSF.
Modification, Substantial, as defined in RSA 12-K:2, XXV, as from time to time amended, shall
mean the mounting of a proposed PWSF on a tower or mount which, as a result of single or
successive modification applications:
(a) Increases or results in the increase of the permitted vertical height of a tower, or the
existing vertical height of a mount, by either more than 10 percent or the height of one
additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20
feet, whichever is greater; or
(b) Involves adding an appurtenance to the body of a tower or mount that protrudes
horizontally from the edge of the tower or mount more than 20 feet, or more than the width of
the tower or mount at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater, except where
necessary to shelter the antenna from inclement weather or to connect the antenna to the
tower or mount via cable; or
(c) Increases or results in the increase of the permitted square footage of the existing
equipment compound by more than 2,500 square feet; or
(d) Adds to or modifies a camouflaged PWSF in a way that would defeat the effect of the
camouflage.
Mount shall mean the structure or surface upon which antennas are mounted and include roofmounted,
side-mounted, ground-mounted, and structure-mounted types.
Personal Wireless Service Facility(ies) or PWSF(s) or facility(ies) shall mean any “PWSF” as
defined in the federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 U.S.C. section 332(c)(7)(C)(ii),
including facilities used or to be used by a licensed provider of personal wireless services,
which for purposes of this Ordinance shall also include, as the context may require, all towers
and antennas used in connection therewith.
Personal Wireless Services shall mean any wireless telecommunications services, and
41
commercial mobile services including cellular telephone services, personal communications
services, and mobile and radio paging services as defined in the federal Telecommunications
Act of 1996, 47 U.S.C. section 332 (c)(7)(C)(i).
Pre-existing Facilities shall mean any PWSF, tower or antenna lawfully constructed or
permitted prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, as well as the replacement of any such
PWSF, tower or antenna, provided that such replacement meets the requirements of Section
7.10 E. 1. Pre-existing Facilities shall also mean any PWSF, tower or antenna lawfully
constructed in accordance with this Ordinance that predates an application currently before the
Board.
Radio frequency radiation shall mean the electronic emissions from personal wireless service
facilities.
Stealth Facility/Stealth Technology shall mean any PWSF designed to look like a structure
which may commonly be found in the area surrounding such proposed facilities such as, but
not limited to, flagpoles, farm silos, ranger or forest fire watch towers, or artificial trees.
Tower shall mean any structure that is designed in part and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas. The term includes radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers,
stealth facilities, utility poles, monopoles and the like.
Viewshed shall mean the geographic area visible from a particular point (location) of view.
_______________________________________________________________
A. Authority
This Ordinance is adopted by the Town of Bow on May 9, 2006, in accordance with the
authority granted in New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated 674:16, 674:21, and 12-K.
B. Purposes
These regulations have been enacted in order to establish general guidelines for the siting of
personal wireless service facilities (PWSF), including towers and antennas and to enhance
and fulfill the following goals:
1. Further the goals, objectives and recommendations of the Bow Master Plan and
preserve the authority of the Town of Bow to regulate and to provide for reasonable
opportunity for the siting of personal wireless service facilities, by enhancing the ability of
providers of personal wireless services to provide such services to the community quickly,
effectively, and efficiently.
2. Reduce adverse impacts such personal wireless service facilities may create, including,
but not limited to impacts on: aesthetics, environmentally sensitive areas, conservation lands,
historically significant locations, ridge lines, scenic areas and vistas, viewsheds, flight
corridors, health and safety by reducing injurious accidents to person and property, and
prosperity by protecting property values.
3. Provide for co-location and minimal impact siting options through an assessment of
technology, current locational options, future available locations, innovative siting techniques,
42
and siting possibilities beyond the political jurisdiction of the Town of Bow.
4. Permit the construction of new personal wireless service facilities only where all other
reasonable opportunities have been exhausted, and to encourage the construction of new
PWSFs in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of such facilities.
5. Require cooperation and co-location, to the highest extent possible, between
competitors in order to reduce cumulative negative impacts upon the Town of Bow.
6. Provide for the regular maintenance and safety inspections for any and all personal
wireless service facilities.
7. Provide for the removal of abandoned personal wireless service facilities that are no
longer inspected for safety concerns and code compliance. Provide a mechanism for the Town
of Bow to remove these abandoned facilities to protect the citizens from imminent harm and
danger at other than municipal expense.
8. Provide for the removal of personal wireless service facilities that are technologically
outdated.
C. Overlay District
Personal wireless service facilities shall be permitted as a principal or accessory (secondary)
use in all zoning districts within the Town of Bow governed by this Ordinance only after
obtaining a Conditional Use Permit, with exceptions listed in D. 2., as provided in this
Ordinance.
1. Existing Uses or Structures. The existence of a permitted use on a site shall not
preclude the addition of a PWSF as a secondary use provided all other provisions of this
Ordinance are satisfied. A different existing use or an existing structure on the same lot shall
not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot. For purposes of determining
whether the installation of a PWSF, tower, or antenna complies with district development
regulations, including but not limited to set-back requirements, lot-coverage requirements, and
other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the PWSF,
tower, or antenna may be located on an easement or leased parcel within such lot. PWSF,
towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions
of this Ordinance, shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or
structure.
D. Applicability
1. General. The terms of this Ordinance shall apply to all personal wireless service
facilities proposed to be located within the Town of Bow whether on property owned by the
Town of Bow, on privately owned property, or on property owned by another governmental
entity that acts in a proprietary capacity to lease such property to a carrier.
2. Exceptions.
a. Amateur Radio / Receive-Only Antennas. This Ordinance shall not govern any
43
tower, or the installation of any antenna that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and
operated by a federally- licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for
receive only antennas. This Ordinance adopts the provisions and limitations as referenced in
RSA 674:16, IV.
b. Essential Services & Public Utilities. Personal wireless service facilities shall not
be considered infrastructure, essential services, or public utilities, as defined or used
elsewhere in the Town of Bow's ordinances and regulations. Siting for personal wireless
service facilities is a use of land, and is addressed by this Section 7.10.
c. Applications for Modification or Collocation. Applications for Modification or
Collocation shall be reviewed in conformance with RSA 12-K:10, as from time to time
amended. 12-K:10 includes provisions that a decision as to completeness shall be rendered
within 15 days, a decision to approve or disapprove shall be rendered within 45 days, shall not
require a Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning Board public hearing or approval, provides
for automatic approval after 45 days, and limits municipal authority over PWSF mounted on
utility poles.
E. Location, Construction, and Performance Requirements
1. Setbacks. All personal wireless service facilities, including equipment compounds,
utility buildings, structures, towers and antennas must meet the minimum setback
requirements of this Ordinance. Further, towers must be set back from all lot lines and public
rights-of-way a minimum distance equal to 125% of the tower’s height; provided, however, that
this requirement shall not apply to PWSFs and appurtenant facilities (1) located on or within
existing buildings or structures; or structures less than thirty-five (35) feet in height from
surrounding grades, and (2) camouflaged as otherwise required by this Ordinance.
2. Height Limitations
a. General. Subject to any stricter standards as set forth below, a personal
wireless service facility shall not exceed ninety (90) feet in height, measured as the vertical
distance from the average finished grade surrounding the facility, to its highest point, including
all attachments. The 90 feet height limit shall not apply to antenna only applications,
Modifications, and Collocations. The height of any structure will be the minimum necessary in
order to transmit and receive commercially feasible transmissions. The intent to serve a large
area with one tall installation will not be accepted as justification of height. Multiple, minimumheight
towers are preferred, and may be required.
b. PWSFs in Wooded Areas. A personal wireless service facility located in a
wooded area, except for Modifications and Collocations, shall not project higher than twenty
(20) feet above the average tree canopy height of the proposed site. Further, a PWSF located
in a wooded area must be camouflaged to blend in with the natural character of such area and
must employ stealth technology in order to make the site less obtrusive to surrounding
properties and the community. Appropriate stealth technologies for wooded areas include:
ranger or forest fire watch towers of a size typically found in the State of New Hampshire,
artificial trees, or other structures acceptable to the Planning Board.
c. PWSFs in Fields or Agricultural Areas. A personal wireless service facility
located in a field or other open area without a tree canopy shall employ stealth technology.
Appropriate stealth technologies for fields or open areas include agricultural silos, windmills, or
other structures acceptable to the Planning Board and of a size and configuration typically
44
found in the State of New Hampshire.
d. PWSFs in or on Existing Structures. A PWSF may be located on or within an
existing building or structure provided that such facilities, except for Modifications and
Collocations, shall employ stealth technologies and shall be architecturally compatible with the
host building or structure.
e. New PWSF Structures. A PWSF may be located in a new building or structure
provided that such building or structure (a) shall not exceed the maximum building height in
the zoning district where a PWSF is proposed, and (b) shall be architecturally compatible with
the buildings in the immediately surrounding area.
3. Location Prioritization. Any new personal wireless service facility shall be located in
accordance with the following priorities, starting with the first. An applicant shall show proof of
having exhausted each option before moving on to succeeding options. Antenna only
applications shall be located in accordance with priority a or c, as applicable.
a. Concealed or camouflaged on or within an existing building or structure,
including but not limited to an historic building, an agricultural building or structure, a water
tank, a utility transmission pole, an outdoor lighting structure, or a church steeple.
b. On or within a new building or structure having a height not greater than the
maximum building height in the zoning district where the PWSF is proposed.
c. On an existing PWSF (co-location);
d. On a new facility which is camouflaged using stealth technologies subject to the
height limitations set forth above.
4. Easements or Leased Areas. If a PWSF is to be located on an easement or leased
area, said easement or leased area shall have a minimum area equal to an area having a
radius of 125% of the tower’s height plus additional area for accessory structures and access,
if required. Antenna only applications, Modifications, and Collocations need only provide
easement or leased area for accessory structures.
5. Tower Construction. All new PWSFs must employ appropriate stealth technologies that
are visually compatible and in scale with the rural character of the Town and its villages and
shall satisfy the following additional requirements:
a. The design of the tower, buildings and related structures on a PWSF site shall,
to the maximum extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping
that will blend such facilities with the natural setting and man-made environment. The design
also should call for installation of appropriate techniques to mitigate the effects of noise
produced by the PWSF’s equipment and reduce the impact of noise pollution to neighboring
properties. These facilities shall also be subject to all other requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance and Site Plan Review Regulations.
b. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and
supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a color satisfactory to the Board
that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to
make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
45
c. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other
applicable authority. If lighting is required, the governing authority may review the available
lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the
surrounding views.
d. Towers shall not contain any permanent or temporary signs, writing, symbols, or
any graphic representation of any kind, except as required by law for such facilities.
e. An applicant constructing a PWSF in a wooded area shall utilize appropriate
construction techniques to minimize damage to trees and other vegetation within the PWSF
site and surrounding areas. Moreover, all trees used to determine the average tree canopy
height for the PWSF site shall not be damaged or removed during construction, maintenance,
repair and operation of the PWSF. In all cases, the applicant also shall demonstrate legal
capacity to control tree-cutting and removal from the proposed camouflage area.
6. Viewshed Analysis. As a part of the initial application, except for Modifications and
Collocations, the applicant shall submit a map showing the areas within 2000' from which the
PWSF would be visible. As part of the review process the applicant shall conduct a viewshed
analysis, using a methodology approved by the Board. Such analysis may include: (1) a
mapped viewshed delineation; (2) a test balloon or crane extension moored at the site; or (3)
other technology to indicate the visibility of proposed towers and/or antennas. Photographs or
video footage of the balloon or crane test shall be provided to the Planning Board and shall
provide views of the tower from the PWSF site and other vantage points as determined by the
Planning Board.
7. Landscaping. The following landscaping requirements shall apply to personal wireless
service facilities constructed under this ordinance.
a. Towers and all accessory buildings and fencing shall be landscaped with a
buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from adjacent
property. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least ten (10) feet wide
outside the perimeter of the compound. Natural vegetation is preferred.
b. In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the
landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived entirely.
c. Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be
preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, PWSFs sited on large wooded lots,
natural growth around the property may be deemed a sufficient buffer.
8. Federal Requirements. All PWSFs must meet or exceed current standards and
regulations of the FAA, FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the
authority to regulate such facilities. If such standards and regulations are changed, the owners
of the PWSFs governed by this Ordinance shall bring such facilities into compliance with such
revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of such revised
standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the
controlling federal agency, or unless the controlling federal agency provides an exemption for
pre-existing facilities. Failure to bring a PWSF into compliance with such revised standards
and regulations shall constitute an abandonment and grounds for the removal of the PWSF in
accordance with Section 7.10 I. at the owner’s expense through the execution of the posted
46
security. Owners of telecommunications facilities shall provide documentation showing that
each telecommunications facility is in compliance with all applicable federal and state
requirements. Evidence of compliance must be submitted every 12 months.
9. Building Codes-Safety Standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers and
antennas, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards
contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are
published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon
inspection, the Board of Selectmen or designee concludes that a tower fails to comply with
such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice
being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower
into compliance with such standards, unless the Board or Selectmen or designee determines
that corrective action must be taken in less time to protect the public safety. If the owner fails
to bring such tower into compliance within 30 days, such action shall constitute an
abandonment and grounds for the removal of the tower in accordance with Section 7.10 I. at
the owner’s expense through execution of the posted security.
F. Conditional Use Permits
1. General. Any person seeking to construct a personal wireless service facility, except
for antenna only applications, Modifications, and Collocations, shall apply to the Planning
Board for Site Plan Review in accordance with the requirements set forth in the Town’s Site
Plan Review Regulations. In addition, each applicant shall submit the information required in
this Section 7.10 F.
2. Issuance of Conditional Use Permits. In granting a Conditional Use Permit, the
Planning Board may impose such conditions as the Board determines are necessary to
minimize any adverse effect of the proposed PWSF on adjoining properties, and to preserve
the intent of this Ordinance.
3. Procedure on Applications. The Planning Board shall act upon an application in
accordance with the procedural requirements of the Site Plan Review Regulations and RSA
676:4. In addition, applicants shall submit a list of all communities within twenty (20) miles of
the Town of Bow, and the local newspapers used by the towns, with mailing addresses for
each, as required by RSA 12-K. Applicants shall also pay all fees required to notify each
community.
4. Decisions. Possible decisions that may be rendered by the Planning Board include
approval, approval with conditions, disapproval without prejudice, or disapproval. All
decisions shall be rendered in writing, in accordance with RSA 676:3. Further, in accordance
with the National Wireless Telecommunications Siting Policy - Section 332(c)(47 U.S.C.
332(c)), a denial shall be based upon substantial evidence contained in the written record.
Pursuant to RSA 676:5, any decision made under this ordinance cannot be appealed to the
Board of Adjustment, but may be appealed under State or Federal law.
5. Application Requirements. All applications shall meet the standards set forth in Section
7.10 E.
6. Other Factors. Other factors to be considered by the Board in reviewing applications
shall include:
a. The height of the proposed tower or other structure shall not exceed that which
47
is essential for its intended use and public safety.
b. Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties.
c. Surrounding topography.
d. Proposed ingress and egress to the site.
e. Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures as discussed in
Section 7.10 E.3.
7. Plan Requirements. Each applicant requesting a Conditional Use Permit under this
Ordinance shall submit a scaled plan in accordance with the Site Plan Review Regulations and
further information including the below items. Items b., g., h., j., k., l., n., and o. are not
required for antenna only applications.
a. A scaled elevation view;
b. Topography;
c. Propagation Maps showing proposed radio frequency coverage and coverage
from alternative sites within the Town of Bow;
d. Radio frequency coverage;
e. Setbacks;
f. Adjacent uses (up to 400 feet away);
g. The location of all buildings and structures within 500 feet of the proposed tower;
h. Diagram of the average tree canopy height determined for the proposed PWSF
site;
i. Driveways and parking;
j. Fencing, including anti-climbing techniques;
k. Landscaping;
l. Proximity of tower to residential development;
m. Impact on identified historical resources;
n. Surrounding tree cover and foliage;
o. Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have
the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; and
p. Visual impacts of the Viewshed, ridge lines, open fields and other impacts by
means of tower location, tree and foliage clearing and placement of incidental structures.
48
8. Other Information Required. In order to assess compliance with this Ordinance, the
Planning Board shall require the applicant for a PWSF to submit the following information prior
to any decision by the Board:
a. The applicant shall submit written proof that the proposed use/facility complies
with the FCC regulations on radio frequency (RF) exposure guidelines.
b. The applicant shall submit written proof that it has conducted an evaluation of
any requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) pertaining to the proposed
wireless telecommunication facility, tower or antenna, as may be required under applicable
FCC rules, and the results of any such evaluation. If an Environmental Assessment (EA) or an
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) is required under the FCC rules and/or NEPA, the
applicant shall submit the EA or EIS to the Board prior to the beginning of the federal thirty (30)
day comment period, and the Town proceedings with respect to the proposed wireless
telecommunication facility, tower or antenna shall become part of the FCC application
requirements.
c. The applicant shall submit written proof that it has complied with the
requirements of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act.
d. Each applicant for a PWSF shall provide to the Planning Board an inventory of
all existing personal wireless service facilities and towers that are within the jurisdiction of the
Town of Bow and those within two miles of the border thereof, including specific information
about the location, height, design of each tower, as well as economic and technological
feasibility for co-location on the inventoried towers. This inventory shall include all existing
towers, all towers that have been approved but not yet built, and all towers that have been
proposed. The Planning Board may share such information with other applicants applying for
approvals or conditional use permits under this Ordinance or other organizations seeking to
locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the governing authority, provided, however, the
Planning Board is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that
such sites are available or suitable.
9. New PWSF Construction. If an applicant proposes to build a new PWSF tower, the
applicant shall submit written evidence demonstrating that no existing structure can
accommodate the applicant’s proposed antenna. The evidence shall consist of:
a. Substantial evidence that no existing PWSFs, towers or structures are located
within the geographic area which meet the applicant’s engineering requirements,. The
applicant must provide a description of the geographic area targeted for coverage.
b. Substantial evidence that existing towers are not of sufficient height to meet the
applicant’s engineering requirements, with supporting reasons.
c. Substantial evidence that the existing towers or PWSF structures do not have
sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment.
d. Substantial evidence that the applicant's proposed antenna or PWSF structures
would not cause electromagnetic interference with other antennae on the existing towers, and
vice versa.
e. Substantial evidence that the fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by
49
the owner in order to share the existing tower or PWSF structure are unreasonable. Costs
exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable.
f. Substantial evidence that the applicant can demonstrate other limiting factors
that render existing towers and PWSF structures unsuitable.
g. Information on the number of sites for PWSFs each provider will require.
h. Information on sites outside of the Town of Bow that are being considered.
i. Information on how future technology may reduce or eliminate the need for
towers.
j. Information on the impact, if any, of the PWSF on a competitor’s facility on the
same property.
k. Information on whether it is feasible for carriers to locate base station equipment
underground.
l. A description of why less visibly intrusive alternatives for this facility were not
proposed.
m. Mandatory submittal of studies of alternative sites in the Town of Bow that have
been considered for siting.
10. Co-location on New PWSF. The applicant proposing to build a new PWSF shall submit
an agreement with the Town of Bow that allows for the maximum allowance of co-location
upon the new facility. Such statement shall become a condition to any approval. This
statement shall, at a minimum, require the applicant to supply available co-location for
reasonable fees and costs to other personal wireless service providers. Failure to provide
such an agreement is evidence of the applicant’s unwillingness to cooperate with the orderly
and well-planned development of the Town of Bow and grounds for a denial.
11. Size / Coverage Requirements. The applicant shall submit the engineering information
detailing the size and coverage required for the facility location. The Board may retain the
services of a consultant qualified in personal wireless services to review the application and all
associated information submitted by the applicant. The Board may further require, pursuant to
RSA 676:4, l (g), that the applicant reimburse the Town of Bow for reasonable costs of this
review. No application shall be approved until such fees, if applicable, are paid in full.
G. Waivers
The Planning Board may grant waivers to these regulations provided that a majority of the
Board finds that the criteria set forth in Article 13.02 B. 2. a. for unnecessary hardship of the
Zoning Ordinance have been satisfied.
1. Conditions. In approving waivers, the Board may impose such conditions, as it deems
appropriate to substantially secure the objectives of the standards or requirements of these
regulations.
2. Procedures. A petition for any such waiver shall be submitted in writing by the
50
applicant for Board review. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the waiver and all of
the facts relied upon by the applicant.
H. Bonding and Security Insurance. Requirements for surety shall conform with RSA 12-
K:11, 1 (k), as from time to time amended. In recognition of the extremely hazardous situation
presented by abandoned, unmonitored and/or non-maintained PWSFs, towers and antennas
and their appurtenances, the Planning Board shall set the form and amount of security that
represents the cost for removal and disposal of such facilities in the event that such facility is
abandoned, unmonitored or not maintained and the owner thereof is incapable and/or unwilling
to remove the facility in accordance with Section 7.10 I. Such security shall not be required
for Modifications and Collocations. The Planning Board shall require the applicant to submit
proof of appropriate liability insurance with respect to the proposed PWSF, tower or antenna
prior to the construction of such facilities. The applicant shall provide the Planning Board proof
of acceptable insurance and security on an annual basis unless required sooner by the
Planning Board. Failure to adhere to bonding and security requirements shall result in any and
all related permits being revoked at the discretion of the Board.
I. Removal of Abandoned PWSFs. Any PWSF, tower, antenna or appurtenance that is not
operated and/or properly maintained for the commercial transmission of wireless
communication for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned
and hazardous to the public health and safety, unless the owner of said facility provides proof
of quarterly inspections acceptable to the Board. The owner shall remove the abandoned
structure within ninety (90) days of receipt of a declaration of abandonment from the Board. In
the event the Board of Selectmen, at its sole discretion, determines the structure to be an
imminent safety hazard, the owner shall present the Board of Selectmen or its designee with a
plan to secure the area and remove the structure within seven-two (72) hours. The owner
shall be responsible for all costs to restore the area to an acceptable condition. Otherwise, a
declaration of abandonment shall only be issued following a public hearing, noticed per Town
of Bow regulations, with notice to abutters and the last known owner/operator of the tower. If
the abandoned PWSF, tower or antenna is not removed within ninety (90) days of the
determination of abandonment, the Board may execute on the security posted in accordance
with Section 7.10 H. and have the facility removed. If there are two or more users of a single
facility, this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the facility.
J. Requirement to Maintain and Monitor. The owner shall at all times maintain the facility in
acceptable condition. Said maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting, structural
repairs, security, and maintenance of buffer areas and stealth technologies as applicable.
Where stealth technology has been employed to reduce the aesthetic impact of a PWSF, said
technology or camouflaging techniques must be maintained in perpetuity for the life of the
PWSF. Failure to maintain said technology/techniques shall be considered abandonment and
grounds for removal of said facility in accordance with Sections 7.10 H. and I. of this
Ordinance.
As part of the issuance of the site plan approval or building permit, the property owner shall
agree that the Board of Selectmen or its designee may enter upon the premises to inspect the
facilities as it deems necessary. No prior notice shall be required for said inspection. Results
of any inspection by the Board of Selectmen shall be shared with the property owner and the
facility owner, when different.
7.11 Sexually Oriented Businesses
51
Definition Section
Adult Bookstore or Adult Video Store - A business that devotes more than 15% of the total
display, shelf, rack, table, stand or floor area, utilized for the display and sale of the following:
books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, slides, tapes, records, CD-ROMS or other forms of visual or audio
representations which meet the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set
forth in RSA 571-B:1; or instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with "sexual conduct" as defined in RSA 571-B:1, other than birth control devices.
AN ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE DOES NOT INCLUDE AN
ESTABLISHMENT THAT SELLS BOOKS OR PERIODICALS AS AN INCIDENTAL OR
ACCESSORY PART OF ITS PRINCIPAL STOCK AND TRADE AND DOES NOT DEVOTE
MORE THAN 15% OF THE TOTAL FLOOR AREA OF THE ESTABLISHMENT TO THE SALE
OF BOOKS AND PERIODICALS.
Adult Cabaret - A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar establishment which during a substantial
portion of the total presentation time features live performances which meet the definition of
"harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in RSA 571-B:1 and/or feature films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions, a substantial
portion of the total presentation time of which is devoted to showing of material which meets
the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in RSA 571-B:1.
Adult Drive-In Theater - An open lot or part thereof, with appurtenant facilities, devoted
primarily to the presentation of motion pictures, films, theatrical productions and other forms of
visual productions, for any form of consideration to persons in motor vehicles or on outdoor
seats, in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time being presented for
observation by patrons is devoted to the showing of material which meets the definition of
"harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in RSA 571-B:1.
Adult Motel - A motel or similar establishment offering public accommodations for any form of
consideration which provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions, a substantial portion of
the total presentation time of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon
the depiction or description of materials which meet the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or
"sexual conduct" as set forth in RSA 571-B:1.
Adult Motion Picture Arcade - Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin
or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture
machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five
or fewer persons per machine at any one time, in which a substantial portion of the total
presentation time of the images so displayed is devoted to the showing of material which
meets the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in RSA 571-B:1.
Adult Motion Picture Theater - An establishment with a capacity of five or more persons, where
for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar
photographic reproductions are shown, and in which a substantial portion of the total
presentation time is devoted to the showing of material which meets the definition of "harmful
to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in RSA 571-B:1, for observation by patrons. A
"substantial portion of the total presentation time" shall mean the presentation of films or
shows described above for viewing on more than seven days within any 30 consecutive day
52
period.
Adult Theater - A theater, concern hall, auditorium or similar establishment either indoor or
outdoor in nature, which, for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances, a
substantial portion of the total presentation time of which are distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on activities which meet the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual
conduct" as set forth in RSA 571-B:1.
Nude Model Studio - A place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays male
genitals in a state of sexual arousal and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female
genitals and is observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration or such display is
characterized by an emphasis on activities which meets the definition of "harmful to minors"
and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in RSA 571-B:1.
Sexual Encounter Center - A business or commercial enterprise that as one of its primary
business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: (A) physical contact in the form of
wresting or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or (B) activities between male and
female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more persons is in the state of
nudity; or where the activities in (A) or (B) is characterized by an emphasis on activities which
meets the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in RSA 571-B:1.
Sexually Oriented Businesses: A sexually oriented business is any place of business at which
any of the above defined activities is conducted:
__________________________________________________________________
A. Purpose and Intent
It is the purpose of this article to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the
concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the Town of Bow; and, it is the intent to
promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Bow; and, it is the
intent of this article that the regulations be utilized to prevent problems of blight and
deterioration which accompany and are brought about by the concentration of sexually
oriented businesses; and the provisions of this amendment have neither the purpose nor the
effect of imposing limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented materials; and, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict
or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or
to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market; and, neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize
the distribution of obscene material.
B. Allowed locations and location restrictions of sexually oriented businesses
1. Sexually Oriented Businesses, as defined above shall be permitted only in the General
Industrial I-2 District provided that all other regulations, requirements, and restrictions for the
zone in which the sexually oriented business is to be located are met; and, no sexually
oriented business shall be permitted within 1000 feet of another existing sexually oriented
business or one for which a building permit has been applied for.
2. No sexually oriented business shall be permitted within 1000 feet of any residence,
apartment or manufactured housing.
53
3. No sexually oriented business shall be permitted within 1000 feet of any church, place
of worship, parish house, convent, public, parochial, or private school, kindergarten, State
approved day care center or public sports/recreation parks; and, no sexually oriented business
shall be permitted within 1000 feet of the Town boundaries.
4. No sexually oriented business shall be permitted within 1000 feet of another existing
sexually oriented business on the date of the passage of this amendment; and no sexually
oriented business shall be permitted within a building, premise, structure or other facility that
contains a sexually oriented business as defined herein.
C. Measure of Distance
The distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures from the closest exterior structural wall or
temporary or permanent physical divider between each business.
D. Additional Reasonable Regulations
The Planning Board is empowered to review and approve permit applications for sexually
oriented businesses, and to impose reasonable restrictions for buffering, outdoor lighting,
parking, adequate ingress and egress from the site off of and onto public roads, pedestrian
movement, and to provide for appropriate landscaping and building aesthetics in the "Site Plan
Review Regulations of the Town of Bow, New Hampshire", and to avoid site development
layout which may result in negative environmental impacts.
E. Severability
The invalidity of any section or provision of this article shall not invalidate any other section or
provision thereof.
7.12 Industrial and Utility Uses
A. Uses
Uses restricted to indoor operation. Manufacturing, assembly, processing, packaging,
research and testing operations shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building or
structure.
B. Fuel Storage
Coal, fuel oil, bottled gas and similar materials shall not be located within three hundred (300)
feet of any existing dwelling or where any dwelling which could be permitted under the terms of
this ordinance. Storage tanks shall be surrounded by a diked area sufficient to contain the
accidental spillage of the materials which are stored on site. All such storage shall comply
with all applicable state and local laws and codes relating to the storage of such materials.
C. Performance Requirements for Industrial Uses and Utilities
Industrial uses and utilities shall operate in such a manner that noise, vibration,
electromagnetic transmission, odors, air pollution, and all such other emissions shall not be
54
perceptible without instruments at the boundary of the District in which the use is permitted.
Applicants for industrial uses shall submit with their applications a list of all chemicals,
pesticides, fuels, solvents, lubricants and other flammable or other potentially hazardous or
toxic materials to be used, stored or generated on the premises. This list shall be updated and
filed annually with the Building Inspector and the Fire Chief.
7.13 Planing Mills, Sawmills and Similar Uses
A. Content of Application and Plot Plan
The applicant for a use involving a planing mill, sawmill or similar wood processing uses shall
indicate in the application whether a portable or stationary operation is proposed. The
following minimum information must be included on a plot plan for such use:
1. Log storage area in square feet
2. Sticking yard in square feet
3. Service area in square feet
4. Show travel pattern throughout mill area including sticking area on the site plan
5. Show travel routes on Local and State highways.
B. Plan for disposal of waste materials and reclamation
The applicant shall describe the provisions which will be made for disposal of slabs, edgings,
and trimmings; bark; sawdust; and shavings. The applicant shall also indicate the provisions
which will be implemented for the reclamation of the affected area after operations have
terminated.
C. Site Development and Operation Standards
The site shall maintain buffer growth of trees along its entire perimeter for a depth of at least
fifty (50) feet. Operation and management practices shall comply with all NH State fire laws.
7.14 Excavation of Earth Materials
Definition Section
Earth - sand, gravel, rock, soil or construction aggregate produced by quarrying, crushing or
any other mining activity or such other naturally-occurring unconsolidated materials that
normally mask the bedrock.
Excavation - either a land area which is used, or has been used, for commercial taking of
earth, including all slopes, or the taking of earth, as the context requires.
Excavation site - any area of contiguous land in common ownership upon which excavation
may take place.
Minor / Pre-development Excavations (M/PdE) - an Excavation conducted immediately prior to
55
the development of land which meets all of the following criteria: (a) will be completed within
one year; (b) will involve the removal from the site of less than 10,000 cubic yards in the I-1, I-
2, C, & BD districts or 2000 cubic yards in the RU, R, R-1, CV, or IN districts ; and (c) for which
all local, state, and federal development permits, including, but not limited to subdivision and
site plan approval, building permits, sewage disposal, water supply, highway access, alteration
of terrain, and/or wetlands permits have been obtained, and for which a complete PA-38 Intent
to Excavate form has been filed.
Regulator - For the purposes of regulating excavation pursuant to RSA 155-E, the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, except for Minor / Pre-development Excavations, in which case, the
regulator shall be the Planning Board.
_________________________________________________________________
A. Operation and Reclamation Standards for Excavation
The Regulator shall not issue a permit for the excavation of earth materials unless the owner
provides sufficient evidence to demonstrate that the proposed excavation will comply with the
minimum operational standards of RSA 155-E:4-a and the following minimum standards.
Where indicated, the Planning Board may waive the below operational standards for Minor /
Pre-development Excavations (M/PdE).
1. OPERATIONAL STANDARDS
a. All property corners shall be staked or clearly marked by a Registered Land Surveyor.
Every property line shall be clearly marked at reasonable intervals to prevent encroachment on
abutting property. Planning Board may waive for M/PdE.
b. All loam and topsoil to be stripped and piled and re-spread to a minimum depth of four
(4) inches of loam evenly on the completed pit, or in accordance with an alternate plan
approved by the Regulator.
c. No excavation shall be made below the grade of adjacent streets where feasible. In
any case, a minimum buffer strip of fifty (50) feet will be required separating the proposed
excavation from any street. Planning Board may waive for M/PdE.
d. No excavation shall be left with less than six (6) feet of cover above estimated seasonal
high water level. The cover shall consist of clean native or fill material.
e. Working slopes are to be made safe with no overhanging trees or frost embankments
allowed to exist after working hours.
f. All finished slopes shall not be steeper than two (2) horizontal to one (1) vertical. The
proposed grade of the permit area shall have a minimum gradient of one percent (1%).
Planning Board may waive for M/PdE.
g. The Town may select a Registered Land Surveyor to verify the grades of the
excavation not more frequently than once per year and the applicant shall pay the complete
cost of such services. In the event the applicant fails to pay these costs within thirty (30) days
of being billed, the permit will be temporarily revoked and the bonding company will be notified.
56
h. Premises to be left at elevations of contours shown on the approved plan. No
excavation below these grades will be permitted, except to bury boulders, unless for other
good reasons agreed to by the Regulator.
i. No more than four (4) acres of the excavation site upon which excavation may take
place under a permit may be disturbed without restoring the completed section as outlined in
the permit. The only exception will be for access roads. This article applies to excavation
sites of eight (8) acres or more. No other areas to be disturbed before inspection by the
Regulator.
j. All stumps are to be chipped or removed from the site in accordance with law. All rocks
are to be removed, buried, or used for landscaping in accordance with the restoration plans.
Planning Board may waive for M/PdE.
k. No equipment or vehicles involved in the operation will be operated in the excavation
site prior to 7:00 a.m. or on the streets prior to 7:00 a.m. or after 6:30 p.m. Monday through
Saturday, or at any time on Sunday, except as otherwise approved by the Regulator.
l. The applicant shall pay for traffic police and/or signage during trucking of materials onto
public ways as the Police Chief deems necessary.
m. All vehicles shall be loaded so as to prevent any spillage and utilizing dust covers.
n. The contractor shall provide such dust control procedures as to eliminate any
annoyance or inconveniences to the inhabitants.
o. All ways to be cleaned of spilled material at the end of each day or more frequently if
required by the Building Inspector.
p. The applicant must furnish the Town with a duly executed and acknowledged
easement, permitting its officers, agents and employees to enter upon the subject land for a
period beginning with the date of the permit and ending one (1) year after the expiration of the
permit for the purpose of putting the land in the condition called for by the permit.
q. No part of the operation shall be in violation of any State law.
r. The applicant must sign an agreement to observe all the conditions of the decision.
2. RECLAMATION STANDARDS
Where indicated, the Planning Board may waive the below reclamation standards for Minor /
Pre-development Excavations (M/PdE).
a. The entire area of the excavation shall be replanted so as to stabilize the land with a
minimum of four (4) inches of loam and seeding or the planting of appropriate trees. A bond
or irrevocable letter of credit will be retained to guarantee said stabilization. Planning Board
may waive for M/PdE.
b. Vegetation suitable to prevent erosion and soils suitable to sustain such vegetation,
except for exposed rock ledge.
c. All debris resulting from the excavation shall be removed.
57
d. All slopes shall be graded to natural repose for the type of soil of which they are
composed. Planning Board may waive for M/PdE.
e. Any standing bodies of water created in the excavation project that may constitute a
hazard to health and safety shall be eliminated unless the Regulator specified different
restoration.
f. The reclamation shall comply with the express reclamation standards of RSA 155-E:5
Planning Board may waive for M/PdE.
B. Prohibited Excavations
No permit shall be granted where the Regulator finds that:
1. The excavation would be unduly hazardous and/or injurious to the public either during
or after the pit operation.
2. The excavation is not permitted by zoning or other applicable ordinances except where
the Board of Adjustment feels that a variance is warranted.
3. The excavation would substantially damage a known water bearing stratum so
designated by the Water Resources Management and Protection Plan developed under RSA
674:2, VIII.
4. The excavation is planned beneath or adjacent to inland surface water in such a
manner that a permit is required from the NH Department of Environmental Services (NHDES)
Wetlands Bureau or other State and federal agencies with jurisdiction over the premises, but
the Board of Adjustment may approve the application when all necessary permits have been
obtained.
5. The project cannot comply with the reclamation provisions of RSA 155-E as amended
from time to time.
6. Other prohibited projects defined by RSA 155-E:4.
C. Content of Application for Excavation Permit
Any owner or owner's designee shall, prior to excavation of his land, apply to the Regulator for
a permit for excavation. The applicant shall also send a copy of the application to the
Conservation Commission for written comments. When the scope of an existing permitted
excavation is proposed to be altered so as to affect either the size or location of the
excavation, the rate of removal of earth, or the plan for restoration, the owner shall submit an
application for amendment of his excavation permit. An application for amendment shall be
subject to the same application requirements and approval procedures as provided for a new
excavation permit with the addition that an inspection of the current site must be made by the
Regulator before the amendment is granted. The application shall be signed and dated by the
applicant, shall conform to the provisions of this section and shall contain all information
required by RSA 155-E:3 and at least the following information [the Planning Board may waive
the below requirements for Minor / Pre-development Excavations (M/PdE)]:
58
1. The names and addresses of the owner of the land to be excavated, the person who
will actually do the excavation and all abutters to all of the owner's or applicants land which is
contiguous with the proposed excavation site.
2. A sketch and description of the location and boundaries of the proposed excavation,
and the number of acres to be involved in the project.
3. Detailed grading plans showing both original ground and final grades after excavation if
the soil removal operation is particularly complex or of such scale and duration to warrant
same. All plans must be upgraded at least every three (3) years or as directed by the
Regulator.
4. A sketch and description of the proposed access to the excavation site and the visual
barriers which will be provided during the proposed excavation.
5. The breadth, depth and slope of the proposed excavation and the estimated duration of
the project.
6. The elevation of the highest annual average ground water table within or next to the
proposed excavation.
7. A plan for the reclamation of the area affected by the excavation. Such plan shall
comply with the provisions of RSA 155-E and shall include or provide at a minimum:
a. A detailed written explanation of the restoration plan;
b. A diagram, acceptable to the Regulator, showing the restored topography and drainage at
the completion of the restoration;
c. A written report and diagram explaining the phasing of site restoration showing designated
areas, and completion dates for fully depleted areas, if the site is not to be restored all at once;
d. Seeding and mulching specifications; and
e. Such other information as the Regulator may require.
8. State and Federal Approvals: Copies of all Applications to the State of New Hampshire
for approval of on-site septic systems, alteration of terrain permits, dredge and fill permits, and
driveway permits, and copies of Applications to federal agencies for Section 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334 or for any other permit or
approval required by the State of New Hampshire or federal agency for the Excavation must
be filed with the Regulator prior to approval of the Excavation. Final Approval of the
Excavation shall be conditioned upon filing with the Regulator copies of permits for all such
state and federal approvals.
D. Decision on Application
1. Public Hearing on Application. After the Regulator accepts a completed application for
an excavation permit, a public hearing shall be held on such decision or any matter determined
thereby. A notice of said hearing shall be sent to all abutters, as well as the Conservation
Commission, by certified mail, and shall specify the grounds for the hearing as well as the
59
date, time and place, all as required by RSA 155-E. All costs incurred for the public hearing
notification shall be the responsibility of the owner or agent acting on behalf of the owner and
payable prior to the hearing.
2. Decision on Application. Following the public hearing, an excavation permit shall be
issued if the Regulator determines that all conditions of this section will be met. Such permit
may be issued subject to additional conditions established by the Regulator. Upon disapproval
of an application for an excavation permit, or an amendment to an excavation permit, the
Regulator shall state the reasons for denial, in writing, to the applicant.
3. Duration of Permit. The Regulator may issue a permit to remove soil materials for a
period of up to three (3) years duration. Upon written request of the applicant and where the
ZBA finds that the operation has been in conformance with prior permits and established a
record of compliance for at least four (4) years, the ZBA may grant renewal permits for long
term excavations for a period of up to five (5) years. The Regulator may require brief written
reports on an annual basis from the permit holder outlining the degree of compliance with the
conditions of the permit.
4. Assignability. A permit issued under this section shall not be assignable or transferable
without the prior written consent of the Regulator.
5. Appeal of Decision. Following the approval or disapproval of an application for an
excavation permit, any interested person may seek a rehearing or appeal the decision of the
Regulator in accordance with the provisions of RSA 155-E:9.
6. Compliance Hearings After Approval. The Regulator may order a public
hearing to review the conditions of or the continuance of the permit if a Cease and Desist
Order has been issued by the Building Inspector or there has been a valid complaint presented
which in the opinion of the Regulator warrants investigation and a hearing.
7. Revocation of Approval. An excavation permit may be modified or revoked at any time
that, in the opinion of the Regulator, the operation is causing undue wear and tear or littering
streets or roads in the Town or is causing undue annoyance to its inhabitants or is being
carried on in violation of any of the terms and conditions of the permit. The modification or
revocation of a permit shall not relieve the owner from any of his obligations under this permit.
The Building Inspector may suspend operations pending a hearing by the Board of Adjustment
concerning any violation.
E. Fees and Surety
1. Permit and Inspection Fees. The Regulator may charge the applicant a Permit Fee of
up to Fifty Dollars ($50.00) for a permit or an amended permit issued under this Section. The
Regulator may also charge the applicant an Inspection Fee of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) per
inspection per permit to cover the costs of inspections deemed necessary to verify compliance
with the permit. In addition, the applicant will be responsible for the payment of costs of all
engineers or professionals hired by the Regulator to advise the Town with respect to any
proposed application to verify compliance with the terms of the permit. If the applicant fails to
pay any fee described above, the Regulator may revoke the relevant permit.
2. Performance Surety. This permit will not become effective until the applicant furnishes
the Town with a bond with a surety company as surety or secured by a deposit of cash or
60
other approved securities satisfactory to the Board of Selectmen in an amount based on the
estimated cost of restoration at the completion of the project. The Zoning Board of
Adjustment may employ one (1) independent consultant at the applicant's expense to assist in
determining the amount of the bond. The bond is to remain in effect until released in writing
by the Board of Selectmen.
F. Existing and Abandoned Excavations
1. Any existing or abandoned excavation as defined in RSA 155-E:2 shall be subject to all
of the applicable terms and provisions of RSA 155-E, as well as all of the provisions of which
may be lawfully applied to the excavation.
2. If no permit pursuant to RSA 155-E has been issued by the Regulator for a lawful
existing excavation, such site shall be subject to the following provisions:
a. The excavation may not be expanded beyond the owner's contiguous land holdings as of
August 24, 1979, if the excavation was a lawful permitted use at that time.
b. The excavation may not be expanded into present zoning districts where excavations are
not permitted.
c. The owner of an existing or excavation site must file the reports required
by RSA 155-E:2 I(d) in a timely fashion, or he will be required to apply for and receive a permit
before he may proceed with his excavation.
d. An existing excavation site shall be subject to the operation and reclamation standards of
this section and as provided for in RSA 155-E:I.
3. An abandoned excavation, as defined in RSA 155-E:II shall be subject to the
reclamation standards of this section and as provided for in RSA 155-E:II.
7.15 Accessory Buildings
A. Location of Accessory Buildings
In any District, no permanent accessory building or structure shall be permitted in any required
yard area.
B. Farm Produce Stand
The display of goods shall be limited to an area located at least twenty (20) feet from any
street right of way line.
7.16 Screening Standards
Definition Section
Screen or Screening - the visual shielding or obscuring of one abutting or nearby structure or
use from another by fencing, walls, berms, or densely planted vegetation.
___________________________________________________________________
A. Screen or Screening
61
Where required under the provisions of this Ordinance, screening shall comprise a strip of land
at least six (6) feet wide, densely planted (or of natural growth) of shrubs or trees, at least four
(4) feet high at the time of planting, of a type that will form a year round dense screen at least
six (6) feet high within three (3) years; or an opaque fence at least six (6) feet high.
B. Transitional Screening between Residential and Non-Residential Districts
In the Commercial, Limited Industrial, General Industrial, Civic, and Institutional Zoning
Districts, any new use or activity adjoining property in the Rural, Residential, and Residential
One Family Zoning Districts shall not locate within fifty (50) feet of the boundaries separating
the two (2) Zoning Districts and shall provide for and maintain a semi-opaque screen to be
installed along the entire length of the Zoning District boundary and within fifty (50) feet of the
boundary. The same provision shall apply to residential districts in abutting municipalities,
including, but not limited to, the Medium Density Residential (MDR) District in Hooksett and the
Single Family Residential (SFR) and Open Space Residential (RO) Districts in Concord.
The screen shall be opaque from the ground to a height of three feet, with intermittent visual
obstruction from above the opaque portion to a height of at least twenty (20) feet. The semiopaque
screen is intended to partially block visual contact between uses and to create a
strong impression of the separation of spaces.
The semi-opaque screen may be composed of a wall, fencing, landscaped berm, planted
vegetation, or existing vegetation. Compliance of planted or existing vegetation will be judged
on the basis of the average mature height and density of foliage of the subject species, or field
observation of the existing vegetation. At maturity, the portion of intermittently visual
obstructions should not contain any unobstructed openings more than ten (10) feet wide.
Suggested planting patterns which will achieve this standard are included in Appendix B of the
Site Plan Review Regulations.
7.17 Outdoor Storage of a Boat, Recreational Vehicle, Camping Trailer, or Motor
Vehicles
In any District, a boat, recreational vehicle, or camping trailer shall not be stored in any
required yard area.
No such equipment shall be used for living quarters, or housekeeping purposes in the Town of
Bow. The Building Inspector may authorize by permit, the temporary occupancy of
recreational vehicles and camping trailers, where adequate sanitary facilities are provided.
Such temporary use shall not exceed 10 days within any 30 day period or 30 days within one
calendar year.
On any parcel in any District, not more than one unregistered vehicle or trailer may be stored,
except in a licensed junk yard as defined in RSA 236:112. All vehicles in excess of the one
unregistered vehicle or trailer, must bear a valid inspection sticker.
The storage of antique, specialty, or collectible motor vehicles by legitimate hobbyists may be
permitted by the Code Enforcement Officer.
7.18 Grazing, Care, Raising, or Keeping of Livestock
62
Livestock shall include all horses, cattle, goats, pigs, sheep, llamas, poultry, ostriches, emus,
and similar animals. No livestock shall be kept on lots smaller than two acres. The Table
below establishes minimum area requirements for various species. The minimum pasture and
enclosure areas shall not include any areas within 20 feet of a dwelling unit.
Livestock shall be kept such that no nuisance results. Animal waste shall not be stored within
one hundred (100) feet of any lot line. Livestock must be kept within a secure enclosure which
meets or exceeds the recommendations of the UNH Cooperative Extension. All livestock must
have available shelter which meets or exceeds the recommendations of the UNH Cooperative
Extension. No shelter or enclosure, other than a pasture, shall be located within 100 feet of
the street or abutter's property line.
Pastures are areas suitable for grazing livestock which maintain grass cover throughout the
grazing season. If a pasture is grazed down such that bare spots in excess of 100 square feet
exist or such that less than 90% of the area maintains grass cover, then the area no longer
qualifies as a pasture and must meet the setback requirements for a livestock enclosure.
Livestock may be kept without any pasture areas, if a suitable enclosure is available and
sufficient feed is provided.
Small Backyard Flocks shall mean up to six (6) chicken hens. The minimum requirements for
Small Backyard Flocks shall include the following. Small Backyard Flocks may be kept on lots
of a minimum of one acre. Small Backyard Flocks shall be kept within secure enclosures at all
times. The animal waste generated by Small Backyard Flocks shall be properly managed
such that noxious odors are not detectable at property boundaries and such that pests and
flies are not attracted. The shelter or enclosure for a Small Backyard Flock shall be located a
minimum of fifty (50) feet from any lot line. A Small Backyard Flock shall have a minimum of
three (3) square feet of enclosed housing per hen and a minimum of ten (10) square feet of
enclosed exercise yard per hen.
Temporary and Principal Uses. In temporary situations [up to six (6) months] or where
livestock are proposed to be kept as a principal use, the Planning Board may approve, by
conditional use permit, alternate provisions for pasture and enclosures and may waive shelter
requirements.
Minimum Pasture, Enclosure, and Shelter Requirements
Livestock Type Pasture Outside Enclosure Shelter
Horses & Cattle 1 animal / 1 acre 500 SF / animal 120 SF/animal (3 sided)
Goats 2 animals / 1 acre 50 SF / animal 10 SF / animal (4 sided)
Pigs not allowed to be
pastured
100 SF / animal 10 SF / animal (3 sided)
Sheep, Deer, &
Llamas
7 animals / 1 acre 100 SF / animal 12 SF / animal (3 sided)
Poultry not allowed to be
pastured
caged 100 SF for 24 hen chickens or
ducks; 50 broilers; 12 turkeys
Ostriches & Emus 6 animals / 1 acre 100 SF / animal 20 SF / animal (4 sided)
63
Bison & Elk 1 animal / 1 acre 500 SF / animal 120 SF / animal (3 sided)
Other as determined by
ZBA
as determined by
ZBA
as determined by ZBA
7.19 Heliports and Airstrips
A. Site Plan Review Required
1. No person shall make any improvements for the purpose of creating a landing and/or
takeoff area or strip for any aircraft until such improvements have been approved as a site plan
review.
2. Heliports and Airstrips are considered non-residential uses and are not considered to
be accessory uses in any zone. Heliports and Airstrips may be permitted as a second primary
use on any lot after site plan review approval.
B. Flight Pattern
1. As a part of the site plan review application, the property owner or agent must file a
written description of the size and type of all aircraft to be permitted use of the heliport or
airstrip. The description must provide access to information on noise, speed, climbing and
descending capabilities, safety records/reliability, and other pertinent information.
2. As a part of any proposal to construct a heliport or airstrip, the property owner must
present plans bearing the seal of a professional engineer or other similarly qualified individual.
The plans must depict the range of flight paths of aircraft permitted to use the facility, including
flight paths under all weather conditions expected.
3. The owner or applicant must provide written permission from any landowner over
whose property aircraft might fly at altitudes of less than 200' above ground level.
7.20 Location of Privately Owned Water Supplies
Privately owned water supplies shall not be dug, drilled, or developed closer than seventy five
feet (75') to highway rights-of-way and drainage ditches or both.
7.21 Campgrounds
Campgrounds provide lodging for itinerant or temporary visitors. No recreational vehicle,
travel trailer, or tent shall remain on any campground site for more than 90 days.
Manufactured housing, as herein defined, shall not be permitted in any campground.
7.22 Off-Site Parking Allowed by Special Exception
A. Off-site parking authorized
Off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the principal use(s) they are
intended to serve, except where off-site parking is approved as a Special Exception. Such offsite
parking area shall be specifically dedicated to the principal use(s) that it serves.
64
B. Special Exception criteria for off-site parking
The Zoning Board of Adjustment is authorized to grant a Special Exception for the use of offsite
parking, subject to a finding by the Board of Adjustment that the following conditions will
be met by the applicant:
1. The parking facility will be located within five hundred (500) feet of the public entrance
of the applicant's commercial establishment, and the facility will not extend inside the boundary
line of a residential district.
2. The applicant has adequately demonstrated that the parking demands of the use may
reasonably be satisfied by the alternative parking arrangement.
3. The establishment seeking approval must not be a non conforming use but may be
within a non conforming building or on a nonconforming lot.
4. Any lighting system shall be appropriately shielded such that glare does not interfere
with adjacent residential properties.
5. Specific measures have been proposed by the applicant to remedy existing on-site
parking design deficiencies of the use(s) seeking approval. Such measures shall be deemed
conditions of approval.
6. The Zoning Board of Adjustment, in issuing a special exception under this Article, may
impose such additional conditions as it finds reasonably appropriate to safeguard the
neighborhood or otherwise serve the purposes of this ordinance.
7.23 Planned Business Subdivisions
In non-residential zone districts, the Planning Board may reduce the minimum lot size,
frontage, and yard requirements for approved planned business subdivisions. The Planning
Board may also permit the maximum lot coverage to be calculated on the subdivision overall,
rather than on individual lots.
Prior to approving a planned business subdivision the Planning Board must find that
permanent adequate provisions for light and air, vehicular and pedestrian access, emergency
vehicular access, health, safety, and aesthetics are in place. The Planning Board must also
find that the planned business subdivision will result in increased public benefits such as
creative design, higher utilization of business development properties, increased diversity of
desired services, reduced public service costs, improved aesthetics, reduced environmental
impacts, and greater taxable value. The Planning Board may attach conditions to the approval
of planned business subdivisions to ensure that the increased public benefits will be long term.
7.24 Semi-Opaque Screens
The Planning Board shall adopt recommended plants for semi-opaque screens. The materials
shall be published in the Site Plan Review Regulations.
7.25 Small Wind Energy Systems
65
Definition Section
Meteorological tower (met tower) - Includes the tower, base plate, anchors, guy wires and
hardware, anemometers (wind speed indicators), wind direction vanes, booms to hold
equipment for anemometers and vanes, data loggers, instrument wiring, and any telemetry
devices that are used to monitor or transmit wind speed and wind flow characteristics over a
period of time for either instantaneous wind information or to characterize the wind resource at
a given location. For the purpose of this ordinance, met towers shall refer only to those whose
purpose are to analyze the environmental factors needed to assess the potential to install,
construct or erect a small wind energy system.
Modification - Any change to the small wind energy system that materially alters the size, type
or location of the small wind energy system. Like-kind replacements shall not be construed to
be a modification.
Net metering - The difference between the electricity supplied to a customer over the electric
distribution system and the electricity generated by the customer’s small wind energy system
that is fed back into the electric distribution system over a billing period.
Power grid - The transmission system, managed by ISO New England, created to balance the
supply and demand of electricity for consumers in New England.
Shadow flicker - The visible flicker effect when rotating blades of the wind generator cast
shadows on the ground and nearby structures causing a repeating pattern of light and shadow.
Small wind energy system - A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind generator,
a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of 100
kilowatts or less and will be used primarily for onsite consumption.
System height - The vertical distance from ground level to the tip of the wind generator blade
when it is at its highest point.
Tower - The monopole, guyed monopole or lattice structure that supports a wind generator.
Tower height - The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower, excluding the wind
generator.
Wind generator - The blades and associated mechanical and electrical conversion
components mounted on top of the tower whose purpose is to convert kinetic energy of the
wind into rotational energy used to generate electricity.
___________________________________________________________________
A. Purpose
This small wind energy systems ordinance is enacted in accordance with RSA 674:62-66, and
the purposes outlined in RSA 672:1-III-a. The purpose of this ordinance is to accommodate
small wind energy systems in appropriate locations, while protecting the public’s health, safety
and welfare. In addition, this ordinance provides a permitting process for small wind energy
systems to ensure compliance with the provisions of the requirements and standards
established herein.
B. Procedure for Review
66
1. Building Permit: Small wind energy systems and met towers are an accessory use
permitted in all zoning districts where structures of any sort are allowed. No small wind energy
system shall be erected, constructed, or installed without first receiving a building permit from
the building inspector. A building permit shall be required for any physical modification to an
existing small wind energy system. Met towers that receive a building permit shall be
permitted on a temporary basis not to exceed 3 years from the date the building permit was
issued.
2. Application: Applications submitted to the building inspector shall contain a site plan
depicting or accompanied by the following information:
a. Property lines and physical dimensions of the applicant’s property.
b. Location, dimensions, and types of existing major structures on the property.
c. Location of the proposed small wind energy system, foundations, guy anchors and
associated equipment.
d. Tower foundation blueprints or drawings.
e. Tower blueprints or drawings.
f. Setback requirements as outlined in this ordinance.
g. The right-of-way of any public road that is contiguous with the property.
h. Any overhead utility lines.
i. Small wind energy system specifications, including manufacturer, model, rotor diameter,
tower height, tower type, nameplate generation capacity.
j. Small wind energy systems that will be connected to the power grid shall include a copy of
the application for interconnection with their electric utility provider.
k. Sound level analysis prepared by the wind generator manufacturer or qualified engineer.
l. Electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the manner of
installation conforms to the NH State Building Code.
m. Evidence of compliance or non-applicability with Federal Aviation Administration
requirements.
n. List of abutters to the applicant’s property.
3. Abutter and Regional Notification: In accordance with RSA 674:66, the building
inspector shall notify all abutters and the local governing body by certified mail upon
application for a building permit to construct a small wind energy system. The public will be
afforded 30 days to submit comments to the building inspector prior to the issuance of the
building permit. The building inspector shall review the application for regional impacts per
RSA 36:55. If the proposal is determined to have potential regional impacts, the building
67
inspector shall follow the procedures set forth in RSA 36:57, IV.
C. Standards
The building inspector shall evaluate the application for compliance with the following
standards:
1. Setbacks: The setback shall be calculated by multiplying the minimum setback
requirement number by the system height and measured from the center of the tower base to
property line, public roads, or nearest point on the foundation of an occupied building.
Minimum Setback Requirement Number
Occupied Buildings
on Participating
Landowner Property
Occupied Buildings
on Abutting Property
Property Lines of
Abutting Property
and Utility Lines
Public Roads
0 1.5 1.1 1.5
a. Small wind energy systems must meet all setbacks for principal structures for the zoning
district in which the system is located.
b. Guy wires used to support the tower are exempt from the small wind energy system
setback requirements.
2. Tower: The maximum tower height shall be 150 feet.
3. Sound Level: The small wind energy system shall not exceed 60 decibels in the
Residential (R), Rural (RU), and Residential One Family (R-1) Districts and shall not exceed
70 decibels in all other Districts, both using the A scale (dBA), as measured at the site property
line, except during short-term events such as severe wind storms and utility outages.
4. Shadow Flicker: Small wind energy systems shall be sited in a manner that does not
result in significant shadow flicker impacts. Significant shadow flicker is defined as more than
30 hours per year on abutting occupied buildings. The applicant has the burden of proving
that the shadow flicker will not have significant adverse impact on neighboring or adjacent
uses. Potential shadow flicker will be addressed either through siting or mitigation measures.
5. Signs: All signs including flags streamers and decorative items, both temporary and
permanent, are prohibited on the small wind energy system, except for manufacturer
identification or appropriate warning signs.
6. Code Compliance: The small wind energy system shall comply with all applicable
sections of the New Hampshire State Building Code.
7. Aviation: The small wind energy system shall be built to comply with all applicable
Federal Aviation Administration regulations including but not limited to 14 C.F.R. part 77,
subpart B regarding installations close to airports, and the New Hampshire Aviation
regulations, including but not limited to RSA 422-b and RSA 424.
68
8. Visual Impacts: It is inherent that small wind energy systems may pose some visual
impacts due to the tower height needed to access wind resources. The purpose of this section
is to reduce the visual impacts, without restricting the owner’s access to the optimal wind
resources on the property.
a. The applicant shall demonstrate through project site planning and proposed mitigation that
the small wind energy system’s visual impacts will be minimized for surrounding neighbors and
the community. This may include, but not be limited to information regarding site selection,
wind generator design or appearance, buffering, and screening of ground mounted electrical
and control equipment. All electrical conduits shall be underground.
b. The color of the small wind energy system shall either be the stock color from the
manufacturer or painted with a non-reflective, unobtrusive color that blends in with the
surrounding environment. Approved colors include but are not limited to white, off-white or
gray.
c. A small wind energy system shall not be artificially lit unless such lighting is required by the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). If lighting is required, the applicant shall provide a copy
of the FAA determination to establish the required markings and/or lights for the small wind
energy system.
9. Approved Wind Generators: The manufacturer and model of the wind generator to be
used in the proposed small wind energy system must have been approved by the California
Energy Commission or the New York State Energy Research and Development Authority, or a
similar list approved by the state of New Hampshire, if available.
10. Access: The tower shall be designed and installed so as not to provide step bolts or a
ladder readily accessible to the public for a minimum height of 8 feet above the ground. All
ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall be labeled and secured to prevent
unauthorized access.
D. Abandonment
1. At such time that a small wind energy system is scheduled to be abandoned or
discontinued, the applicant will notify the building inspector by certified U.S. mail of the
proposed date of abandonment or discontinuation of operations.
2. Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the owner shall physically remove the
small wind energy system within 90 days from the date of abandonment or discontinuation of
use. This period may be extended at the request of the owner and at the discretion of the
building inspector. “Physically remove” shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Removal of the wind generator and tower and related above-grade structures.
b. Restoration of the location of the small wind energy system to its natural condition, except
that any landscaping, grading or below-grade foundation may remain in its same condition at
initiation of abandonment.
3. In the event that an applicant fails to give such notice, the system shall be considered
abandoned or discontinued if the system is out-of-service for a continuous 12-month period.
After the 12 months out-of-service has lapsed, the building inspector may issue a Notice of
69
Abandonment to the owner of the small wind energy system. The owner shall have the right to
respond to the Notice of Abandonment within 30 days from Notice receipt date. After review of
the information provided by the owner, the building inspector shall determine if the small wind
energy system has been abandoned. If it is determined that the small wind energy system has
not been abandoned, the building inspector shall withdraw the Notice of Abandonment and
notify the owner of the withdrawal.
4. If the owner fails to respond to the Notice of Abandonment or if, after review by the
building inspector, it is determined that the small wind energy system has been abandoned or
discontinued, the owner of the small wind energy system shall remove the wind generator and
tower at the owner’s sole expense within 3 months of receipt of the Notice of Abandonment. If
the owner fails to physically remove the small wind energy system after the Notice of
Abandonment procedure, the building inspector may pursue legal action to have the small
wind energy system removed at the owner’s expense.
E. Violation
It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate a small wind energy system that is
not in compliance with this ordinance. Small wind energy systems installed prior to the
adoption of this ordinance are exempt from this ordinance except when modifications are
proposed to the small wind energy system. Violations are subject to the procedures of section
14.07 Violations.
7.26 Dwelling Unit for Resident Caretaker or Security Personnel
A. The dwelling unit shall be intended for a resident caretaker or security personnel
directly associated with a permitted business. Not more than one such dwelling unit shall be
permitted per lot and the lot shall meet the minimum area requirement for the district in which it
is located, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board through Site Plan Review
process.
B. The dwelling unit shall
1. be occupied by the owner or employee of the business;
2. be limited to 800 square feet of Habitable Floor Area;
3. have a maximum of one bedroom; and,
4. be either served by municipal sewer or connected to a septic system with
adequate capacity to service both the dwelling unit and business premise.
70
ARTICLE 8. SIGN REGULATIONS
Definition Section
Portable Sign - a sign not permanently attached to a building, the ground, or a vehicle.
Portable signs are designed to be transportable and include, but are not limited to, the
following: sandwich boards; air propelled signs; variable message boards; signs designed to
be transported by means of wheels; balloons used as signs; signs attached to or painted on
vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way unless said vehicle is used in the
normal day-to-day operations of the business.
Sign - any device that is sufficiently visible to persons not located on the lot where such a
device is located, and designed to attract the attention of such persons or communicate
information to them about products, accommodations, services, or activities on the lot
where the device is located. Signs include, but are not limited to, banners, billboards,
flags, and pennants.
Banner - is a sign of lightweight, plastic, fabric, or similar non-rigid material that is
temporarily mounted.
Billboard - an outdoor advertising structure displaying a sign or signs not related to a use,
service, or activity on the premises, other than signs described in Section 8.06
Flag - is a sign of any fabric containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, and used
as a symbol of a governmental subdivision, educational institution, business or other entity
such as the US, state, municipal or school flags. The height of a flag pole shall not
exceed the vertical feet height limit of the zone.
Pennant - is a sign of any lightweight plastic, fabric, or similar non-rigid material whether or
not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or other material,
usually in a series, designed to move in the wind.
Temporary Sign - is a sign that is used for not more than 30 consecutive days and for not more
than 60 days in any 12 month period and is not permanently mounted. Banners and Flags
may be permitted as a Temporary Sign in accordance with the provisions of section 8.10 A.
8.01 Purposes of Sign Regulations
The purposes of these sign regulations are to:
A. Encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the Town of Bow;
B. Maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment of the Town while retaining the
Town's ability to attract and encourage economic development and growth;
C. Improve traffic safety;
D. Minimize possible adverse effects of signs on nearby public and private property; and
71
E. Enable fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations.
8.02 Permit Required for Signs
Except for signs in a street right of way or as otherwise provided in this Article, no sign may be
erected, placed, replaced, moved, enlarged, illuminated or altered in the Town of Bow without
a permit in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. A permit application and fee
shall be submitted to the Building Inspector and shall include a set of plans at an appropriate
scale showing the location, size, method of illumination, and materials proposed for said sign.
The Building Inspector shall review the permit application and act to approve or deny it within
thirty (30) days [within five (5) business days for applications for Temporary Signs] after the
filing of the application. Signs in a street right of way are permitted in accordance with the
Town Right of Way Ordinance adopted by the Board of Selectmen on October 8, 2002, as
from time to time amended.
8.03 Signs Allowed and Exempted from Permit Requirements
The following signs are exempt from the permit requirements of Section 8.02 of this Article, but
are subject to the standards contained herein. Any failure to comply with these standards and
any other provisions of this Article shall be considered a violation of this Ordinance:
A. Signs required or erected by governmental agencies are exempt.
B. Incidental signs directing and guiding traffic on private property that do not exceed two
(2) square feet each and that bear no advertising matter;
C. One sign per lot containing the message that the real estate on which the sign is
located (including buildings) is for sale, lease, or rent, together with information identifying the
owner or agent. In the case of approved condominiums, one sign per unit is permitted directly
in front of the unit for sale, lease, or rent. Such signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in
area and shall be removed immediately after sale, lease, or rental;
D. Construction site identification signs: A maximum of two signs per lot are permitted.
One sign may contain the message that the real estate on which the sign is located (including
buildings) is for sale, lease, or rent, together with information identifying the owner or agent.
Such signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area and shall be removed immediately
after sale, lease, or rental.
A second sign may identify the project, the owner or developer, architect, engineer, contractor
and subcontractors, funding sources, and may contain information related to sale or leasing of
the premises. Not more than one (1) such sign may be erected per site, and it may not exceed
thirty-two (32) square feet in area. Such signs shall not be erected prior to the issuance of a
building permit, subdivision, site plan, or other approval as applicable, and shall be removed
within thirty (30) days after the issuance of the final occupancy permit or acceptance of the
subdivision or site plan improvements.
Such signs shall not be illuminated.
E. Building marker signs, and historic marker signs that do not exceed four (4) square feet
in area.
72
8.04 Design, Construction, and Maintenance of Signs
All signs shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with this ordinance, the
Building Code, and the Electrical Code. Except for Portable Signs, Banners, Flags, and
Pennants, all signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently
attached to the ground, a building, or other structure.
Signs shall not be subject to the minimum yard requirements of Article 6.07 Table of
Dimensional Regulations. Except for signs in a street right of way, all signs shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from property lines and street right of way lines.
8.05 Sign Area Computation
Computation of Area of Individual Signs:
The computation of the area of a sign shall be the surface area and shall be considered to
include all lettering or elements of a sign, accompanying designs and symbols, together with
the background, whether open or closed, on which they are displayed, but not including any
supporting framework and bracing which are incidental to the display itself and which are not
designed to attract attention. Where the sign consists of letters or symbols affixed to a surface
or building, without any distinguishing border, panel or background, the area shall be
considered to be the smallest rectangle or shape which encompasses all of the letters and
symbols. The area of one side of a double faced sign shall be regarded as the total area of
the sign provided that such sign faces are parallel to each other, part of the same sign
structure, and not more than forty-two (42) inches apart.
8.06 Signs Prohibited Under This Ordinance
All signs not expressly permitted under Sections 8.07 and 8.08 of this Ordinance, or signs not
expressly exempt from permit requirements under Section 8.03 of this Ordinance, are
prohibited in the Town of Bow. Such signs include the following:
A. Signs which flash, move or create an illusion of movement except those parts which
solely indicate date, time, or temperature.
B. Beacons, or any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or one or
more points not on the same lot as the light source;
C. Inflated signs, and tethered balloons;
D. Signs painted directly on the exterior surface of a building;
E. Signs, or any point in a sign, over, on, attached to, or in any way made part of a roof;
F. Signs that are located in, over, or on a public right-of-way are regulated under the Town
of Bow Right of Way Ordinance;
G. Signs attached to a tree or utility pole; and
H. Signs that could be mistaken for the words "stop", "yield", "caution", and "danger", or
73
that contain red, amber, and green lights that may resemble traffic control lights.
8.07 Signs Permitted in Residential Districts
A. The following signs are permitted in the Residential (R), Rural (RU), and Residential
One Family (R-1) Districts, provided that such signs are not illuminated:
1. One (1) Home Occupation or Cottage Industry Sign shall be permitted in any zone where a
permitted home occupation or cottage industry is conducted. A home occupation or cottage
industry sign is an Advertising Sign or a Free Standing Sign identifying a home occupation or
cottage industry. The maximum area of the sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet.
2. One (1) Residential Sign shall be permitted for a subdivision of six (6) or more lots in the R,
RU, or R-1 Districts. A residential sign is a sign that identifies the name of a residential
subdivision. The maximum area of the sign shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet.
3. One (1) Subdivision Sale sign is permitted per subdivision. The sign shall be removed
within three (3) years from the date of permit, or upon sale of the last lot within the subdivision,
whichever occurrence happens first. This time can be extended upon application for extension
and approval thereof by the Zoning Board of Adjustment by Special Exception. A subdivision
sale sign identifies that lots within a residential subdivision are for sale. The maximum area of
one side of the sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet, and the sign may be doublefaced.
8.08 Signs Permitted in Non-Residential Districts
A. Permanent, Portable, and Temporary Signs
Except for signs in a street right of way, signs, including Portable Signs, in non-residential
districts, which include the Civic (CV), Commercial (C), Institutional (IN), Limited Industrial (I-
1), General Industrial (I-2), and Business Development (BD) Districts shall comply with 15.13
Signage Requirements of the Business Development District. Except as applied to
Temporary Signs, Reasonable Exceptions and Waivers of the Sign Regulations of Article 8
and the Signage Requirements of Section 15.13 may only be approved by the Planning Board.
Where neither a Site Plan nor a Subdivision application is required, requests for Reasonable
Exceptions and Waivers shall be submitted as a Conditional Use Permit application.
B. Flags and Banners
Flags and Banners shall be permitted on approved Outdoor Display Lots and as a Temporary
Sign in accordance with 8.10 in the C, I-1, I-2, CV, IN, and BD Districts in conformance to the
standards below.
1. Outdoor Display Lots shall be depicted on site plans approved by the Planning Board and
recorded at the Merrimack County Registry of Deeds. Lawfully pre-existing Outdoor Display
Lots (see Article 11. Non-Conforming Lots, Uses, and Structures) may be approved for Flags
and Banners by Conditional Use Permit approved by the Planning Board.
2. Flags and Banners shall be a maximum of 15 square feet when displayed within 50' of a
property boundary or street Right Of Way, and a maximum of 25 square feet elsewhere on the
property, except for US and State of NH flags, which should be displayed in accordance with
74
accepted flag protocol (Flag Code found in Title 4 of the US Code).
3. The square footage of Flags and Banners shall not be counted against the allowable area
of Permanent, Portable, and Temporary Signs per Article 15.13.
4. Flags and Banners may contain logos, pictures, and lettering.
5. The total square footage and number of Flags and Banners shall be limited as shown on
the table below. US and State of NH flags displayed in accordance with item 2 above shall not
be counted against the limits for the number and total square footage of Flags and Banners.
Area of Approved Display Lot in Square Feet
Up to 5000 5001 to 10,001 to 15,001 to Greater than
10,000 15,000 20,000 20,000
Maximum total
square footage
30 60 90 120 see formula 1.
below
Maximum number 3 6 9 12 see formula 2.
below
Formulas
1. 120 + [(area of display lot in SF - 20,000) / 5000 x 15]
2. 12 + [(area of display lot in SF - 20,000) / 5000 x 15 / 10]
The area (square footage) shall be calculated based on the total dimensions of the largest side
for two sided Flags and Banners and shall not include the area of poles, rope, or other
mounting apparatus.
8.09 Status of Non-Conforming Signs
A sign installed prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance for which a permit has been
previously issued shall be deemed a permitted non-conforming sign. Such non-conforming
signs shall be subject to the following regulations:
A. If the non-conforming sign is removed, for any purpose other than maintenance, it shall
be replaced only with a sign that is in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
B. Grandfathered signs shall be maintained;
C. Should a non-conforming sign be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than
seventy-five (75%) percent of its replacement cost at the time of its destruction, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, and
D. All signs shall comply with the provisions of this Ordinance prohibiting movement of
signs and flashing lights within ninety (90) days from the effective date of this Ordinance.
8.10 Other Signs in Non-Residential Districts
A. Temporary Signs shall be subject to the permit requirements of Section 8.02.
Temporary Signs shall not be placed in any required yard (setback). One unlit Flag or Banner
per business premise may be used on-site to advertise the business in accordance with the
75
size and location limitations of section 8.08 B 2. Where a permanent Sign has been approved,
but is not ready for installation, the Building Inspector may issue a permit for a second 30 day
period. In accordance with the provisions of RSA 674:21 Innovative Land Use Controls, a
decision of the Building Inspector in regards to a Temporary Sign may be appealed to the
Town Manager. The Town Manager shall render a decision on appeal within five (5) business
days. A decision of the Town Manager may be appealed to the Board of Selectmen, which
shall render a decision on appeal within 15 calendar days.
The Planning Board may approve, by Conditional Use Permit:
B. General business area signs designed to direct travelers to business development
areas in Town. Such signs may contain incidental advertising for individual businesses.
C. Signs whose purpose is to contribute to the general welfare of the community and
which contain only incidental advertising.
76
ARTICLE 9. OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS
9.01 Applicability
Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for all new development, and for changes or
expansions of existing uses and buildings to the extent that such changes would necessitate
an increase in the number of parking spaces required for the proposed use under the
standards of the Site Plan Review Regulations of the Town of Bow. Required parking spaces
shall not be used for storage of vehicles, recreational equipment or vehicles, goods, or
materials, or for the sale, repair, or servicing of any vehicles. All off-street parking shall be
provided on-site except as authorized by a Special Exception under Section 7.22 of this
Ordinance.
Each single family, duplex, or two-family dwelling unit shall have a minimum of two parking
spaces per dwelling unit. Each parking space shall have a minimum rectangular area at least
nineteen (19) feet long and nine (9) feet wide as well as adequate maneuvering area to permit
continuous access to the space.
Except as otherwise provided within this Ordinance, the Planning Board is authorized, through
the Site Plan Review Regulations of the Town of Bow, to adopt and administer regulations
governing parking and loading standards for all uses of land, whether or not a site plan review
is required. The regulations adopted by the Planning Board shall specify the number and size
of parking and loading spaces, necessary design criteria, and the procedures for modifying or
waiving adopted standards. The Planning Board may also provide for landscaping, buffering,
and other parking and loading standards necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance.
77
ARTICLE 10. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
10.01 Wetlands Conservation (WC) District
A. Authority for the WC District
The WC District is adopted pursuant to Section 1.03, Authority, of this Ordinance, and in
accordance with the provisions of RSA 674:21, Innovative Land Use Controls. The WC
District is considered to be an innovative land use control as environmental characteristics
zoning. Within the WC District, the Planning Board is authorized to administer and grant
conditional use permits in accordance with Article 12, Conditional Use Permits, of this
Ordinance. Reasonable Exceptions from the terms of Section 10.01 may only be approved
through a Conditional Use Process by the Planning Board where the applicant, in addition to
the standards contained in 10.01 F 1 through 3 and Article 12, meets the additional standards
of 10.01 F. 4.
B. Establishment of the WC District
1. The WC District is established in accordance with, and for the purposes so stated in
Section 4.01, Establishment of Districts and Statement of Purpose of Each, of this Ordinance.
2. The WC District shall consist of the following lands:
a. Lands as indicated in Section 4.02, Zoning Map, of this Ordinance;
b. Lands that meet the definition of wetlands or Surface Waters as specified in Article 3,
Definitions, of this Ordinance;
c. Lands designated as Prime Wetlands pursuant to RSA 482-A:15, N.H. Administrative
Rules Env-Wt 700, and this Section; and
d. Buffers to Wetlands, Prime Wetlands, and Surface Waters as designated pursuant to this
Section.
3. If a boundary of the WC District is disputed by either the Planning Board or an
applicant, the exact location of the boundary shall be determined by the Planning Board in
consultation with the Conservation Commission. The Planning Board, at the applicant's
expense, may engage a certified wetland scientist to determine the precise location of the WC
District boundary, using the methodology consistent with N.H. Administrative Rules Env-Wt
100-900, and in accordance with the "1987 Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual",
as modified by the 2011 Regional Supplement to the Corps of Engineers Wetland Delineation
Manual: Northcentral and Northeast Region (Version 2.0), or most current methodology
accepted by NH DES Wetlands Bureau and providing documentation in the form of the US
Army Corps of Engineers WETLAND DETERMINATION DATA FORM – Northcentral and
Northeast Region. In the alternative, the applicant may retain such a scientist, acceptable to
the Planning Board and Conservation Commission, to make such determination. A report of
the scientist's findings shall be submitted to the Planning Board and the Conservation
Commission, and shall include, if warranted, a revised wetland map of the area in question
along with a written report of the results of the investigation together with the completed data
forms.
78
4. Signage Required. Required wetland buffers on parcels for which conditional use
permits, subdivisions, and site plans have been approved shall be marked at 50' intervals with
signs approved by the Conservation Commission.
C. Prime Wetlands
Wetlands designated as Prime Wetlands by the town of Bow, within the scope of RSA 483-A
and N.H. Code of Administrative Rules Env-Wt 700, are described in the Bow Wetlands Report
dated December 1989 and include the following wetlands:
PRIME WETLANDS
WETLAND NUMBER LOCATION TAX MAP SHEET NO.
32 Great Meadow Swamp
Woodhill-Hooksett Road
33, 38
34 Center Brook and Horse Brook 33, 34, 38
35 Bow Bog Brook
upstream of Interstate 93
34, 35
43 Brown Hill Road and
Dunbarton Center Road
13, 18
44 White Rock Brook
Branch Londonderry Turnpike West
13
45 Headwaters of White Brook 13, 18, 23
55 White Rock Brook
Birchdale Road area
3, 4, 5
56 Turee Pond 8, 9, 10, 14, 15
79
D. Buffers to Wetlands and Setbacks from Wetlands
The minimum wetland buffer shall consist of undisturbed land in accordance with the following
regulations, the only exception would be for driveway crossings.
TABLE OF MINIMUM WETLAND BUFFERS
All dimensions are given in feet.
A. Buffers to Prime Wetlands * ...................................................................................... 150'
B. Buffers to Surface Waters, Wetlands with very poorly drained soils, bogs .................. 75'
C. Buffers to vernal pools and Wetlands 0.25 acre or larger ........................................... 50'
D. Buffers to other wetlands, less than 0.25 acres ........................................................... 30'
The wetland buffer shall consist of ungraded and undisturbed land.
Buffers shall not be required if the wetland is one of the following types:
A. A constructed vegetated swale, roadside ditch, or driveway ditch;
B. A sedimentation, detention, or retention basin; or
C. An excavated agricultural, irrigation, or fire pond.
TABLE OF MINIMUM WETLAND SETBACKS
All dimensions are given in feet.
A. Setbacks from Prime Wetlands *
B. Setbacks from Surface Waters, Wetlands with very poorly drained soils, bogs
C. Setbacks from vernal pools and Wetlands 0.25 acre or larger
D. Setbacks from other wetlands, less than 0.25 acres
A. B. C. D. Uses and Activities
150 75 75 75 On-site waste disposal systems for one and two family
dwellings
150 125 125 125 On-site waste disposal systems for all other uses
150 75 50 30 Buildings and parking lots
200 200 200 200 Underground chemical and fuel tanks
Where an existing use within the buffer or setback is destroyed or in need of extensive repair it
may be rebuilt provided that such rebuilding is completed within one year of the event causing
destruction, the new or rebuilt use shall not extend further into the wetland or setback area
than the original use. The buffer shall consist of natural vegetation.
All construction, forestry and agricultural activities within one hundred feet (100') of any
wetland shall be undertaken with special care to avoid erosion and siltation into the wetlands.
When deemed necessary, a Sediment and Erosion Control Plan may be requested by the
Planning Board or the Conservation Commission.
* For uses or activities that involve construction within 25 feet of a required Prime Wetland
Buffer, the boundary of the buffer shall be marked with orange construction fencing or silt
80
fence as appropriate prior to the commencement of construction activities. Such fencing shall
be maintained throughout the construction process.
E. Uses Prohibited, Permitted, and Requiring a Conditional Use Permit in the WC
District
TABLE OF USES FOR THE WETLAND CONSERVATION (WC) DISTRICT
PW Wet & PWB
Uses and Activities Buffer
Salt storage, junk yards, resource recovery facilities, transfer
stations, landfills, solid or hazardous waste facilities
– – –
Bulk storage of chemicals, petroleum products, toxic & hazardous
materials
– – –
Dumping/disposal of snow & ice from roadways & parking – – –
Erection/construction of structures – – –
Recontouring/grading of land – – –
Draining, dredging, filling, or change in flow of water – – –
Pollution of wetlands, surface or ground waters – – –
Agricultural1 _ P C
Logging 2 operations P P P
Activities which alter the natural drainage system resulting in a
change in the flow of water, water level or water table
– C –
Abbreviations:
PW = Prime Wetlands P = Permitted
Wet = Wetlands C = Conditional Use Permit
PWB = Prime Wetlands Buffer – = Not Permitted
1 Includes agricultural activities as defined in NH RSA 21:34-a and as governed by RSA 430,
provided that such activities and operations are in conformance with the most recent best management
practices determined by the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service, NH Department of Agriculture,
Markets & Food, and UNH Cooperative Extension.
2 Logging operations must (1) utilize best management practices as described in Best Management
Practices for Erosion Control on Timber Harvesting Operations in New Hampshire; and (2) Comply with all
applicable state laws including RSA 227-J:9 Cutting of Timber Near Certain Waters and Public Highways,
obtaining and filing an intent to cut form according to RSA 79:10 (as appropriate), and filing a complete
Notification of forest Management Activities Having Minimum Wetlands Impact according to RSA 482-A:3,
V.(a), or obtaining a NHDES Wetlands permit according to RSA 482-A.
81
TABLE OF USES FOR THE WETLAND CONSERVATION (WC) DISTRICT - Continued
PW Wet & PWB
Uses and Activities Buffer
Water impoundments for the purpose of creating a water body for
wildlife, on-site detention of stormwater runoff, or for recreational
uses
– C –
Outdoor recreational activities including hunting, fishing, swimming,
and boating; Wildlife or fisheries management activities;
Educational activities and scientific research
P P P
Activities incidental to ordinary residential use such as normal
ground maintenance, mowing, trimming, removal of dead or
diseased vegetation – not regrading or recontouring land or
clearing vegetation
P P P
Construction, repair, and/or maintenance of streets, roads, and
other access ways and utility right of way easement, including
power lines and pipelines
C C C
Uses permitted within the base district, but which are not otherwise
permitted in the WC District
C C C
Abbreviations:
PW = Prime Wetlands P = Permitted
Wet = Wetlands C = Conditional Use Permit
PWB = Prime Wetlands Buffer – = Not Permitted
F. Standards for Granting of a Conditional Use Permit in the WC District
1. An application for a conditional use permit in the WC District shall be filed with the
Planning Board pursuant to Section 12.02, Application and Review Procedure, of this
Ordinance. The Planning Board shall refer the application to the Conservation Commission for
review and comment prior to the public hearing on the application. In acting on the application,
the Board shall consider any report received from the Commission.
2. In addition to the requirements of Article 12, Conditional Use Permits, of this
Ordinance, the applicant shall provide adequate documentation in order for the Planning Board
to make a finding that the proposed use or activity meets the following conditions:
a. The proposed activity or use is consistent with the purposes of the WC District;
b. The proposed activity minimizes the degradation to, or loss of wetlands and wetland buffers,
and minimizes any adverse impact to the functions and values of wetlands and wetland buffers
as determined by a wetlands evaluation in accordance with an established methodology such
as The Highway Methodology Workbook Supplement (1999) of the US Army Corps of
Engineers;
82
c. The proposed activity minimizes the environmental impact to abutting or downstream
property and/or hydrologically connected water and/or wetland resources;
d. The proposed activity or use cannot practicably be located otherwise on the site to eliminate
or reduce the impact to the Wetland or Surface Water and/or its buffer area, provided however,
this condition shall not apply to impoundments for the purpose of creating a water body for
wildlife, on-site detention of stormwater runoff, or for recreational uses;
e. Federal and/or state permit(s) have been received for the proposed activity in accordance
with N.H. Administrative Rules Env-Wt 100-900, the Federal Section 404 Permit; and
f. Where applicable, proof of compliance with all other state and/or federal regulations has
been received.
3. The Planning Board, in acting on an application for a conditional use permit in the WC
District, may attach conditions to its approval including but not limited to requirements for more
extensive buffers, additional plantings in areas to be revegetated, performance guarantees,
and a reduction in proposed impervious surfaces.
4. Reasonable Exceptions. The TABLE OF USES FOR THE WETLAND
CONSERVATION (WC) DISTRICT specifically authorizes certain Uses and Activities within
wetlands and buffers to wetlands. The TABLE OF WETLAND BUFFERS specifies the
minimum standards for buffers to wetlands. Reasonable Exceptions may only be granted by
the Planning Board through a Conditional Use Process where the applicant additionally
demonstrates that granting the exception:
a. is consistent with the purposes of the Zoning Ordinance,
b. will not cause undue financial burden on the Town or adjacent properties,
c. creates a balance between the adverse impacts to wetlands and/or buffers and the
reduction of adverse impacts to private property, and
d. is necessary for reasonable use of the property.
In addition, the Planning Board may require mitigation measures to offset the adverse impacts
to wetlands and/or buffers.
G. Subsurface Disposal Systems in the WC District
The following conditions, based on characteristics of the receiving soil as they relate to U.S.
Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service drainage classes, shall
dictate the setback requirements for all new leaching portions of new septic systems, as
follows:
1. Where the receiving soil down gradient of the leaching portions of the septic system is a
porous sand and gravel material with a percolation rate faster than two (2) minutes per inch,
the setback shall be at least one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from a wetland;
2. For soils with restrictive layers within eighteen (18) inches of the natural soil surface,
the setback shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from a wetland; and
83
3. For all other soil conditions, the setback shall be at least seventy-five (75) feet from a
wetland.
H. Non-Conforming Structures and Uses in the WC District
Structures or uses that became non-conforming on or after January 6, 1990, as a result of the
adoption of this Section, shall be subject to Article 11, Non-Conforming Lots, Uses, and
Structures, of this Ordinance.
84
10.02 Floodplain (F) District
Definition Section The following definitions shall apply only to this Floodplain (F) District, and
shall not be affected by the provisions of any other ordinance of the Town of Bow.
Area of Special Flood Hazard - the land in the flood plain within the Town of Bow subject to a 1
percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area is designated as Zone(s) A
and AE on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
Base Flood - the flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year. The base flood is also known as the "100 year flood".
Basement - any area of a building having its floor subgrade on all sides.
Building - see "structure".
Development - any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but
not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation
or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
FEMA - means the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (Floodway Map) - the official map of the Town of Bow, on
which FEMA has delineated the "Regulatory Floodway". This map should not be used to
determine the correct flood hazard zone or base flood elevation. The Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) will be used to make determinations of flood hazard zones and base flood
elevations.
Flood or Flooding - means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from: (1) the overflow of inland or tidal waters, and (2) the unusual
and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Elevation Study - means an examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards
and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination and
determination of mudslide or flood - related erosion hazards.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - an official map on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk
premium zones applicable to the Town of Bow.
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) - an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards
and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and
determination of mudslide (i.e. mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
Floodplain or Flood-prone area - any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from
any source.
Flood-proofing - means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved
real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
85
Functionally Dependent Use - a use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is
located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking and port
facilities that are necessary for the loading/unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship
building/repair facilities but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
Highest Adjacent Grade - the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to
construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
Historic Structure - any structure that is:
1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting
the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to
the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by
the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
3. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
4. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
a. by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
b. directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Lowest Floor - The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor;
provided, that such an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance. (Used for administration of
flood hazard area regulations).
Manufactured Home - a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when
attached to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term ‘‘manufactured
home’’ includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on site for greater
than 180 consecutive days. This includes manufactured homes located in a manufactured
home park or subdivision.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into
two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean Sea Level - the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps are referenced.
New Construction - for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the
86
“start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after
December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures. For floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for
which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements
to such structures.
Recreational Vehicle - a vehicle which is (a) built on a single chassis; (b) 400 square feet or
less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c) designed to be self propelled or
permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a
permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or
seasonal use. (For purposes of flood hazard regulations).
Regulatory Floodway - the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the
water surface elevation more than a designated height. These areas are designated as
floodways on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps.
Riverine - relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream or brook.
Special Flood Hazard Area - see “Area of Special Flood Hazard”.
Start of Construction - start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of
the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the state of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footing, piers, or foundations
or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. (For administration of flood hazard area regulations).
Structure - for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas
or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial Damage - damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement - any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or
improvements to a structure in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%)
of the market value of the structure. The market value of the structure should be : (1) the
appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in
the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. For the
purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not,
however, include any project for improvement of a structure required to comply with existing
87
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions or any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
(For administration of flood hazard area regulations).
Violation - the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the
community’s flood plain management regulations. A structure or other development without
the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in
Section C. 3., Section F. 2. and Section D. 3 & 4. is presumed to be in violation until such time
as that documentation is provided.
Water Surface Elevation - the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929, or other datum where specified, of floods of various magnitudes and
frequencies in the floodplain.
___________________________________________________________________
A. Authority for the F District
The F District is adopted pursuant to Section 1.03, Authority, of this Ordinance, and in
accordance with the provisions of RSA 674:21, Innovative Land Use Controls. The F District is
considered to be an innovative land use control as environmental characteristics zoning.
Within the F District, where so specified herein, the Planning Board is authorized to administer
and grant conditional use permits in accordance with Article 12, Conditional Use Permits, of
this Ordinance.
The following regulations in this ordinance shall apply to all lands designated as special flood
hazard areas by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its "Flood Insurance
Study for the Town of Bow, N.H." together with the associated Flood Insurance Rate Maps
(and Flood Boundary & Floodway Maps), both as adopted by the Board of Selectmen (see
Resolution 2010-1 adopted March 9, 2010), which are declared to be a part of this ordinance
and are hereby incorporated by reference.
B. Establishment of the F District
The F District is established in accordance with, and for the purposes so stated in Section
4.01, Establishment of Districts and Statement of Purpose of Each, of this Ordinance, and
encompasses lands as indicated in Section 4.02, Zoning Map, of this Ordinance.
C. General Requirements for the F District
1. Within the F District, the Building Inspector shall review all building permit
applications for new construction or substantial improvements to determine whether proposed
building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a special
flood hazard area, all new construction and substantial improvements shall be:
a. designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy:
b. constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
c. constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages; and
88
d. constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
2. Where new and replacement water and sewer systems (including on-site systems) are
proposed in a special flood hazard area, the applicant shall provide the Building Inspector with
assurances that new and replacement sanitary sewage systems will be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into
flood waters, and on-site waste disposal systems will be located to avoid impairment to them
or contamination from them during periods of flooding.
3. For all new or substantially improved structures located in Zones A, A1-30, AE, AO and
AH, the applicant shall furnish the following information to the Building Inspector, who shall
maintain such information for public inspection and furnish it upon request.
a. the as-built elevation (in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
[NGVD] of 1929) of the lowest floor (including basement), and include whether or not such
structures contain a basement;
b. If the structure has been flood-proofed, the as-built elevation (in relation to NGVD) to which
the structure was flood-proofed; and
c. any certification of flood-proofing.
4. The Building Inspector shall review proposed developments to assure that all
necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which
approval is required by Federal or State law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
5. No building permit shall be issued for the erection or placement of a structure or
building within the Floodplain District unless such permit contains language advising the permit
holder that the Town assumes no responsibility or liability for damages which may be incurred
as result of said building or structure being located within the Floodplain District. Further, prior
to the issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall produce evidence that an appropriate
notice of this section and the limitation of municipal responsibility and liability has been
recorded in the Merrimack County Registry of Deeds.
D. Alteration or Relocation of Watercourses
1. No fill shall be permitted in any natural drainage channel, or stream bed. No building,
impervious surface, or stripping of topsoil shall be permitted within twenty-five (25) feet of any
pond or the top of any stream bank, or within thirty-five (35) feet from the stream centerline,
where a top of bank is not discernible. A greater setback may be required where it can be
demonstrated that these minimum dimensions afford insufficient protection to the natural
functioning of these areas. Furthermore, where the provisions of 10.01 Wetlands
Conservation (WC) District require greater protection of any natural drainage channel or
stream bed, the more restrictive standards shall apply.
2. In riverine situations, prior to the alteration or relocation of a watercourse, the applicant
for such authorization shall notify the Wetlands Bureau of the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services and submit copies of such notification to the Building Inspector in
89
addition to the copies required by RSA 482-A:3. The applicant shall submit copies of state and
federal permits required for the alteration or relocation. Further, the applicant shall be required
to submit copies of said notification to those adjacent communities as determined by the
Building Inspector, including notice of all scheduled hearings before the Wetlands Bureau, the
Planning Board, and the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The applicant shall submit to the
Building Inspector, certification and supporting data provided by a licensed professional
engineer assuring that the flood carrying capacity of an altered or relocated watercourse can
and will be maintained.
3. Along watercourses with a designated Regulatory Floodway no encroachments,
including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development are allowed
within the floodway that would result in any increase in flood levels within the community
during the base flood discharge.
4. Along watercourses that have not had a Regulatory Floodway designated, no new
construction, substantial improvements or other development (including fill) shall be permitted
within Zones A and AE on the FIRM, unless it is demonstrated by the applicant that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more
than one (1) foot at any point within the community.
5. The Building Inspector shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data
available from Federal, State, or other sources as criteria for requiring that development
located in Zone A meet the following floodway requirement:
No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other
development are allowed within the floodway that would result in any increase in flood levels
within the community during the base flood discharge.
E. Determination of 100-year Flood Levels in the F District
In special flood hazard areas the Building Inspector shall determine the one hundred (100)
year flood elevation in the following order or precedence according to the data available:
1. In Zone AE, refer to the elevation data provided in the Bow Flood Insurance Study and
accompanying FIRM and FHBM;
2. In A Zones, the Building Inspector shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any one
hundred (100) year flood elevation data available from Federal, State, or other source
including data submitted pursuant to development applications to the Town of Bow.
F. Design Standards in the F District
The Building Inspector’s 100 year flood elevation determination will be used as criteria in
Zones AE and A and it shall be required that:
1. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the
lowest floor (including basement) elevated to a minimum of two feet (2') above the Base Flood
elevation.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall
90
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to a minimum of two feet (2') above the
Base Flood elevation; or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
a. Be flood-proofed so that below a minimum of two feet (2') above the Base Flood elevation
the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
the effects of buoyancy; and
c. Be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions
of this Section;
3. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within special flood
hazard areas shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is a minimum of two feet (2') above the Base Flood elevation; and be
securely anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring
may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is an addition to applicable State and Local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces;
4. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A and AE shall either:
a. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
b. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
c. Meet all standards of Section 60.3(b)(1) of the National Flood Insurance Program
Regulations and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in
Paragraph (c)(6) of Section 60.3.
5. For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas below the
lowest floor that are subject to flooding are permitted providing the enclosed areas meet the
following requirements:
a. The enclosed area is unfinished or flood resistant, usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage;
b. The area is not a basement;
c. Shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either
be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria: A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be
provided. The bottom on all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that
they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
G. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) in the F District
91
1. Any appeal of a determination or decision made pursuant to this Section (other than a
determination or decision related to a conditional use permit), shall be in accordance with
Article 13, Appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, of this Ordinance.
2. If a variance is requested, the applicant shall have the burden of presenting evidence
sufficient to allow the ZBA to reach conclusions and make findings that the variance:
a. Will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary
public expense;
b. Will not result in increased flood levels during the base flood discharge, if the requested
variance is in a regulatory floodway; and
c. Is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
These findings shall be in addition to those required of the ZBA pursuant to Article 13.
3. In granting a variance, the ZBA shall notify the applicant in writing that construction
below the base flood level will result in the following:
a. Increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of
insurance coverage, and
b. Increased risk to life and property.
Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions.
4. A record of all variance actions shall be included in the Town's regular reports to
FEMA's Federal Insurance Administrator.
92
10.03 Aquifer Protection (AP) District
Definition Section (applicable to the AP District)
Aquifer - a geologic formation composed of rock, sand, or gravel that contains significant
amounts of potentially recoverable water.
Gasoline station - means that portion of a property where petroleum products are received by
tank vessel, pipeline, tank car, or tank vehicle and distributed for the purposes of retail sale.
Groundwater - subsurface water that occurs beneath the water table in soils and geologic
formations.
Impervious - not readily permitting the infiltration of water.
Impervious surface - a surface through which regulated substances cannot pass when spilled.
Impervious surfaces include concrete unless unsealed cracks or holes are present. Asphalt;
earthen, wooden, or gravel surfaces; or other surfaces which could react with or dissolve when
in contact with the substances stored on them are not considered impervious surfaces.
Junkyard - a place as defined in RSA 236:112, I.
Outdoor storage - storage of materials where they are not protected from the elements by a
roof, walls, and a floor with an impervious surface.
Petroleum bulk plant (up to 20,000 gal/day) or terminal (over 20,000 gal/day) - means that
portion of the property where petroleum products are received by tank vessel, pipeline, tank
car, or tank vehicle and are stored or blended in bulk for the purpose of distributing such
liquids by tank vessel, pipeline tank car, tank vehicle, portable tank, or container.
Public water system - a system for the provision to the public of piped water for human
consumption, if such system has at least 15 service connections or regularly serves an
average of at least 25 individuals daily at least 60 days out of the year.
Regulated substance - petroleum, petroleum products, and substances listed under 40 CFR
302, current edition, excluding the following substances: (1) ammonia, (2) sodium hypochlorite,
(3) sodium hydroxide, (4) acetic acid, (5) sulfuric acid, (6) potassium hydroxide, (7) potassium
permanganate, and (8) propane and other liquefied fuels which exist as gases at normal
atmospheric temperature and pressure.
Sanitary protective radius - The area around a public water supply well which must be
maintained in its natural state as required by Env-Dw 301 or Env-Dw 302 (for community water
systems); Env-Dw 372.12 and Env-Dw 372.13 (for other public water systems).
Secondary containment - a structure such as a berm or dike with an impervious surface which
is adequate to hold at least 110% of the volume of the largest regulated-substances container
that will be stored there.
Solid Waste Landfill - a facility as defined in Env-Sw 103.32.
93
Stratified-drift aquifer - A geologic formation of predominantly well-sorted sediment deposited
by or in bodies of glacial meltwater, including gravel, sand, silt, or clay, which contains
sufficient saturated permeable material to yield significant quantities of water to wells.
Surface water - those portions of waters of the state as defined by RSA 485-A:2, XIV.
Waste-water or Septage Lagoon - a place where industrial waste, septage, or sewage, as
defined in RSA 485-A:2, VI, IX-a, & X, is stored and / or treated, as regulated by Env-Wq 700
(see 702.36 & 710.06 - 13) and Env-Wq 1600 (see 1602.23)
Wellhead protection area - The surface and subsurface area surrounding a water well or
wellfield supplying a community or non-transient non-community public water system, through
which contaminants are reasonably likely to move toward and reach such water well or
wellfield.
___________________________________________________________________
A. Authority for the AP District
The AP District is adopted pursuant to Section 1.03, Authority, of this Ordinance, and in
accordance with the provisions of RSA 674:21, Innovative Land Use Controls. The AP District
is considered to be an innovative land use control as environmental characteristics zoning.
Within the AP District, the Planning Board is authorized to administer and grant conditional use
permits in accordance with Article 12, Conditional Use Permits, of this Ordinance.
B. Establishment of the AP District
1. The AP District is established in accordance with, and for the purposes so stated in
Section 4.01, Establishment of Districts and Statement of Purpose of Each, of this Ordinance,
and encompasses lands as indicated in Section 4.02, Zoning Map, of this Ordinance.
2. If new data on local hydrogeology and topography, acceptable to the Planning Board,
would lead to a different location of the boundary of the AP District, the Planning Board upon
application shall grant a conditional use permit, thereby deeming the revised boundary location
to be the correct legal boundary for purposes of this Section. Upon request of an applicant,
the Planning Board may engage a licensed professional engineer or hydrogeologist, at the
applicant's expense, to conduct such a boundary analysis or, in the alternative, the applicant
may retain a licensed engineer or hydrologist acceptable to the Planning Board to conduct
such analysis.
C. Applicability
This Ordinance applies to all uses in the Aquifer Protection District, except for those uses
exempt under Section I. Exemptions of this Ordinance.
D. Performance Standards
The following Performance Standards apply to all uses in the Aquifer Protection District unless
exempt under Section I. Exemptions:
1. For any use that will render impervious more than 15% or more than 2,500 square feet
of any lot, whichever is greater, a stormwater management plan shall be prepared which the
94
planning board determines is consistent with New Hampshire Stormwater Manual, December
2008, Volumes II and III.
2. Conditional uses, as defined under Section G. Conditional Uses shall have a current
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit or develop stormwater management
and pollution prevention plans and include information consistent with Stormwater
Management for Industrial Activities: Developing Pollution Prevention Plans and Best
Management Practices. (US EPA, 1992) The plan shall contain provisions to:
a. Minimize the release of regulated substances into stormwater, through a source control
plan that identifies pollution prevention measures;
b. Prevent recharge to groundwater that will result in violation of Ambient Groundwater Quality
Standards (Env-Wq 402.06) at the property boundary;
c. Stipulate that expansion or redevelopment activities shall require an amended stormwater
plan and may not infiltrate stormwater through areas containing contaminated soils. The
applicant may submit a Phase I Assessment in conformance with ASTM E 1527-05, also
referred to as All Appropriate Inquiry (AAI) to demonstrate that such infiltration will not result in
a violation of Ambient Groundwater Quality Standards.
3. Animal manures, fertilizers, and compost must be stored in accordance with Manual of
Best Management Practices for Agriculture in New Hampshire, NH Department of Agriculture,
Markets, and Food, June 2011 and any subsequent revisions;
4. All regulated substances stored in containers with a capacity of 5 gallons or more must
be stored in product-tight containers on an impervious surface designed and maintained to
prevent flow to exposed soils, floor drains, and outside drains;
5. Facilities where regulated substances are stored must be secured against unauthorized
entry by means of a door and/or gate that is locked when authorized personnel are not present
and must be inspected weekly by the facility owner;
6. Outdoor storage areas for regulated substances, associated material or waste must be
protected from exposure to precipitation and must be located at least 50 feet from surface
water or storm drains, at least 75 feet from private wells, and outside the sanitary protective
radius of wells used by public water systems;
7. Secondary containment must be provided for outdoor storage systems for regulated
substances if an aggregate of 275 gallons or more of regulated substances are stored
outdoors on any particular property. Secondary containment shall also be provided for outdoor
conveyance systems;
8. Containers in which regulated substances are stored must be clearly and visibly labeled
and must be kept closed and sealed when material is not being transferred from one container
to another;
9. Prior to any land disturbing activities, all inactive wells on the property, not in use or
properly maintained at the time the plan is submitted, shall be considered abandoned and
must be sealed in accordance with We 604 of the New Hampshire Water Well Board Rules;
95
10. Disposal of stumps is permitted for same site disposal of stumps generated on site
where a minimum separation of four feet (4') is maintained between stumps and estimated
seasonal high water.
E. Permitted Uses
All uses permitted by right or allowed by special exception in the underlying district are
permitted in the Aquifer Protection District unless they are Prohibited Uses or Conditional
Uses. All uses must comply with the Performance Standards unless specifically exempt under
Section I. Exemptions.
F. Prohibited Uses
The following uses are prohibited in the Aquifer Protection District.
1. The establishment of a hazardous waste disposal facility as defined under RSA 147-A;
2. The establishment of a Solid Waste Landfill;
3. The outdoor storage of road salt or other deicing chemicals in bulk, except for use on
the site on which it is stored;
4. The establishment of a Junkyard;
5. Disposal of snow or ice, which is cleared from roadways and/or motor vehicle parking
areas, from another lot or parcel;
6. The establishment of a Wastewater or Septage Lagoon, except for discharge to the
ground approved by NHDES for treatment of groundwater;
7. The establishment of a petroleum bulk plant or terminal;
8. The establishment of gasoline stations;
9. The disposal of sewage sludge or biosolids.
G. Conditional Uses
An Aquifer Protection Conditional Use Permit (CUP) is subject to the provisions of Article 12 of
this Ordinance, except where modified below. The Planning Board may grant a CUP for a use
that is otherwise permitted within the underlying district, if the permitted use is involved in one
or more of the following:
1. Storage, handling, and use of regulated substances in quantities exceeding 100 gallons
or 800 pounds dry weight at any one time, provided that an adequate spill prevention, control
and countermeasure (SPCC) plan is approved by the local Fire Department;
a. The Spill Prevention, Control and Countermeasure (SPCC) Plan shall be submitted to the
Fire Chief who shall determine whether the plan will prevent, contain, and minimize releases
from ordinary or catastrophic events such as spills, floods or fires that may cause large
releases of regulated substances. It shall include:
96
(1) A description of the physical layout and a facility diagram, including all
surrounding surface waters and wellhead protection areas.
(2) Contact list and phone numbers for the facility response coordinator, cleanup
contractors, and all appropriate federal, state, and local agencies who must be contacted in
case of a release to the environment.
(3) A list of all regulated substances in containers of 55 gallons or greater in use
and locations of use and storage;
(4) A prediction of the direction, rate of flow, and total quantity of regulated
substance that could be released where experience indicates a potential for equipment failure.
(5) A description of containment and/or diversionary structures or equipment to
prevent regulated substances from infiltrating into the ground.
2. The expansion of a Solid Waste Landfill;
3. The expansion of outdoor operations of a Junkyard;
4. The expansion of a Wastewater or Septage Lagoon;
5. The expansion of a petroleum bulk plant or terminal;
6. The expansion of a gasoline station; and
7. The expansion of any other non-conforming use.
For Aquifer Protection CUP applications that involve development subject to Site Plan Review
approval, the application shall be subject to Section 12.02 A of this Ordinance.
For all other Aquifer Protection CUP applications, the activity or development subject to CUP
approval shall be accurately sketched on a copy of the recorded site plan or plan of similar
reliability. Six full scale copies and one copy reduced to 11" X 17" paper shall be submitted.
For Aquifer Protection CUP applications for which a recorded site plan is not available, six
copies of a legible, accurate sketch of the activity or development subject to CUP approval and
existing improvements shall be submitted. At least one copy shall be reduced to 11" X 17"
paper.
In granting such approval the Planning Board must first determine that the proposed use is not
a new prohibited use and will be in compliance with Section D. Performance Standards as well
as all applicable local, state and federal requirements. The Planning Board may, at its
discretion, require a performance guarantee or bond, in an amount and with surety conditions
satisfactory to the Board, to be posted to ensure completion of construction of any facilities
required for compliance with the Performance Standards.
H. Existing Nonconforming Uses
Existing nonconforming uses may continue without expanding or changing to another
nonconforming use, unless allowed by CUP, but must be in compliance with all applicable
97
state and federal requirements, including Env-Wq 401, Best Management Practices Rules.
I. Exemptions
The following uses are exempt from the specified provisions of this ordinance as long as they
are in compliance with all applicable local, state, and federal requirements:
1. Any private residence is exempt from all Performance Standards;
2. Any business or facility where regulated substances are stored in containers with a
capacity of 5 gallons or less is exempt from Section D. Performance Standards 5 through 8;
3. Storage of heating fuels for on-site use or fuels for emergency electric generation,
provided that storage tanks are indoors on a concrete floor or have corrosion control, leak
detection, and secondary containment in place, is exempt from Section D. Performance
Standards 5;
4. Storage of motor fuel in tanks attached to vehicles and fitted with permanent fuel lines
to enable the fuel to be used by that vehicle is exempt from Section D. Performance Standards
5 through 8;
5. Storage and use of office supplies is exempt from Section D. Performance Standards 5
through 8;
6. Temporary storage for up to one year of construction materials on a site where they are
to be used is exempt from Section D. Performance Standards 5 through 8;
7. The sale, transportation, and use of pesticides as defined in RSA 430:29 XXVI are
exempt from all provisions of this ordinance;
8. Household hazardous waste collection projects regulated under Env-Hw 401.03(b)(1)
and 501.01(b) are exempt from Section D. Performance Standards 5 through 8;
9. Underground storage tank systems and aboveground storage tank systems that are in
compliance with applicable state rules are exempt from inspections under Section K.
Maintenance and Inspection of this ordinance.
J. Relationship between State and Local Requirements
Where both the State and the municipality have existing requirements the more stringent shall
govern.
K. Maintenance and Inspection
1. For uses requiring planning board approval for any reason, a narrative description of
maintenance requirements for structures required to comply with Performance Standards shall
be recorded so as to run with the land on which such structures are located, at the Registry of
Deeds for Merrimack County. The description so prepared shall comply with the requirements
of RSA 478:4-a.
2. Inspections may be required to verify compliance with Performance Standards. Such
inspections shall be performed by the Building Inspector or designee at reasonable times with
98
prior notice to the landowner.
3. All properties within the Aquifer Protection District known to the Building Inspector or
designee as using or storing regulated substances in containers with a capacity of 5 gallons or
more, except for facilities where all regulated substances storage is exempt from this
Ordinance under Section I. Exemptions, shall be subject to inspections under this Article.
4. The Town may require a fee for compliance inspections. The fee shall be paid by the
property owner. A fee schedule shall be established by the Board of Selectmen as provided
for in RSA 41-9:a.
L. Enforcement Procedures and Penalties
Any violation of the requirements of this ordinance shall be subject to the enforcement
procedures and penalties detailed in 14.07 Violations.
M. State Rules, Regulations, and Statutes
The applicability of State Rules, Regulations, and Statutes shall be as amended from time to
time.
99
ARTICLE 11. NON-CONFORMING LOTS, USES AND STRUCTURES
11.01 Determination and Status of Non-conforming Property
A. Evidence of non-conforming use or building
In reviewing an application for a building permit, or other application for land use change or
structural alteration involving a non-conforming use or building, the Building Inspector shall
make a determination as to the existence of a non-conformity. In so doing, the Building
Inspector may require the property owner, to produce acceptable evidence attesting to said
legal non-conforming status. Such evidence shall include, but is not restricted to such
documents as rent receipts, documentation of utility services, affidavits, or other information as
may be deemed to be necessary in a particular case.
B. Evidence of Non-conforming lot
The date of creation of a lot shall be considered established by its most recent lawful change
in configuration by parcel area reduction, consolidation, land division, or other official action. A
non-conforming lot shall be deemed to exist where the Building Inspector finds, based on
evidence submitted by the property owner, that all of the following conditions are true:
1. The lot was created prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, or prior to the relevant
amendments resulting in nonconformity of the lot, and no further division has occurred since
that date;
2. The lot has not previously been reviewed under this Article;
3. The lot met the minimum size, frontage and area standards which were in effect when
the lot was created; and
4. The lot does not conform with present size, frontage, or area standards for the zoning
district.
C. Non-conforming use status limited to permanent lawful uses
The casual, temporary, or illegal use of land or structures, or land or structures in combination,
shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a non-conforming use or to create rights in
the continuance of such use.
D. Right to Continue
Any legal use that exists at the effective date of this Ordinance (or the date of an amendment
which created a non-conformity) but which would not be permitted under the provisions herein
shall be allowed to continue as a legal non-conforming use.
E. Status of uses authorized by special exception
Any use in lawful existence at the time of passage or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance
which would thereafter require a special exception or conditional use permit under its terms
shall without further action be deemed a conforming use. Any enlargement or replacement of
such use, in buildings or on land, shall require a special exception or conditional use permit, as
100
applicable, as though it were a new use.
11.02 Non-Conforming Lots
A. Actions by land use boards may not create non-conformity
Non-conforming lots shall not be created through the grant of a variance, special exception,
conditional use or other development permit.
B. Use of a Non-conforming lot
A lot which failed to conform with size or dimension requirements which were in effect under
ordinances or regulations at the time of division shall not by reason of that defect alone be
denied any land development permit otherwise available under current ordinances. Non
conforming lots of record may be developed for uses permitted within the zoning district under
the following conditions:
1. Substandard lot size.
When a non-conforming lot can be used in conformity with all applicable regulations except for
minimum lot size, then the lot may be used for a permitted use, provided that the development
complies with all other standards which apply to that use under the zoning ordinance.
2. Substandard lot frontage.
In an "R", "RU", or “R-1” District only, a one-family dwelling may be allowed by way of Special
Exception on a lot, created prior to Planning Board subdivision review authority (1967), having
less than the required frontage, but having the required minimum area, provided the following
conditions are satisfied:
a. The lot must have at least one hundred and one (101) feet of frontage on a Class V or better
road and a total of two hundred (200) feet of frontage on a public street.
b. The lot in its present configuration must have been created by deed or approved
subdivision recorded in the Registry of Deeds before January 1, 1983;
c. No structures shall be erected on the lot except a one (1) family dwelling together with those
attached or detached accessory structures customarily used with a one-family dwelling;
d. The driveway shall be constructed and maintained as to afford reasonable access to the
structures by public emergency vehicles on a year round basis;
e. The lot shall not be subdivided except in strict accordance with the subdivision regulations
of the Planning Board then in force.
f. A site plan to be submitted in accordance with Site Review procedures.
g. The Planning Board must approve the provisions for a turnaround.
C. Vesting
Lots in existence prior to the adoption of this ordinance shall be entitled to statutory vesting
pursuant to NH RSA 674:39, as may be amended from time to time.
101
11.03 Non-Conforming Uses
A. Continuation of use
Where a non-conforming use, or where non-conforming characteristics of a use exist, such as
signs, off street parking and loading, lighting, landscaping, or similar features, such nonconforming
uses and characteristics of use may continue indefinitely except as provided in this
Ordinance.
B. Change in ownership or management
Nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting change in tenancy, ownership, or
management of a non-conforming lot, use, or structure, provided such change is otherwise
lawful.
C. Reversion to less conforming use not permitted
No building or lot in which a non-conforming use has been changed in whole or in part to a
more conforming use shall again be devoted to a less conforming use.
D. Expansion or change in use authorized by special exception
No non-conforming use within a building, structure or lot shall be expanded or changed to
another non-conforming use, unless it has been approved as a special exception, subject to
the standards of this section, and to the conditions attached by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
1. Findings required.
A special exception for a change or expansion of a non-conforming use may be issued by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment only upon its finding that the proposed use (1) will not have an
adverse impact on the surrounding neighborhood, and (2) that the change in use will be
equally or more conforming with the purpose and intent of this Ordinance and the zoning
district.
2. Criteria for change or expansion of use.
In making the required findings, the Zoning Board of Adjustment must determine that the
change as proposed can reasonably meet all of the following conditions:
a. The proposed change would not result in an increase in noise, vibration, dust, odor, fumes,
glare or smoke detectable at the property line; and
b. The numbers and kinds of vehicular trips to the site will be comparable to, or lower than,
those associated with the existing use; and
c. The use will not place increased demand on outside storage or loading requirements, there
will be no net loss in the number of existing off-street parking spaces serving the existing
use(s);
d. The visual appearance of the site and structure will either remain unchanged or will be
improved;
102
e. The proposed hours of operation for the use will result in an equal or lesser impact on the
neighborhood;
f. The non-conforming use area of the lot will not be increased as a result of the change in
use;
g. The gross floor area of the building housing the existing non-conforming use will not be
expanded as a result of the change in use;
h. The change in use will be equally or more compatible with the character of the
neighborhood, or will otherwise be in the public interest; and
i. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may attach reasonable conditions to its approval which
would allow the applicant to satisfy the above criteria, or which would make the property more
conforming with respect to bulk and setback requirements, signs, parking, loading, lighting,
landscaping or screening.
E. Excavation
The change, expansion or continuation of non-conforming uses involving the excavation of
earth materials shall be governed by the applicable sections of Article 7, Section 7.15
Excavation of Earth Materials and the applicable provisions of RSA 155-E as amended.
11.04 Non-conforming structures
A. Repair and maintenance
Normal repairs, renovations and maintenance may be made to any non-conforming building or
structure, except as provided for in Article 11, Section 11.05, Termination of Nonconformity.
B. Structural alterations
Structural alterations of a building or structure which do not conform to the provisions of this
Ordinance may be made only if the building is being altered to conform to the requirements of
the zoning district in which it is located, or to the extent authorized by a special exception
issued under the provisions of this Article.
C. Rebuilding after catastrophe:
Any non-conforming structure that is destroyed by casualty may be rebuilt to its former extent
of non-conformance, provided that rebuilding is commenced within a one (1) year period and
completed within a two (2) year period.
D. Replacement of non-conforming single family dwelling in residential district
Any single-family residence maintained as a non-conforming structure within a residential
zoning district may be replaced with a similar structure of the same footprint dimension, or of a
larger size, provided that the enlargement or replacement does not create new
nonconformities or increase the extent of existing nonconformities with respect to setback,
height and parking requirements.
103
E. Replacement of residential accessory structures
Any non-conforming residential accessory structure such as a garage, shed, deck or porch
may be razed and replaced in its entirety provided that it is replaced in the same location, and
for the same purpose, with no expansion in the size of the structure whatsoever.
F. Temporary use of manufactured housing unit
Subject to state and town requirements for water supply and sewerage disposal, any owneroccupancy
of a residence which has been damaged by fire or other disaster may place a
manufactured home on the lot of such residence and reside therein while the residence is
being rebuilt for a maximum of twelve months from the placement of such structure or the
issuance of certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. A manufactured home which is
placed on a lot under this provision shall not attain the status of a vested non-conforming use.
[RSA 674:32, II]
G. Non-conforming signs
Non-conforming signs shall be governed by the sign regulations of this Ordinance under Article
8, Section 8.09, Status of Non-conforming Signs.
11.05 Abandonment and termination of nonconformity
A. Determination of abandonment
The voluntary discontinuance of a non-conforming use or occupancy of a non-conforming
structure shall be considered the abandonment of such use or structure. Normal, seasonal
cessation of a use, or a temporary discontinuance for purposes of maintenance, rebuilding
after damage or destruction, or for maintenance or improvements permitted under this Article,
or the active marketing of a property, shall not be included in calculating the period of
discontinuance. Any one of the following shall constitute evidence of abandonment of a nonconforming
use:
1. Failure to make a good faith effort to take the necessary steps to resume the nonconforming
use or occupancy with reasonable dispatch in the circumstances, such as
advertising and listing the property for sale or for lease; or
2. Discontinuance of the use of unimproved land, or the occupancy of a building or
structure comprising a non-conforming use for twelve (12) consecutive months, or
3. In the case of a non-conforming structure which is damaged by means out of control of
the owner, the failure to commence restoration within one (1) year, or to conclude restoration
within two (2) years from the time restoration construction is initiated.
Upon application for appeal, the ZBA may grant, for good cause, reasonable extensions of
time limits for the resumption of non-conforming uses, provided that the use will not create
hazards to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public, nor be detrimental to the use of
or out of character with the adjacent neighborhood.
B. Termination due to abandonment
104
Any non-conforming use or structure that is abandoned cannot be resumed but can be
replaced by a conforming use or structure created in compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance. The abandonment of a non-conforming use shall result in the termination of the
non-conforming status of that use. The use of the property shall thereafter conform to the
regulations of the district and the non-conforming use may not be resumed.
C. Termination due to destruction
Except for destruction as a result of casualty, or pursuant to the placement of a nonconforming
structure specifically authorized by this Article, the voluntary destruction of a nonconforming
use, building or structure shall result in the termination of its non-conforming
status.
105
ARTICLE 12. CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
12.01 Planning Board to Administer
Wherever a conditional use is authorized by this ordinance, the authority to administer or grant
conditional use permits shall be vested in the Planning Board. The duration of a conditional
use permit shall be defined by the provisions of Article 14, section 14.05 Duration of permits
and Approvals.
12.02 Application and Review Procedure
An application for a conditional use shall be initiated by filing with the Planning Board for an
application for a conditional use permit. The following procedures shall apply to the
processing of such application.
A. Procedure if Subdivision or Site Plan Approval Also Required
Where other required development approvals for a conditional use include subdivision or site
plan approval by the Planning Board, the application and review procedure for a conditional
use permit shall be made concurrently and in accordance with the procedures specified in the
Subdivision Regulations or Site Plan Regulations as applicable to the particular development.
B. Procedure if Subdivision or Site Plan Approval Not Required
Where no subdivision or site plan approval would otherwise be required for the conditional
use, the application and procedural requirements of the Site Plan Regulations shall be applied
to the application and processing of conditional use permits with respect to content of
applications, requirements for public notice, hearings and timing of decisions by the Planning
Board.
C. Procedure for minor conditional use permits
The Planning Board may authorize, by rule or on a case by case basis, an administrative
procedure for conditional use permits. Such minor CUP may be issued for:
1. Agricultural and logging operations in prime wetland buffers;
2. Construction of driveways in non-prime wetland buffers and Minimum Impact
Applications for access to single family houses on lots in existence as of January 1, 1997.
3. Such conditional use permits may be issued without a public hearing, but all other
procedural requirements, including notice to abutters, consultation with the Conservation
Commission, and the findings of Section 12.05 shall remain in effect. Appeals of the decision
on such conditional use permit applications shall be made to the Planning Board within 30
days.
12.03 Burden of Persuasion
The applicant bears the burden of persuasion, through the introduction of sufficient evidence
through testimony or otherwise, that the development, if completed as proposed, will comply
with this Article and will satisfy the specific requirements for the use contained in the
106
ordinance.
12.04 Standards of Review
In reviewing an application of a conditional use permit the Planning Board shall consider the
following information in its deliberation, as applicable to the case:
A. Specific authorization for the conditional use in Article 5, Section 5.11 Table of Use
Regulations;
B. The compliance of the development plan with the specific standards for such use
contained in the Ordinance;
C. The results of any special investigative or scientific studies prepared in association with
the proposed development;
D. Special reports or analyses of the project or its impacts prepared by the Town's
departments, its consultants, its boards or commissions;
E. The findings, goals and objectives of the Master Plan;
F. The relationship of the development to the timing, location and cost of public
improvements scheduled in the Bow Capital Improvements Program; and
G. Testimony and evidence introduced at the public hearing on the application.
12.05 Hearing and Decision
Following a public hearing on the proposed use, the Planning Board shall issue a conditional
use permit, if it finds, based on the information and testimony submitted with respect to the
application, that:
A. The use is specifically authorized by Article 5, Section 5.11 Table of Use Regulations
as a conditional use;
B. If completed as proposed by the applicant, the development in its proposed location will
comply with all requirements of this Article, and with the specific conditions or standards
established in this ordinance for the particular use;
C. The use will not materially endanger the public health or safety;
D. The use will be compatible with the neighborhood and with adjoining or abutting uses in
the area in which it is to be located;
E. The use will not have a substantial adverse impact on highway or pedestrian safety;
F. The use will not have a substantial adverse impact on the natural resources of the
town; and
G. The use will be adequately serviced by necessary public utilities and community
facilities and services of a sufficient capacity to ensure the proper operation of the proposed
107
use, and will not necessitate excessive public expenditures to provide sufficient additional
capacity or services.
12.06 Stipulations of Approval
In granting a conditional use permit, the Planning Board may attach reasonable conditions to
its approval, including but not limited to performance guarantees and the phasing of a
development, where such conditions are shown to be necessary to further the objectives of
this ordinance or the master plan, or which would otherwise allow the general conditions of this
Article to be satisfied. Representations made at a public hearing or in material submitted to
the Planning Board by an applicant to obtain a conditional use permit shall be deemed
conditions of the issuance of the permit. All other conditions of approval shall be stated in
writing in the permit. The Planning Board may require that such conditions be annotated on a
site plan or subdivision plan, or otherwise recorded at the Merrimack County Registry of
Deeds.
12.07 Appeals
Any persons aggrieved by a Planning Board decision on a conditional use permit may appeal
that decision to the superior court as provided in the manner provided by RSA 677:15. A
Planning Board decision on the issuance of a conditional use permit cannot be appealed to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment. (RSA 676:5, III).
108
ARTICLE 13. APPEALS TO THE ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
13.01 Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA)
A. Appointment and Terms
Pursuant to RSA 673, Local Land Use Boards, a ZBA shall be established, consisting of five
(5) members and up to five (5) alternate members, all appointed by the Board of Selectmen for
three (3) year terms. Alternate members may fulfill the duties and responsibilities of a regular
member when a regular member is disqualified from consideration of a particular application.
B. Organization and Rules of Procedure
On an annual basis, the ZBA shall elect a chairman and other officers from among its
membership. The ZBA shall adopt, and from time to time amend, Rules of Procedure for the
conduct of its business. The rules of procedure shall establish a regular meeting schedule so
as to allow for the expeditious consideration of appeals.
13.02 Powers and Duties of the ZBA
A. Interpretation of the Ordinance
The ZBA shall:
1. Hear and decide appeals where it alleged that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination by the Building Inspector in the administration of this
Ordinance. The ZBA may affirm or reverse such order, requirement, decision, or
determination, in whole or in part, or may modify the same;
2. Hear and render determinations on any questions relative to the meaning of the text of
this Ordinance; and
3. Hear and render determinations on any questions relative to the exact location of any
district boundary shown on the zoning map.
B. Authorization of Variances
1. Upon appeal, the ZBA may authorize a variance from the terms of this Ordinance for a
particular use, a parcel of land, an existing building, or a proposed building.
2. The ZBA may authorize a variance from this Ordinance only where it confirms in writing
all of the following:
a. Literal enforcement of the provisions of the Ordinance would result in an unnecessary
hardship. Unnecessary hardship means that, owing to special conditions of the property that
distinguish it from other properties in the area:
(1) No fair and substantial relationship exists between the general public purposes
of the Ordinance provision and the specific application of that provision to the property and
(2) the proposed use is a reasonable one.
109
(3) If the criteria in subparagraphs (1) and (2) are not established, an unnecessary
hardship will be deemed to exist if, and only if, owing to special conditions of the property that
distinguish it from other properties in the area, the property cannot be reasonably used in strict
conformance with the Ordinance, and a variance is therefore necessary to enable a
reasonable use of it.
b. Authorization of a variance will not be contrary to the public interest; and
c. The spirit of this Ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done in the
authorization of a variance; and
d. No diminution in the value of surrounding properties would be suffered as a result of the
authorization of a variance.
3. The applicant bears the burden of presenting evidence sufficient to allow the ZBA to
reach conclusions and make findings to support the authorization of a variance.
4. In authorizing a variance, the ZBA may impose such conditions and stipulations as it
deems necessary and proper in order to fulfill the purposes and intents of this Ordinance.
5. If the use or construction so authorized by a variance has not commenced within a two
(2) year period from the date of the decision, then the variance shall be deemed to have
expired and the ZBA's authorization shall be considered null and void.
6. If after commencement, a variance is abandoned for a period of two (2) years, then the
variance shall be deemed to have expired and cannot be re-established without a new
application process and affirmative decision of the ZBA.
C. Granting of Special Exceptions
1. The ZBA shall hear and decide requests for Special Exceptions that are specifically
authorized in Article 5, Use Regulations, or otherwise in this Ordinance.
2. The ZBA shall grant a request for a Special Exception only where it confirms in writing
each of the following findings:
a. The use requested is specifically authorized in the Ordinance;
b. The requested use will not create undue traffic congestion or unduly impair pedestrian
safety;
c. The requested use will not overload any public water, drainage, or sewer system or any
other municipal system, nor will there be any significant increase in storm water runoff onto
adjacent property or streets;
d. The requested use will not create excessive demand for municipal police, fire protection,
schools, or solid waste disposal services;
e. Any requirements and standards for the use as set forth in Article 7, Supplementary
Regulations and Standards for Specific Uses, of this Ordinance are fulfilled;
110
f. The requested use will not create hazards to the health, safety, or general welfare of the
public, nor be detrimental to the use of or out of character with the adjacent neighborhood;
g. The proposed location is appropriate for the requested use; and
h. The requested use is consistent with the spirit and intent of this Ordinance and the Master
Plan.
3. The applicant bears the burden of presenting evidence sufficient to allow the ZBA to
make findings required to support the granting of a Special Exception.
4. In granting a Special Exception, the ZBA may attach conditions as it deems necessary
to assure compliance with the purposes of this Ordinance. Such conditions may include but
are not limited to the following:
a. Increasing the lot size or yard dimensions;
b. Limiting the lot coverage or building height;
c. Specifying the location and limiting the number of vehicular access points to the property;
d. Requiring additional on-site parking or loading spaces;
e. Requiring additional landscaping and screening;
f. Limiting the number of occupants of a building, and the methods and times of operation of a
use;
g. Restricting the number, size, and illumination of signs;
h. Modifying the exterior appearance of a building; and
i. Providing for specific locations or layout of facilities on the property.
5. If the use or construction so authorized by the granting of a Special Exception has not
commenced within a two (2) year period from the date of the decision, then the Special
Exception shall be deemed to have expired and the ZBA's decision rendered null and void.
6. If after commencement, a Special Exception is abandoned or discontinued for a period
of two (2) years, then the Special Exception shall be deemed to have expired and cannot be
re-established without a new application process and the affirmative decision of the ZBA.
D. Equitable Waivers of Dimensional Requirements
The ZBA shall have the authority to grant equitable waivers of dimensional requirements
pursuant to the provisions and requirements of RSA 674:33-a.
13.03 Application Procedure for the ZBA
111
A. Application Fees
A non-refundable fee shall be submitted together with an application to cover the costs of the
advertising, notification, and processing of the application as well as any special investigative
studies deemed necessary by the ZBA.
B. Submission Materials
An application to the ZBA shall include a completed application form, and plans and
supplemental information as may be required for the specific type of appeal. The application
shall be filed at least fourteen (14) days before a regularly scheduled meeting of the ZBA.
C. Notification
A notice of a public hearing on an application shall be given to the applicant and to all abutters
by certified mail not less than ten (10) days before the date of the hearing. Notice shall also be
given to each member of the ZBA and a notice shall be sent to the Planning Board. A public
notice shall be placed in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Bow, not less than
ten (10) days before the date of the hearing.
D. Public Hearing
At the public hearing, the ZBA shall hear or receive oral or written testimony from the applicant
and all abutters, and any non-abutters who can demonstrate that they are directly affected by
the application upon which the hearing is being held. Representations made at the public
hearing or material submitted to the ZBA shall be deemed to be conditions of any subsequent
decision of the ZBA. The ZBA may convene or reconvene the public hearing at the site of the
proposed use in order to permit observations concerning the site to become part of the record
of the hearing and decision by the ZBA.
E. Referral to Planning Board
The ZBA shall, before taking final action on any application for a Special Exception, refer it to
the Planning Board for review and recommendation. The ZBA may, before taking final action
on any other matter, refer it to the Planning Board for review and recommendation. The action
of the Planning Board shall be reported to the ZBA within forty-five (45) days of such referral.
Any recommendation received from the Planning Board shall be disclosed at the public
hearing and shall become a part of the record of the matter. In its review, the Planning Board
shall consider the proposed use as it relates to the neighborhood and the Town, and its
conformance to the spirit and intent of the Master Plan and this Ordinance.
F. Action on the Application
The ZBA shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions, each application upon which a
hearing has been held. Action on the application may be tabled by the ZBA from the date of
the hearing to another meeting of the ZBA. A concurring vote of three members of the ZBA
shall be necessary for a decision on an application. Only members who were present at the
hearing may vote on the application.
G. Issuance of a Decision
112
Within seventy-two (72) hours after a vote on an application, a written record of the decision
shall be available for public inspection at the office of the ZBA. The record of decision shall
state whether the application was approved or denied, include any conditions if approved, and
state the reasons for the decision. A copy of the record of decision shall be sent to the
applicant by first class mail, and copies shall be made available to the Building Inspector and
the Planning Board. Following the 30 day time limit for appeals and within 90 days of the final
decision, including decisions on Rehearing or Appeals to Superior Court, the applicant shall
record the notice of decision at the Merrimack County Registry of Deeds. Within ten (10) days
of the recordation, the applicant shall provide a certified copy of the recorded notice of decision
to the Zoning Administrator. No action authorized by an application to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall commence until the certified copy of the recorded notice of decision has been
received by the Zoning Administrator. If an application is disapproved, the Zoning Board of
Adjustment may direct the Zoning Administrator to record the notice of decision.
H. Rehearing
Within thirty (30) days after a decision of the ZBA, any party to the action or any person
directly affected thereby may apply for a rehearing in respect to any matter determined in the
decision, and must specify such grounds in the motion for rehearing. The ZBA may grant a
rehearing if, in the opinion of the ZBA, there is good reason for such based on the motion.
I. Appeal to Superior Court
No appeal from any decision of the ZBA may be taken to the Superior Court unless the
appellant has first made application for a rehearing as provided above.
113
ARTICLE 14. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
14.01 Administrative Official
A. Building Inspector
The Town Manager shall appoint a Building Inspector to administer, interpret and enforce the
provisions of the Town of Bow Building Code. In the absence of the Building Inspector, these
duties will be performed by the Town Manager or designee. The Chief of Police, Fire Chief
and Town Health Officer, or their respective departments shall comply with the reasonable
requests of the Building Inspector for assistance and cooperation in the administration and
enforcement of the Town of Bow Building Code.
1. The Town of Bow Building Code includes the State of New Hampshire Building Code
as contained within NH RSA 155-A, as may be amended by the State of NH.
a. Additions and Amendments to the Bow Building Code. In addition to the State
of New Hampshire Building Code, the following additions and amendments shall apply within
the Town of Bow.
From the International Residential Code (IRC):
SECTION R310 EMERGENCY ESCAPE AND RESCUE OPENINGS
R310.1. Emergency escape and rescue required. Basements and every sleeping room
shall have at least one operable emergency and rescue opening. Such opening shall open
directly into a public street, public alley, yard, or court. Where basements contain one or more
sleeping rooms, emergency egress and rescue openings shall be required in each sleeping
room, but shall not be required in adjoining areas of the basement. Where emergency escape
and rescue openings are provided they shall have a sill height of not more than 44 inches
(1118 mm) above the floor. In newly constructed buildings where a door opening having a
threshold below the adjacent ground elevation serves as an emergency escape and rescue
opening, a bulkhead enclosure and bulkhead door shall not be permitted. Homes constructed
after the effective date of this ordinance shall have an at-grade basement access, other than
through a garage, in the form an enclosed structure with an at-grade, vertical hung door
opening inward. All other aspects of the access shall conform to the applicable building code.
In an existing building where the basement is renovated to create habitable space, the
bulkhead enclosure shall comply with Section R310.3. The net clear opening dimensions
required by this section shall be obtained by the normal operation of the emergency escape
and rescue opening from the inside. Emergency escape and rescue openings with a finished
sill height below the adjacent ground elevation shall be provided with a window well in
accordance with Section R310.2. Emergency escape and rescue openings shall open directly
into a public way, or to a yard or court that opens to a public way.
Exception: Basements used only to house mechanical equipment and not exceeding total
floor area of 200 square feet (18.58 Square Meters).
From the International Residential Code:
SECTION R313 SMOKE ALARMS and CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTORS R313.2.1.
Alterations, repairs, or additions. When alterations, repairs, or additions requiring a permit
occur, or when one or more sleeping rooms are added or created in existing dwellings, the
individual dwelling unit shall be equipped with smoke alarms and carbon monoxide detectors
located as required for new dwellings, and the smoke alarms and carbon monoxide detectors
114
shall be interconnected and hardwired, except as provided below.
Exceptions:
Interconnection and hardwiring of smoke alarms and carbon monoxide detectors in existing
buildings where the alterations or repairs do not otherwise require the removal of interior wall
and ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is reasonable alternative access to
allow the hardwiring and interconnection to occur.
POTABLE WATER TEST RESULTS.
Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for any dwelling supplied by a private well
system, the owner shall certify that the water supply is potable and submit to the Building
Inspector the water quality test results for the NHDES recommended Standard Analysis as
stated in Environmental Fact Sheet WD-DWGB-2-1 dated 2011, as may be amended.
B. Zoning Administrator
The Town Manager shall appoint, with the recommendation of the Planning Board, a Zoning
Administrator to administer, interpret and enforce the provisions of the Town of Bow Zoning
Ordinance. In the absence of the Zoning Administrator, these duties will be performed by the
Town Manager or designee. The Chief of Police, Fire Chief and Town Health Officer, or their
respective departments shall comply with the reasonable requests of the Zoning Administrator
for assistance and cooperation in the administration and enforcement of the Town of Bow
Zoning Ordinance.
C. Enforcing Authority
1. The duty of administering and enforcing the provisions of the currently adopted Town of
Bow Building Code, which includes the State of New Hampshire Building Code as contained
within NH RSA 155-A, as may be amended from time to time, is hereby conferred upon the
Town Building Inspector or his duly authorized agent.
2. The duty of administering and enforcing the provisions of the currently adopted Town of
Bow Zoning Ordinance is hereby conferred upon the Town Zoning Administrator or his duly
authorized agent. A written record shall be kept of all interpretations of the Town of Bow
Zoning Ordinance by the Zoning Administrator. This record shall be kept as a public document
to insure consistency in the application of this ordinance.
14.02 Permits Required
A. New buildings and structures
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, reconstruct, renovate, add to, or alter a
structure or non-exempt sign without applying for and receiving from the Building Inspector a
building permit in compliance with the Town of Bow, NH Building and Permit Ordinance.
B. Change in use or modification of buildings and structures
It shall be unlawful for any person to change the use or lot coverage, or extend or displace the
use of any building, structure or lot without applying for and receiving all applicable approvals
from the Planning Board and/or the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
115
C. Approvals required prior to building permit
No building permit shall be issued until all other required approvals are secured by the
applicant. Such approvals may include, but shall not be limited to Special Exception,
Variance, conditional use permit, site plan approval, or subdivision approval. Verification of
compliance with such approvals and all associated conditions imposed pursuant to the
approvals and with all provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, Site Plan Review Regulations,
Subdivision Regulations, and Building Code shall be made by the Building Inspector prior to
issuance of a building permit.
14.03 Content of Application
An application for a Building Permit shall be accompanied by all materials required for building
permit applications by the Town of Bow, NH Building and Permit Ordinance, including a plot
plan showing all lot and required yard dimensions, lot coverage, the site and location of all
buildings and uses, driveway locations, and all other such information as may be required by
the Building Inspector to process said applications. The proposed handling of water supply
and sewerage disposal shall be described on all applications and shown on the plot plan. To
assure proper recording and filing of an application, the applicant shall submit at least one
copy of the plot plan on a sheet or sheets of a dimension not larger than eleven (11) inches by
seventeen (17) inches.
14.04 Previously Approved Permit
Nothing in this Ordinance shall require changes in the plans, construction and/or use of any
structure and/or lot for which a lawful permit has been issued or otherwise lawfully authorized
within one (1) year before the effective date of this Ordinance, or before the amendment
affecting such use or structure, provided such construction or use shall be actively started
within sixty (60) days and completed within one (1) year of the effective date of this Ordinance
or applicable amendment.
14.05 Duration of Permits and Approvals
A. Building permit
In cases where construction, erection, alteration, excavation, demolition or similar work has
been authorized by a building permit, such permit shall automatically expire if:
1. The work has not commenced within a period of one (1) year; or
2. The work has not been completed within a period of two (2) years.
3. Extension. Prior to expiration of the above time limits, the applicant may petition the
Building Inspector for one extension of not more than six (6) months to the time limits of either
1. or 2. above. Such petition shall be in writing and state the reason(s) for the extension
request and include the applicable fee as determined by the Board of Selectmen. Upon review
of request, the Building Inspector shall either grant or deny such request within five (5)
business days. A denial may only be due to a nuisance, safety or health reason.
B. Special Exceptions, Variances, and Conditional Use Permits
116
With the exception of approvals for excavation (which are granted for a duration of three (3) to
five (5) years pursuant to Article 7, Section 7.14 Excavation of Earth Materials), Conditional
Use Permits issued by the Planning Board or Special Exceptions and Variances issued by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall automatically expire two (2) years after the date of approval
if at that time:
1. The conditions of approval have not been met; or
2. Any related state or local permit or approval is outstanding; or
3. The action authorized by the land use board(s) has not commenced.
14.06 Certificate of Use and Occupancy
A. Certificate required
It shall be unlawful to occupy any structure or lot for which a building permit is required herein
without the owner applying for and receiving from the Building Inspector a certificate of use
and/or occupancy. Certificates of Occupancy may be applied for coincidentally with the
application for a building permit, and shall not be issued until the lawful erection or alteration of
the building is complete. A Certificate of Occupancy shall be required for any of the following
in conformity with the Building Code and this Ordinance:
1. Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or structural alteration requiring a
building permit.
2. Change in use of an existing building or land to a use of a different zoning classification
in the Article 5, Section 5.11 Table of Use Regulations (whether or not said use is permitted by
right).
B. Verification of Compliance
Verification of compliance with approvals and all associated conditions imposed pursuant to
the approvals referenced in Article 14, Section 14.02, Permits Required shall be made by the
Building Inspector, the Town Planner and the Fire Chief, prior to issuance of a certificate of
use and occupancy by the Building Inspector. The Certificate of Occupancy shall state that
the building and use comply with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, Site Plan Review
Regulations, Subdivision Regulations, and of the Building Code of the Town of Bow in effect at
the time of issuance. No such certificate shall be issued unless the building and its use and its
accessory uses and the uses of all premises are in conformity with the provisions of this
Ordinance, the Site Plan Review Regulations, the Subdivision Regulations, and the Building
Code at the time of issuance. A Certificate of Occupancy shall also be conditional on
compliance with provision of adequate parking spaces and other facilities as required by this
Ordinance, or by the specific conditions attached to an approval by the land use boards of the
town, and shall lapse if such provisions or conditions have not been effected by the applicant.
Prior to the above described verification of compliance by Town officials, the applicant for a
Certificate of Occupancy shall submit an Affidavit of Compliance to the Building Inspector. The
Affidavit shall be signed by the property owner or authorized representative and include copies
of applicable Notices of Decision. The Affidavit shall state that all requirements of the
ordinance, regulations, and code listed in the paragraph above and conditions of approval by
117
the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment have been addressed. In the event that
all items have not been completed, the applicant may request and the Building Inspector may
grant a temporary Certificate of Occupancy. For multi-family and all non-residential
development subject to Site Plan Review approval, such temporary Certificate of Occupancy
shall be subject to the following. The applicant shall submit an Affidavit citing all incomplete
items, provide a time frame for completion, and submit an independent estimate of the costs to
complete said requirements and conditions. The applicant shall provide a cash escrow, or a
savings bank deposit book properly endorsed to the Town and deposited with it, a
Performance Guarantee in the form of a bond issued by a surety company registered and
licensed to do business in the State of New Hampshire, a Letter of Credit or other collateral or
surety arrangement, all in form and substance satisfactory to the Board of Selectmen. The
Performance Guarantee shall be in an amount equal to 125% of the estimate of the costs to
complete requirements and conditions.
14.07 Violations
A. Complaints about prohibited use
Any person who desires that the Town take action to cure a use of land that is noxious,
offensive or detrimental to the public or the owners or occupants of adjacent property or
prejudicial to the general welfare of the community or otherwise prohibited by this Ordinance
must file a signed written complaint with the Building Inspector, who shall process such
complaint under the provisions of this Article. The Building Inspector shall acknowledge
receipt of such complaint within two weeks.
B. Notice and Order
The Building Inspector shall serve a Notice of Violation and Order to the owner or to any other
person responsible for the erection, construction, reconstruction, conversion, alteration of a
structure or change in use, increase in intensity of use, or extension or displacement of use of
any structure or lot in violation of any approved plan, information or drawing pertinent thereto;
or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Ordinance. Such
order shall direct the immediate discontinuance of the unlawful action, use or condition and the
abatement of the violation.
C. Owner to secure site from hazards
Any owner who has been served with a Notice of Violation and Order and ceases any work or
other activity, shall not leave any structure or lot in such a condition as to be a hazard or
menace to the public health, safety or general welfare.
D. Prosecution of violation
If the Notice of Violation and Order is not complied with promptly, the Selectmen shall institute
the appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity to prevent any unlawful action, use or
condition and to restrain, correct, or abate such violation.
E. Penalties
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance, shall for each
violation, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine in accordance with RSA 676:17 I (b) of Two
118
Hundred Seventy-five Dollars ($275) for the first day that a violation is permitted to exist after
receipt of a Notice to remove the same. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate
offense. For each day that such violation is found to continue after the conviction date or after
the date on which the violator receives written notice from the municipality that the violator is in
violation, whichever is earlier, such person, firm or corporation shall pay a fine of Five Hundred
Fifty Dollars ($550).
F. Imminent Hazards
Notwithstanding the above procedures, when the Board of Selectmen or Health Officer
determines that a structure or use poses an imminent hazard to public health or safety, the
Board of Selectmen or Health Officer may issue a cease and desist order or initiate other
appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity to address the imminent hazard.
14.08 Land Use Fees
All land use fees including building permits, certificates of occupancy and other fees
associated with the Bow Zoning Ordinance or Building Code shall be established by schedules
adopted by the Selectmen.
14.09 Conflict of Laws
The more restrictive standard shall apply whenever the provisions of this ordinance differ from
those prescribed by any statute, regulation or restriction.
119
ARTICLE 15. BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
The Business Development District Ordinance is published separately.
ARTICLE 16. IMPACT FEES AND METHODOLOGY REPORTS
The Impact Fee Ordinance and the Methodology Reports adopted by the Planning Board are
published separately.

i
INDEX
Subject Section Page
Abandonment and termination of nonconformity …………………………………………….. 11.05..…………… .103
Accessory Buildings …………………………………………………………………………………………… 7.15 ……………... 60
Accessory Dwelling Units (In-Law Apartment) …………………………………………………… 7.04 ……………… 33
Adult Oriented Businesses ………………………………….…………………………………………….. 7.11………………. 50
Affidavit of Compliance ……………………………………….……………………………………………. 14.06B ………….. 116
Animal Hospital ………………………………….……………………………………………………………… 7.09……. ............39
Animals - Grazing, Care, Raising, or Keeping of Livestock……………………………………. 7.18...................61
Application Procedures - Zoning Board of Adjustment ………………………………………. 13.03…. .............110
Aquifer Protection (AP) District, Purpose………………………………….………………………… 4.01…… .............10
Aquifer Protection District, Conditional Uses………………………………….…………………… 10.03G. .............95
Aquifer Protection District, Non-Conforming Structures and Uses……………………… 10.03H. .............96
Aquifer Protection District, Permitted Uses in ………………………………….………………… 10.03E..…………. .95
Aquifer Protection District, Prohibited Uses in………………………………….………………… 10.03F.. .............95
Boat, Outdoor Storage of………………………………….………………………………………………… 7.17……. ............61
Buffer Signs - Open Space Residential Development………………………………….………. 7.02C3 .............30
Buffer Signs - Wetlands………………………………….…………………………………………………… 10.01B4 ............77
Building Permits………………………………….……………………………………………………………… 14.02…. .............114
Business Subdivision, Planned…. ………………………………….……………………………………… 7.23…… .............64
Business Development District………………………………….………………………………………… Published Separately
Campgrounds………………………………….………………………………………………………………….. 7.21…… .............63
Camping Trailer, Outdoor Storage of………………………………….……………………………… 7.17…… .............61
Cellular Phone Towers………………………………….……………………………………………………. 7.10…… .............39
Certificate of Use and Occupancy………………………………….…………………………………… 14.06…. .............116
Change of Use………………………………….………………………………………………………………… 5.09…… .............15
Complaints Regarding Prohibited Use………………………………….…………………………….. 14.07A. .............117
Conditional Use Permits - Application and Review Procedure ............................... 12.02.................105
Cottage Industry (Home Business) .......................................................................... 7.07...................37
Conflict of Laws………………………………….………………………………………………………………. 14.09.................118
Copyright Restrictions………………………………….…………………………………………………….. 2.11...................2
Day Care Centers………………………………….…………………………………………………………….. 7.08...................39
Definitions………………………………….………………………………………………………………………. Article 3 ............3
Destruction, Termination due to..………………………………….…………………………………… 11.05C ..............103
Dimensional Regulations………………………………….………………………………………………… Article 6 ............26
Districts, Overlay & Zoning………………………………….……………………………………………… 4.01...................10
Driveways………………………………….……………………………………………………………………….. 6.06...................27
Driveway Setback………………………………….……………………………………………………………. 6.07...................28
Duplex Dwellings………………………………….…………………………………………………………….. 7.05...................34
Elderly Dwellings………………………………….…………………………………………………………….. 7.05...................34
Excavation of Earth Materials………………………………….…………………………………………. 7.14...................54
Farm Produce Stand………………………………….……………………………………………………….. 7.15B ................60
Fees, Land Use………………………………….………………………………………………………………… 14.08.................118
Flood Levels (100-year) in the Floodplain District, Determination of…………………... 10.02E ...............89
Floodplain (F) District, Buildings within the………………………………….……………………… 10.02C5 ............87
Floodplain (F) District, Purpose………………………………….…………………………………………4.01B2 .............11
ii
Height Limit………………………………….……………………………………………………………………. 6.05...................27
Heliports………………………………….…………………………………………………………………………. 7.19...................63
Home Occupation………………………………….…………………………………………………………… 7.06...................36
Horses, Care and Keeping of………………………………….…………………………………………… 7.18...................61
Impact Fees and Methodology Reports………………………………….…………………………… Published Separately
Industrial and Utility Uses………………………………….……………………………………………….. 7.12………………. 53
In-Law Apartment (Accessory Dwelling Units) ………………………………….………………… 7.04………………. 33
Junk Yard……………………………………………………………………………………………………………..7.17………………. 61
Kennel, Commercial………………………………….………………………………………………………… 7.09………………. 39
Livestock, Grazing, Care, Raising, or Keeping of………………………………………………….. 7.18………………. 61
Lot Coverage, Maximum ………………………………….……………………………………………….. 6.04………………. 27
Lot Frontage, Minimum………………………………….………………………………………………….. 6.02………………. 26
Lot Size, Minimum………………………………….………………………………………………………….. 6.01………………. 26
Lots Recorded Prior to the Adoption of this Ordinance………………………………………. 2.09……………….. 2
Manufactured Housing Parks………………………………….………………………………………….. 7.03………………. 32
Maximum Lot Coverage………………………………….………………………………………………….. 6.04………………. 27
Maximum Number of Stories and Height of Structures………………………………………. 6.05……………….. 27
Meteorological (met) Towers………………………………….………………………………………….. 7.25………………. 64
Minimum Lot Frontage………………………………….…………………………………………………… 6.02………………. 26
Minimum Lot Size………………………………….…………………………………………………………… 6.01………………. 26
Minimum Yard Requirements (Setbacks)……………………………………………………………. 6.03………………. 26
Modification to Buildings and Structures Required Permit…………………………………. 14.02…………….. 113
Multi-Family Dwellings………………………………….……………………………………………………. 7.05……………….. 34
Multiple Principal Uses on a Single Lot………………………………….…………………………… 5.10……………….. 15
New Building and Structures Required Permit …………………………………………………. 14.02…………….. 113
Non-Conforming Lots………………………………….……………………………………………………… 11.02…………….. 100
Non-Conforming Structures………………………………….……………………………………………. 11.04…………….. 102
Non-Conforming Uses………………………………….…………………………………………………….. 11.03…………….. 101
Nonconformity due to Abandonment………………………………….……………………………… 11.05……………… 103
Nuisance Provisions………………………………….………………………………………………………… 2.10……………….. 2
Off-Site Parking Allowed by Special Exception……………………………………………………. 7.22……………….. 63
Off-Street Parking Regulations………………………………….…………………………………………Article 9…………. 76
Open Space Residential Development………………………………….……………………………. 7.02………………. 29
Open Space Residential Development Buffer Signs………………………………….………… 7.02C3…………… 30
Parking Regulations, Off-street………………………………….……………………………………….. Article 9…………. 76
Parking of Tractor Trailers or Trucks………………………………….……………………………….. 7.06I2……………. 36
Parking, Off-Site, Allowed by Special Exception………………………………….………………. 7.22……………….. 63
Performance Guarantee………………………………….…………………………………………………. 14.06B…………… 116
Permit, Previously Approved ………………………………….………………………………………….. 14.04……………… 115
Permits Required………………………………….……………………………………………………………. 14.02……………… 113
Permits, Duration of………………………………….……………………………………………………….. 14.05……………… 115
Personal Wireless Towers………………………………….……………………………………………….. 7.10……………….. 39
Planned Business Subdivision………………………………….…………………………………………. 7.23………………. 64
Previously Approved Permit………………………………….……………………………………………. 14.04…………….. 115
Prime Wetlands………………………………….……………………………………………………………… 10.01C…………… 77
Produce Stand………………………………….………………………………………………………………… 7.15………………. 60
Radio Tower………………………………….……………………………………………………………………. 7.10………………. 39
Recreational Vehicle, Outdoor Storage of ………………………………….……………………… 7.17………………. 61
Reproduction Restrictions………………………………….………………………………………………. 2.11……………….. 2
iii
Sawmills and Similar Uses………………………………….……………………………………………….. 7.13………………. 54
Screening Standards………………………………….……………………………………………………….. 7.16……………….. 60
Setbacks (Yard Requirements), Minimum………………………………….………………………. 6.03……………….. 26
Sexually Oriented Businesses………………………………….………………………………………….. 7.11……………….. 50
Sign Area Computation………………………………….…………………………………………………… 8.05……………….. 72
Sign Regulations………………………………….……………………………………………………………… Article 8…………. 70
Signs Allowed and Exempted from Permit Requirements…………………………………… 8.03……………….. 71
Signs, Buffer - Open Space Residential Development…………………………………………. 7.02C3…………… 30
Signs, Buffer- Wetlands………………………………………………………………………………………. 10.01B4…………. 77
Signs Permitted by Conditional Use Permit in Non-Residential Districts…………….. 8.10………………. 74
Signs Permitted in Non-Residential Districts………………………………………………………. 8.08………………. 73
Signs Permitted in Residential Districts ………………………………….…………………………… 8.07………………. 73
Signs Prohibited Under This Ordinance………………………………….…………………………… 8.06……………….. 72
Small Wind Energy Systems………………………………….…………………………………………….. 7.25……………….. 64
Special Exceptions, Granting of - Zoning Board of Adjustment……………………………. 13.02C…………… 108
Storage of Vehicles………………………………….…………………………………………………………. 7.06I……………… 35
Stories Limit………………………………….……………………………………………………………………. 6.05………………. 27
Subdivision, Planned Business ………………………………….………………………………………… 7.23………………. 64
Subsurface Disposal Systems in Wetlands Conservation District………………………… 10.01G………….. 82
Termination due to Abandonment………………………………….…………………………………. 11.05B…………… 103
Termination due to Destruction………………………………….……………………………………… 11.05C…………… 104
Tower, Radio/TV………………………………….……………………………………………………………… 7.10……………….. 39
Trucks/Tractor Trailer Parking………………………………….…………………………………………. 7.06I2……………. 36
TV Tower………………………………….………………………………………………………………………… 7.10………………. 39
Unregistered Motor Vehicles………………………………….………………………………………….. 7.17……………….. 61
Uses Not Permitted………………………………….………………………………………………………… 5.06……………….. 14
Uses Permitted by Conditional Use Permit…………………………………………………………. 5.03……………….. 14
Uses Permitted by Right………………………………….………………………………………………….. 5.01……………….. 14
Uses Permitted by Special Exception………………………………….……………………………… 5.02……………….. 14
Uses, Non-Conforming ………………………………….………………………………………………….. 11.03……………... 101
Utility and Industrial Uses………………………………….………………………………………………. 7.12………………. 53
Variance Authorization - Zoning Board of Adjustment ………………………………………. 13.02B…………… 109
Vehicle Storage, Prohibited………………………………….…………………………………………….. 7.06I……………… 36
Vernal Pools………………………………….……………………………………………………………………. 10.01D………….. 79
Violations………………………………….……………………………………………………………………….. 14.07……………… 111
Water Supplies, Location of Privately Owned…………………………………………………….. 7.20……………….. 63
Well Setbacks………………………………….…………………………………………………………………. 7.20………………. 63
Wetland Buffer Signs………………………………….………………………………………………………. 10.01B4………… 77
Wetlands, Buffers to ………………………………….………………………………………………………. 10.01D………….. 79
Wetlands Conservation (WC) District, Purpose………………………………………………….. 4.01B1…………… 11
Wetlands Conservation District, Prohibited Uses……………………………………………….. 10.01E…………… 80
Wetlands Conservation District, Subsurface Disposal Systems……………………………. 10.01G………….. 82
Wetland Conservation District, Table of Uses…………………………………………………….. 10.01E…………… 80
Wetlands, Setbacks ………………………………….………………………………………………………… 10.01D………….. 79
Wind Towers………………………………….………………………………………………………………….. 7.25………………. 64
Zoning Board of Adjustment - Application Procedures……………………………………….. 13.03…………….. 110
Zoning Map………………………………….……………………………………………………………………. 4.02………………. 12
S U B D I V I S I O N
R E G U L A T I O N S
T O W N o f B O W , N E W H A M P S H I R E
October 22, 2015
ADOPTION AND REVISIONS
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Bow Planning Board by the voters of the Town of
Bow and in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 675, Section 6, (formerly Chapter
36, Sections 19-29), New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, 1955, as amended,
the Bow Planning Board adopts the following Regulations governing the subdivision and
development of land in the Town of Bow, New Hampshire.
March 8, 1960 Town Meeting authorized the Planning Board to regulate Subdivision of
Land per Warrant Article 16.
May 18, 1967 Subdivision Regulations originally adopted by the Planning Board.
Amendments:
August 17, 1972
March 7, 1974
February 5, 1976
August 2, 1979
February 3, 1983
July 28, 1988 (Comprehensive Revision)
March 30, October 5, and November 2, 1989
July 5, 1990
February 7, 1991
February 6, 1992
April 1 and July 8, 1993
January 6, April 7, and August 4, 1994
September 1, 1994
November 7, 1996
February 5 and August 6, 1998
December 19, 2002 and February 6, 2003
March 4, 2004
May 5, 2005
February 4 and March 25, 2010
January 16, 2014
October 22, 2015
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS; TOWN OF BOW, NH
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section Page
1.00 Authority and Title 1
2.00 Definitions 2
3.00 General Requirements 7
01. Subdivider's Responsibility 7
02. All Subdivisions 7
03. Major Subdivisions 12
04. Special Requirements 14
05. Fees for Offsite Improvements 16
06. Open Space - Residential Development 17
4.00 Procedure 18
01. Preliminary Conceptual Consultation 18
02. Preliminary Design Review Procedure
deleted 7/5/90
03. Preliminary Application 19
04. Expedited Review 22
05. Final Application 23
06. Expenses and Fees 25
07. Modification of Approvals 26
5.00 Non-Residential Development 27
6.00 Plat Details 28
01. Preliminary Conceptual Consultation 28
02. Preliminary Design Review
deleted 7/5/90
03. Preliminary Plat 28
04. Final Plat 33
05. Yield Plan 35
06. Record Drawings (as-Builts) 37
7.00 Required Improvements 38
01. Private and Public Streets 38
02. Drainage 40
03. Topsoil Protection 41
04. Monuments 41
05. Water and Sewer Facilities 41
06. Winter Conditions 43
07. Time Limit to Complete 43
8.00 Design Standards 44
01. Streets 44
02. Blocks 47
03. Lots 47
04. Easements 48
05. Utilities 48
06. Storm Drainage 49
9.00 Inspections and Performance Guarantee 51
01. Performance and Inspection of Work 51
02. Performance Guarantee 52
03. Maintenance of Improvements and Facilities 54
10.00 Compliance with Regulations - Penalties 55
11.00 Waivers 56
12.00 Amendments 57
13.00 Appeals 58
14.00 Appendices 59
A. Flow Chart 60
B. Typical Sections for Roads 61
C. Record Drawings 71
INDEX
1
Section 1.00 - Authority and Title:
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Bow Planning Board by the voters of the Town of
Bow under Revised Statutes Annotated (RSA) 674:35 and in accordance with the
provisions of RSA 674:36, as amended, the Bow Planning Board adopts the following
Regulations governing the subdivision and development of land in the Town of Bow,
New Hampshire, such Regulations to be known as the "Subdivision Regulations of the
Town of Bow".
2
Section 2.00 - Definitions:
2.01 Abutter: Any person whose property is located in New Hampshire and either (a)
adjoins or is directly across the street or stream from or (b) is within two hundred
(200) feet of the land under consideration by the Board. Professionals whose
stamp appears on documents submitted to the Board and holders of
conservation easements on abutting properties shall be notified as abutters. For
purposes of receiving testimony only, and not for purposes of notification, the
terms "abutter" shall include any person who is able to demonstrate that his land
will be directly affected by the proposal under consideration. For purposes of
receipt of notification by the Board of a hearing, in the case of an abutting
property being under a condominium or other collective form of ownership, the
term "abutter" means the officers of the collective or association, as defined in
RSA 356-B:3, XXIII.
2.02 Applicant: Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership or
corporation, trust or other legal entity commencing proceedings under these
Regulations to effect a Subdivision of land or Lot Line Adjustment hereunder for
himself or for another.
2.03 Application: Any Preliminary or Final Application.
2.04 Area of Special Flood Hazard: Any area designated as an Area of Special Flood
Hazard on the Town of Bow Flood Insurance Rate Map, as adopted by the Board
of Selectmen.
2.05 Board: The Planning Board of the Town of Bow, New Hampshire.
2.06 Buildable Land: All land except that which is defined or described as Unsuitable
for Subdivision or Building Purposes in Sections 3.02H or 8.03F of these
Regulations.
2.07 Checklist: The list of information which must appear on a Plat and materials
which must accompany an Application, which list must be completed, initialed
and filed by the Applicant at the time of filing an Application.
2.08 Comprehensive Plan: The Master Plan for the Town of Bow of 1992, as it may
be amended from time to time.
2.09 Concept Plat or Plan: A preliminary concept plan of a proposed Subdivision
which satisfies the provisions of Section 6.01 of these regulations.
2.10 Condominium: The form of ownership of real property, and any interests therein,
lawfully submitted to the provisions of RSA 356-B, in which individual owners
own or lease separate units but together, or through an owners' association, own
the common areas appurtenant to the units.
2.11 Drainage Right-of-Way: Land required for the installation of storm water sewers
or drainage ditches, or required along a natural stream or watercourse for
3
preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water therein to secure
safety from flood damage and to preserve natural amenity.
2.12 Engineer: The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Bow or appointed agent.
2.13 Final Application: The filing by an Applicant of a Final Application Form and all
other documents and information described in Section 4.05A.
2.14 Final Application Form: The form provided by the Board to be submitted by an
Applicant to request approval of a Final Plat.
2.15 Final Plat or Plan: The Final Plat of a Subdivision which is presented to the
Planning Board for final approval in accordance with Section 4.05 of these
Regulations, which complies with Section 6.04 of these regulations and which, if
approved, shall be filed with the Registrar of Deeds of Merrimack County.
2.16 High Intensity Soil Survey: A study or survey of the soil types and characteristics
of a plot or parcel of land which describes and defines the soil properties and soil
types of the parcel in accordance with the Standards for a High Intensity Soil
Map which are adopted from time to time by the Society of Soil Scientists of
Northern New England or comparable standards of other comparable
professional organization.
2.17 Lot: The whole area of a single parcel of land, a tract, plot or portion of a
subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building development. A lot is
an area with ascertainable boundaries in single or joint ownership, undivided by a
street, established by deed(s) of record or a segment of land ownership defined
by lot boundary lines on an approved subdivision plan.
2.18 Non-Residential Development: Any development, use or change in use of land
other than single or two-family residential development, whether or not such
development includes a Subdivision or Resubdivision of the land.
2.19 Official Map: The official Town map adopted in accordance with RSA 674:10
(formerly RSA 36:16-18) as amended. Such a map shall be deemed to be
conclusive with respect to the location and width of Streets and the location of
public parks shown thereon.
2.20 Performance Guarantee: Any security, including performance bonds issued by a
State of NH-approved bonding company, escrow agreements, Letters of Credit,
and other similar collateral or surety agreements, which may be accepted by the
Town in lieu of a requirement that a Subdivider complete certain improvements
before the Board or other Town body approves a Plat.
2.21 Planned Unit Development and Cluster Development: A Subdivision which is
planned and developed as a unified whole according to comprehensive and
detailed plans, including plans as to the location of Streets, utilities, public and
common open spaces, common facilities, lots or building sites, and according to
4
comprehensive design principles for all buildings and improvements intended to
be located, constructed and used in the Subdivision. Development may occur in
a single phase or a programmed series of phases. All of the Subdivision
including common facilities shall be managed for the common benefit of the
residents of the development.
2.22 Plat or Plan: A map or plan of a Subdivision.
2.23 Preliminary Application: The filing by an Applicant of a Preliminary Application
Form and all other documents and information described in Section 4.03B of
these Regulations.
2.24 Preliminary Application Form: The form provided by the Board to be submitted
by an Applicant to request consideration of a Preliminary Plat.
2.25 Preliminary Plat or Plan: A Plat of a Subdivision complying with the provisions of
Sections 6.03 of these Regulations.
2.26 Request for Preliminary Conceptual Consultation: A Subdivider's request for
non-binding discussions with the Board filed pursuant to Section 4.01 of these
Regulations.
2.27 Resubdivision: A change in a map of an approved or recorded Subdivision plat if
such change affects any street layout on such map or area reserved thereon for
public use, or any lot line; or if it affects any map or plan legally recorded prior to
the adoption of any regulations controlling Subdivisions.
2.28 Site Plan Review: The review by this Board of an Applicant's plans for Nonresidential
Development pursuant to the Site Plan Review Regulations.
2.29 Site Plan Review Regulations: The Site Review Regulations for Bow, New
Hampshire.
2.30 Street: Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, alley, viaduct, highway,
freeway and other public roadway. For the purposes of these Regulations
"streets" shall be further divided into the following classifications:
2.30.01 Arterial Street (Class A): An inter-community thoroughfare
designed primarily for high volume traffic movement throughout the
community and beyond.
2.30.02 Collector Street (Class B): A street providing a lower level of traffic
service than an arterial street and which is designed to provide
access between and among areas of the community.
2.30.03 Local Street (Class C): A residential street having the primary
function of providing direct access to adjoining properties; such
street not being designed to provide for traffic service between and
among areas of the community. Class C streets shall not be built in
5
areas with the potential of serving more than fifty (50) units or of
serving any commercial facilities.
2.30.04 Private Street: A Street open to the public that is maintained by a
private entity.
2.31 Subdivider: Any Applicant who has or who intends to request the Board to
approve a Subdivision or Lot Line Adjustment.
2.32 Subdivision:
2.32.01 "Subdivision" means the division of the lot, tract, or parcel of land
into two (2) or more lots, plats, sites, or other divisions of land for
the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, rent, lease,
condominium conveyance, conversion to condominium form of
ownership, or building development. It includes Resubdivision and,
when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of
subdividing or to the land or territory subdivided.
2.32.02 The division of a parcel of land held in common and subsequently
divided into parts among the several owners shall be deemed a
subdivision under this title.
2.32.03 The grant of an easement in gross to a public utility for the purpose
of placing and maintaining overhead and underground facilities
necessary for its transmission or distribution network such as poles,
wires, cable, conduit, manholes, repeaters and supporting
apparatus, including any unmanned structure which is less than two
hundred (200) square feet, shall not be deemed to create any new
division of land for any other purpose.
2.32.04 Lot Line Adjustment: A minor adjustment of the location of the
boundary between two or more Lots which results in no new Lots,
which involves no construction of new Streets or other public
improvements, and which is not a Resubdivision.
2.32.05 Major Subdivision: Any Subdivision not classified as a Minor
Subdivision.
2.32.06 Minor Subdivision: Any Subdivision which creates three (3) or
fewer lots or condominium units with no potential for future
subdivision, which would result in an aggregate number of greater
than three (3) lots, which does not require the construction of any
new Street or the extension of municipal facilities, and which is not
in conflict with any duly accepted or approved Street, plan or map.
For the purposes of determining the applicable requirements of
these Regulations, a Lot Line Adjustment shall be deemed to be a
Minor Subdivision.
6
2.33 Substantially Complete: The Select Board has the authority of RSA 676:12 V to
determine the point at which a road has been constructed to a standard of
Substantially Complete such that buildings, which depend on such new road for
frontage or access, may be used or occupied.
2.34 Turnaround - Permanent: The permanent termination of a Street that will not, or
cannot, be extended. This classification shall be made by the Planning Board
after initial review and consultation.
2.35 Turnaround - Temporary: The area constructed at the termination point of any
street which, in the foreseeable future, will be extended, either further onto the
developer/owner's holdings or onto abutting properties. This classification shall
be made by the Planning Board after initial review and consultation.
7
Section 3.00 - General Requirements:
3.01 Subdivider's Responsibility: It is the responsibility of each Subdivider or
Applicant to read and follow these Regulations. If a Subdivider or Applicant does
not fully understand the Regulations, it is his or her responsibility to seek the
advice and counsel of Town officials, agents, or other qualified persons.
3.02 All Subdivisions: This Section sets forth certain general requirements that apply
to all Subdivisions in the Town of Bow.
A. State Grid Coordinates: All surveys, control and boundary information
shall be tied into and refer to the State Grid Coordinate System.
B. U.S.G.S. Data: All contours, profiles and other elevations shall refer to
current U.S.G.S. Data.
C. Buffer Strip: All Subdivisions shall provide for a "Green Strip" or "Buffer
Strip" along all existing or new Streets, Zone boundaries, and abutting,
established neighborhoods. This "strip" shall be equivalent to the building
setback distance in width, or up to 50 feet wide as directed by the Board,
and shall extend along the entire frontage of such Streets or Zone
boundaries. Construction shall be prohibited in this "strip" and no existing
trees of six inch (6") diameter or larger within the strip shall be disturbed.
The Planning Board, in cases of fields or similar natural features may
require the planting of adequate trees to provide for proper screening. The
only exception to this Section shall be for the installation of proper
driveways.
D. Substandard Streets: Where a Subdivision borders an existing Street that
is below the standards set forth herein, the Applicant shall set aside and
show areas for widening or realigning such Street to the extent
necessitated by the Application. Any land set aside for this purpose shall
be deeded to the Town and shall not be counted for lot size, setbacks, or
frontage. Said areas shall be marked "Road Right-of-Way" on the Final
Plat.
E. Lot Boundaries: Prior to the issuance of any permits, on any new lots
created by a Subdivision, all lot corners shall be permanently marked as
provided in Section 7.04 of these Regulations. Also, all side lot lines shall
be adequately flagged so as to allow proper orientation of improvements
and the side lines shall be cleared to a depth sufficient to allow verification
of the location of all improvements, i.e. house, well, septic system,
driveway, etc.
F. State and Federal Approvals: Copies of all Applications to the State of
New Hampshire for approval of on-site septic systems, alteration of terrain
permits, dredge and fill permits, and driveway permits, and copies of
Applications to federal agencies for Section 404 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334 or for any other
8
permit or approval required by the State of New Hampshire or federal
agency for the Subdivision must be filed with the Board prior to approval of
the Preliminary Plat. Approval of any Final Application shall be
conditioned upon filing with the Board copies of permits for all such state
and federal approvals.
G. Conveyances to Town: Before recordation of a Final Plan of a Subdivision
requiring new road construction or the extension of municipal services, the
owner shall transfer to the Town of Bow by Warranty Deed, all lands not
platted for residential use and common area green spaces and
recreational areas, or if commercial/industrial, for that use. Open spaces
of adequate proportions and suitably located streets may be required to
accommodate existing and prospective traffic and to afford adequate light,
air, and access of fire-fighting apparatus to buildings and equipment and
be coordinated to pose a convenient system. The lands described above
shall include but not be limited to, the following categories:
Public parks, recreation areas, recreation easements, open space,
road rights-of-way, future extension requirements for roads, strips
of land reserved for access to abutters and/or future streets, all
other rights-of-way or dedicated lands.
H. Unsuitable Land: Land of such character that it cannot be safely used for
building purposes because of danger to health or peril from fire, flood or
other hazard shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for other
use which would tend to increase the danger to health, life or property or
aggravate the flood hazard. Land subject to periodic flooding, poor
drainage or other hazardous conditions, shall not be subdivided. Land
with unsuitable soil or inadequate capacity for individual sanitary
sewerage disposal systems shall not be subdivided unless connected to a
common sewer system. No land described above and no land designated
as Area of Special Flood Hazard or shown to be bog, marsh, swamp area,
area of high water table, or designated as wetlands as set forth in the
Town of Bow Zoning Ordinance Article 10.01, or any similar situation, or
area necessary for the protection of aquifers which may serve as future
sources of drinking water for the Town, or with slopes in excess of thirtythree
percent (33%), or ledge which is exposed or lying within four (4) feet
of the soil surface, or which is subject to an easement or a right-of-way in
favor of the Town, County, State, Federal Government, or any third party
shall be counted toward the required minimum lot size, but shall be
allowed to be added to lots if the public welfare and safety is protected.
Any land covered by any soils listed by the "Merrimack and Belknap
Counties Soils Survey”, USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service
as poorly drained or very poorly drained, shall likewise not be counted
towards the minimum lot sizes. In the event that a Subdivision contains
any land, soils or natural features described in this Subsection, the
Applicant shall, at the discretion of the Board, submit as part of his
Application the report and associated plan of the subdivision of a certified
soil scientist as defined in RSA 310-A:76 who has performed a High
Intensity Soil Survey of the Subdivision.
9
I. Ledge: All areas of exposed ledge shall be identified and plotted on any
Plat submitted to the Board.
J. Protection of Natural Features: Due regard shall be shown for all natural
features, such as trees, water courses, scenic points, rare plant or animal
species, historic spots and similar community assets, which if preserved,
will add attractiveness and value to the Subdivision or preserve the natural
resources of the Town. Where appropriate, the Board may require the
Applicant to dedicate lands or grant conservation easements to the Town
to protect such resources in a manner consistent with Section 3.03C of
these Regulations.
K. Driveway Access: The provisions of RSA 236:13 and 14 "Driveways and
other Accesses to the Public Way" are adopted by reference into these
Regulations and the provisions and conditions thereof are extended to
include Town Classified Roads of Classes 4 and 5. It shall be the
responsibility of the property owner to maintain all portions of driveways
and associated drainage facilities located within public right-of-way areas.
L. Scattered or Premature Subdivisions: The Board may disapprove any plat
(a) where it finds that it would result in the scattered or premature
subdivision of land such as would endanger or injure health, safety or
prosperity by reason of lack of water supply, drainage, transportation or
other public services or facilities, or necessitate an excessive expenditure
of public funds for the supply of such services or facilities, and in this
connection, may take into consideration off-site factors affecting the
provision of public services, including the adequacy of existing roads and
streets; or (b) where the Board finds that the proposed Subdivision would
be contrary to the harmonious, coordinated development and growth of
the Town as provided in the Comprehensive Plan.
M. Disturbing Environment: No person who is required to submit an
Application for approval of a Subdivision pursuant to these Regulations
shall commence the construction of roads within the land proposed to be
subdivided or clear the land of natural vegetation or place any artificial fill
thereon or do any other act or acts which will alter the natural state of the
land or environment, unless and until the Final Plat relating thereto has
been submitted and approved in accordance with the requirements of
these Regulations. Furthermore, no such construction shall commence
prior to the conclusion of a pre-construction conference and issuance of
written authorization in accordance with Section 9.00 of these regulations.
Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to prevent such preliminary
ground surveys, marking by stakes, engineering studies, inspections, and
testing (including test borings and test pits) as may be necessary to
evaluate the suitability of the land for subdivision and to assemble the
information required to be shown on a Preliminary Plat, provided,
however, that such preliminary surveys, staking, studies, inspection and
testing shall be accomplished with the minimum disturbance or alteration
of the natural state of the land environment.
10
N. Town Utilities:
1. Town Sewer: If any portion of a Subdivision fronts on an existing
street served or reasonably expected to be served by Town sewer;
or fronts on a new street leading directly from a street served or
reasonably expected to be served by Town sewer; or fronts an
existing street and lies within the lesser of one hundred (100) feet
per lot or one thousand (1000) feet of a street served or reasonably
expected to be served by Town sewer; the Plat shall show
appropriate extensions to the existing sewer lines and appropriate
sewer connections from all improvements to the new or existing
sewer lines. The use of on-site sewage disposal systems shall not
be permitted in such a Subdivision after such sewer service
becomes available.
2. Municipal Water System: If any portion of a Subdivision includes
frontage on an existing street in which is located a Municipal Water
main in said frontage and Municipal Water service is available, the
Plat shall show appropriate extensions to each lot in the
Subdivision from the existing water main and provide for
appropriate water connections from all improvements on the lots to
the water main. If a water main is constructed to a point where the
main abuts any of the lots within the Subdivision, the lots within the
Subdivision may be charged a proportionate share of the costs to
extend the main to serve the lots within the Subdivision. The
Subdivision plat shall bear a note to memorialize the potential
requirement for lots to bear a proportionate share. The use of wells
for domestic water supply, except for irrigation, shall not be
permitted in such a Subdivision after such Municipal water service
becomes available.
O. Utilities: All utility facilities, including but not limited to gas, electric power,
telephone, and CATV cables, shall be located underground at the
expense of the Applicant. Except for major transmission lines not
intended to serve individual properties and except for existing utility lines
along existing Town streets, all other above-ground utility lines on land to
be subdivided must be removed and installed underground. Utilities shall
be located within street rights-of-way in accordance with all applicable
State and Local Regulations and utility company rules and regulations.
Utilities shall not be located beneath the paved surface of any street
except where necessary at intersections and for service connections.
P. Access: Any road serving more than twelve (12) lots shall have an
approved secondary means of egress. The secondary egress may, at the
discretion of the Board, be parallel to the primary access, separated by a
continuous island with a minimum width of 25 feet, to accommodate safety
vehicles.
11
Q. Fire Suppression Water Supply: A Subdivision that will result in twelve
(12) or more lots that are not served by municipal water supply shall install
a 30,000 gallon cistern. The design and location shall be subject to
approval by the Planning Board. Other means of providing water supply
may be accepted by the Board after consultation with the Fire Chief. Per
RSA 674:51, V and 674:36, IV, both as from time to time amended, the
Applicant may offer to construct, and the Planning Board may accept,
residential sprinkler systems in lieu of a Fire Suppression Water Supply.
The offer and acceptance shall be memorialized by a note on the recorded
final plat.
R. Condominiums: In addition to the information otherwise required to be
filed pursuant to these Regulations, an Applicant who is seeking approval
of a Condominium shall also file at the time of an Application copies of:
1. Condominium Declaration
2. Condominium Bylaws
3. Condominium Site Plan
4. Condominium Floor Plan
5. Where applicable, evidence of filing of Application for Registration
of the condominium with the New Hampshire Attorney General.
S. Review by Other Town Officials: Before approval of a Preliminary Plat is
given, the Planning Board shall solicit written statements from the
following Town Officials regarding the proposed application.
1. The Road Agent and Engineer as to the design of the street
system, location of easements, and design of the water, sewer, and
drainage systems, including appurtenances.
2. The Police Chief, or representative, as to vehicular and pedestrian
traffic safety and access for emergency vehicles.
3. The Fire Chief, or representative, as to the adequacy of fire
protection and access for emergency vehicles.
4. The Recreation Commission, or its Director, and the Conservation
Commission as to the suitability and location of any lands proposed
to be dedicated for Town open space, park or playground or other
recreational purposes.
5. The Town Manager as to the design of extensions to water and/or
sewer lines and capacity of existing water and/or sewer systems to
service the new demand.
12
Town Officials may opt to attend the regular Planning Board
meeting to express their concerns regarding the Preliminary Plat.
T. Compliance with Regulations: All Applications shall comply with the
Zoning Ordinance and all other ordinances and regulations of the Town of
Bow.
U. Manufactured Housing Subdivisions: RSA 205-D Manufactured Housing
Installation Standards and amendments thereto is adopted herein by
reference.
3.03 Major Subdivisions: The following general requirements apply only to Major
Subdivisions:
A. Erosion Plan: All Applications shall include a "Soils Erosion and Sediment
Control Plan", conforming to the recommendations and specifications of
the NHDES NH Stormwater Manual, December 2008 or later update.
Said plan shall address slopes, embankments, ditches, drainage ways,
and the effect of the Subdivision on water bodies and all disturbed areas.
These plans shall be stamped by a New Hampshire Registered
Professional Engineer.
B. Drainage/Grading Plan: All Applications shall include a Drainage and
Grading Plan showing the entire area which is directly involved. The Plan
shall indicate existing grades for the entire tract and proposed grading for
all areas of proposed construction activity. The Plan shall show all
existing and proposed drainage facilities, including but not limited to catch
basins, all storm water culverts, headwalls, detention/retention basins,
drainage swales, rip-rap areas, dams and weirs, groundwater recharge
structures, and storm water flow dissipaters. The plan shall show all
contributing drainage and sub-catchment areas and existing and proposed
storm water flow calculations. All drainage plans for the Subdivision shall
be based on hydrological calculations from said Drainage/Grading Plans.
The hydrological calculations shall analyze 10, 25, and 50 year storm
events. These Plans and accompanying calculations shall be prepared by
and bear the stamp and signature of a New Hampshire Registered
Professional Engineer. The developer shall provide appropriate detention
and groundwater recharge facilities to assure that existing flow quantities
or velocities will not be exceeded and that existing groundwater recharge
will be maintained. A waiver of these regulations is required if the storm
water drainage system creates any additional storm water flow quantities
or velocities over other properties. Such waiver will be considered only
where the developer has obtained easements therefore from all owners of
said downstream properties.
C Parks and Recreation: Pursuant to RSA 674:36 II (d), (f), and (g), the
Board may require the Applicant to dedicate land in a Subdivision to the
Town for playgrounds, park trails, open space or recreation uses. The
amount of land dedicated for such purposes shall equal up to ten percent
13
(10%) of the gross land area of a Major Subdivision, and all of such
dedicated land shall be Buildable Land in a contiguous parcel acceptable
to the Board.
1. Subject to the approval of the Board, an Applicant may satisfy the
parks and recreation dedication requirement in any one of the
following manners:
a. Dedication to the Town of an area of Buildable Land
equivalent to ten percent (10%), or such other percentage as
the Board may require, of the gross area of land to be
subdivided as described above. The Plat shall clearly show
the area of land to be dedicated and the parcel(s) shall be
clearly labeled "Town Recreation Land"; or
b. The donation of the cash equivalent of the value of a parcel
of Buildable Land of a size equal to ten percent (10%), or
such other percentage as the Board may require, of the
gross area of the land to be subdivided. The value of the
land shall be determined in its undeveloped state and shall
be determined based upon a valid appraisal of the land. The
appraisal shall be done by a qualified person, shall include at
least three (3) comparable sales, and shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Board. The Board may hire its
own appraiser, at the Subdivider's expense, to confirm the
value of the property; or
c. A combination of land dedication and cash donation; or
d. A combination of land dedication and park development; or
e. Other methods which meet the intent of this Section and
which are in the public interest in regard to the specific
conditions of the area of Town and the land to be
subdivided.
2. Cash donations shall be placed in a Town fund dedicated to
acquiring or developing park or recreation facilities. No portion of
the funds are to be used for maintenance or operations.
D. Phasing Plan Required: A written phasing plan shall accompany all
Applications for Major Subdivisions. The plan shall specify the
development time table for each phase of the Subdivision. The plan shall
include approximate dates for road and other public improvement
construction, for lot sales/development commencement, and for building
occupancy. In cases where specific impacts have been identified, the
Board may require that the development of a Subdivision proceed at a
rate which will allow the Applicant and the Town a reasonable length of
time in which to plan and prepare for impacts and to take steps to mitigate
14
adverse impacts.
E. Private Streets: Where access is to be provided to multiple parcels or
sites via a Private Street, a statement shall be added to the recorded plan
and included in each deed requiring each parcel, unit, or site owner to be
responsible for a proportionate share of the total cost to upgrade the
Private Street(s) to Town road standards in the event the Town, in
accordance with RSA 231:28-33, chooses to conditionally lay out the
Private Street as a Town road. The statement shall include each parcel,
unit, or site owner’s acknowledgment that the development has been
approved conditioned upon the cost of any betterment being
unconditionally borne solely by the owners of the land abutting or being
served by the betterments. The total cost of the betterment shall include,
but is not limited to, construction, engineering, right of way and drainage
easements, and relocation of underground utilities.
F. Restoration Plan and Performance Security Required: A restoration plan
shall accompany all Applications for Major Subdivisions that require an
Alteration of Terrain Permit or propose a new street. The purpose of the
plan and security is to ensure that disturbed areas are permanently
stabilized if construction ceases for more than one year, if erosion and
sedimentation controls during construction are not maintained in
accordance with the approved plan, if the developer disturbs an area
outside the area or phase approved, or if the Town determines that the
site has been abandoned. The plan shall specify the methods and
standards proposed to permanently reclaim disturbed areas. The plan
shall be accompanied by an independent cost estimate to implement the
restoration plan. The cost estimate shall be subject to approval by the
Board. An approved performance security sufficient to implement the
restoration plan shall be submitted prior to altering the natural state of the
land (see 3.02 M).
3.04 Special Requirements: The following general requirements apply to certain large
scale developments or developments which may have a significant impact on the
Town, its services or facilities, as specifically provided herein. The cost of these
assessments and studies will be borne by the Applicant.
A. Traffic Impact Assessment (TIA):
1. Where a Subdivision will result in the generation of an average of
two hundred (200) weekday vehicle trip ends (according to Trip
Generation, An Informational Report, Institute of Transportation
Engineers), the Applicant must submit a TIA to the Board with its
Preliminary Application. The TIA shall include, but not be limited to,
information with respect to:
a. estimated vehicular trips per day,
b. an analysis of approaches,
15
c. an analysis of the circulation and channelization patterns,
d. a description and analysis of the location and type of existing
and proposed traffic control devices,
e. pedestrian traffic and systems,
f. an analysis of signal warrants,
g. a description of the condition and capacity of the road
network,
h. other analysis of specific impacts as identified by the
Planning Board.
2. A "trip end" is defined as a vehicle movement either entering or
leaving the site.
3. Examples of developments which would generate two hundred
(200) weekday vehicle trip ends include (from Trip Generation,
approximate values):
a. 20 detached single family units,
b. 40 manufactured housing units or condominium units,
c. 20 motel units,
d. 17,000 gross square feet general office building,
e. 1,700 gross square feet shopping center,
f. 1,200 gross square feet high turnover sit down restaurant,
g. 8,400 gross square feet medical office building or clinic,
h. 4,000 gross square feet hardware/paint store,
i. Gasoline/service station,
j. 1,200 gross square feet bank.
B. Fiscal Impact Analysis (FIA): Where a Subdivision would contain 30 or
more dwelling units, or where the Planning Board finds that a commercial
or industrial Subdivision may have an adverse fiscal impact upon the
Town, the Applicant must submit an analysis of the projected tax and fee
income to the Town and the projected operating, maintenance and capital
costs of the Town with the Preliminary Application. The analysis must
16
contain a summary of the services applicable to the Subdivision and of the
capital facilities used to deliver the services.
C. School Impact Analysis (SIA): Where a Subdivision would generate a
school age population equal to one classroom according to current U.S.
Census data from Merrimack County, the Applicant must submit an
analysis of the impact of the Subdivision on the school system with the
Preliminary Application.
D. Environmental Assessment (EA): The Applicant of each development
containing ten (10) or more lots or twenty (20) or more acres shall submit
a report from the New Hampshire Natural Heritage Inventory (NH
Department of Resources and Economic Development) which identifies
rare plant and animal species and exemplary natural communities in or
near the proposed Subdivision with the Preliminary Application. If any of
the species or communities are identified within or adjacent to the
Subdivision, an EA addressing the impacts on the species and
communities shall be submitted with the Preliminary Application.
E. Community Services Impact Assessment (CSIA): Where a Subdivision
contains one hundred (100) lots, one hundred (100) residential units, one
hundred (100) gross acres, eight thousand five hundred (8,500) gross
square feet of office or commercial space, or seventeen (17) gross acres
of industrial land the applicant shall submit an assessment of the demands
that the development will place on existing or proposed community
services including, but not limited to, police, fire, emergency, water, sewer,
solid waste, roads, recreation, and Town offices with the Preliminary
Application.
F. Other Considerations: The requirements contained in this Section 3.03
are based on thresholds at which the expected impacts will be measurable
and at which point mitigation measures by the Applicant may be required
by the Board. Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed to
prevent the Planning Board from requiring other special investigations, at
the applicant's expense or from requiring the above identified
investigations at lower thresholds where, in the opinion of the Board,
circumstances related to the development or the area warrant such
special studies. An Applicant may not evade the application of the
provisions of this Section 3.04 through phased or scattered development
of a parcel. The Board may, in its discretion, consider the effects of both
prior and potential development of the land owned by the Applicant or
other prior or future owners of the Subdivision and require compliance with
the terms of this Section.
3.05 Fees for Offsite Improvements: As a condition of the Final Approval of an
Application the Board may require the Subdivider to pay a proportionate share of
the costs of offsite improvements which are necessitated in whole or in part by
the Subdivision.
17
3.06 Open Space - Residential Development: All residential Subdivisions resulting in
ten (10) or more lots or including thirty (30) or more acres shall comply with the
provisions of section 7.02 Open Space - Residential Development of the Zoning
Ordinance of the Town of Bow, and amendments thereto.
A. To comply with section 7.02 B 2 of the Zoning Ordinance, the Subdivider
shall submit a Yield Plan in conformance with Section 6.05 of the
Subdivision Regulations.
18
Section 4.00 - Procedure:
4.01 Preliminary Conceptual Consultation:
A. Prior to submission of an Application for Board approval, the Applicant
may discuss the proposal with the Board's Agent, and may make an
appointment to discuss the proposal at a regularly scheduled Board
meeting by notifying the Board's Agent three (3) weeks prior to the
meeting. At least one week prior to the regularly scheduled meeting, the
applicant shall provide the materials required in 6.01. Prior to submission
of a Subdivision Application resulting in ten (10) or more lots or including
thirty (30) or more acres, the Applicant shall submit a Concept Plan and
make an appointment to discuss the proposal.
B. At the meeting, the Applicant may address the Board concerning the
proposal but must limit the presentation to the intent, location of the
proposal, and the materials identified in 6.01 without going beyond a
general description of the basic concept.
C. The Board may briefly outline the steps that an Applicant may take to
obtain Board approval. It may discuss the content of the Master Plan of
the Town and its relation to the potential Applicant's proposal. The Board
may also cite specific Sections of these Regulations or the Zoning
Ordinance. The proposal may be discussed in conceptual form only and
in general terms, such as the desirability of types of development and
proposals under the Master Plan. The Board may make suggestions
which might be of assistance in resolving problems with meeting
requirements during formal consideration.
D. A proposal shall neither be accepted as an Application nor be approved or
disapproved by the Board under this procedure.
E. No comments made during this consultation shall bind either the Applicant
or the Board.
F. Statements made by Board members shall not be the basis for
disqualifying said members or invalidating any action eventually taken on
the Application.
G. The time limits for Board actions under RSA 676:4, I(c) and Section 4.03I
and 4.05D of these Regulations shall not apply to Preliminary Conceptual
Consultation.
H. The Board recommends that the applicant contact abutters to discuss the
project. The applicant may notify abutters of the Conceptual Consultation
or request that the Board agent notify abutters at the applicant’s expense.
4.02 Preliminary Design Review Procedure - deleted 7/5/1990.
19
4.03 Preliminary Application:
A. Board Agent: The Board shall designate an agent to receive all
Applications.
1. The agent shall publish a schedule for conferences at which initial
filings may be submitted. The schedule shall establish deadlines
for making appointments for conferences. The schedule and
deadlines shall be approved by the Planning Board.
2. The Applicant shall contact the agent to schedule an appointment
to make an Initial Filing.
3. The Planning Board shall establish a fee for the appointment. The
fee shall be due when the appointment is made.
B. Submission of Initial Filing:
1. At the Initial Filing conference, the Applicant shall present three
copies of the complete application package to the agent. During
the conference the Applicant shall demonstrate that all required
items are included.
a. if all required items are included, the Applicant shall submit
the materials under C. Initial Filing;
b. if required items are missing, the Applicant shall repeat the
steps as outlined in 4.03 A 2 & 3 above.
C. Initial Filing:
1. The Applicant shall file with the designated agent:
a. three (3) copies of a completed Preliminary Application
Form;
b. three (3) copies of a Preliminary Application Checklist;
c. seven (7) copies of a Preliminary Plan which complies with
Section 6.03 of these Regulations;
d. Sufficient legible copies of the Preliminary Plan, reduced in
size to no more than 11 x 17 inches, to provide 30 copies to
the Board and one (1) copy to each Abutter and to each
Town official referred to in Section 3.02S of these
Regulations;
e. the appropriate filing fee based upon the fee schedule as
may be set by the Board from time to time; and
20
f. if the Applicant signs the form rather than the owner,
certification that the Applicant is agent for the owner.
2. Completed Preliminary Applications must include all of the items
listed in subsection 4.03C1 and must be filed with the designated
agent no later than the fourth Thursday prior to a regular meeting of
the Board in order to be considered by the Board at such meeting.
If any of the items listed in subsection 4.03C1 are missing or
incomplete as of the filing deadline, the Application shall not be
placed on the agenda for the next Planning Board meeting. A work
session at which no vote may be taken is not a regularly scheduled
meeting of the Board.
D. Notice to Abutters and the Public of Submission of a Preliminary
Application:
The Board shall notify all listed Abutters and the Applicant of its
intent to consider a Preliminary Application by certified mail mailed
not less than ten (10) days prior to the date for official submission
to the Board of a completed Preliminary Application. Such notice
shall contain a general description (supplied by the Applicant) of the
proposal and shall identify the Applicant and the location of the
proposal and a reduced size copy of the Preliminary Plan. The
Board shall also post such notice in two (2) public places in the
Town and publish the notice in a local newspaper within 14 days of
the date of the meeting date.
E. Action on Preliminary Application:
1. The official submission date of the Application shall be the date of
the first regular meeting at which the Application is considered. At
that meeting, the Board will consider whether the Application
includes the information required by Sections 3.00 and 4.00 of
these Regulations.
2. A Preliminary Application which is not complete will be rejected by
the Board. If the Board votes to reject an Application, it shall
provide the Applicant with written notice of its decision which shall
describe the reasons for the rejection.
Yield Plan Acceptance. An applicant for Open Space
Residential Development may request that the Planning Board
accept a Yield Plan in conformance with Section 6.05 that does not
include the information required by Sections 3.00 and 4.00. If
accepted by the Board, the Board shall begin consideration of the
Yield Plan within thirty (30) days and shall take final action within
sixty-five (65) days in accordance with Section 4.03.
21
3. If a Preliminary Application is accepted by the Board, the Board
shall begin formal consideration of the proposal within thirty (30)
days thereafter. The Applicant may waive this and all other time
periods and consent to such extensions as may be mutually
agreeable.
F. Resubmissions: After the application has been accepted by the Planning
Board under 4.03 E, the applicant may submit revised materials to comply
with Town Regulations, Ordinances, or design review comments. To be
considered at a meeting of the Planning Board, such materials shall have
been submitted to the agent a minimum of seven (7) calendar days prior
to the meeting.
G. Requirement for Public Hearing:
1. Once a Preliminary Application has been accepted as complete by
the Board, and except as described in Section 4.04, no Preliminary
Application may be denied or approved without a public hearing.
2. Notice of any public hearing on an Application shall be given in
accordance with Section 4.03D. If notice of the hearing was
included in any prior notice, it need not be repeated. If a hearing is
adjourned, no written notice of the continuation date will be given if
the date, time and place of the continuation was made known at the
prior hearing.
3. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the Rules of
Procedure adopted by the Board.
H. Board Consultation with Specialists:
Throughout the process of Board consideration of an Application,
the Board may consult with engineers, architects, soil scientists,
attorneys, planners or others, at the expense of the Applicant.
I. Consent to On-Site Board Inspection:
1. By filing an Application, the Applicant consents to the inspection of
the property by Board members and Board agents at reasonable
times and in a reasonable manner. The consent includes
attendance by Abutters, as defined in 2.01, and other interested
parties at a posted on-site visit.
2. Prior to the Board's approval of a Preliminary Application, at least
three (3) members of the Board shall schedule and conduct an onsite
inspection of the property. All lot corners on existing streets,
the centerlines of all new streets, wetlands, and the perimeter of the
Subdivision shall be staked or flagged prior to such inspection.
22
3. The on-site visit and final action on the Preliminary Application may
be postponed until no later than May 1st following the acceptance
of the Application if, in the opinion of the Board, winter conditions
prohibit making a proper inspection and evaluation of the site.
4. An on-site visit is considered a meeting of the Planning Board. As
such, minutes and attendance shall be taken and attendees have
the same rights to hear and record the meeting as a meeting of the
Board. Where an applicant states in writing that security issues as
envisioned in RSA 91-A:3, II,(i) are present at the site and requests
prior to scheduling of an on-site visit that on-site attendees not take
photographs or use video recorders, the Board may prohibit such
use.
J. Final Action on Preliminary Application:
1. Subject to the provisions of Section 4.03G, the Board shall approve
or deny a Preliminary Application within sixty-five (65) days of its
submission and acceptance by the Board. The Applicant may
waive this time period and consent to such extensions as may be
mutually agreeable.
2. If the Board denies a Preliminary Application, it shall provide the
Applicant with written notice of its decision which shall describe the
reasons for the denial.
3. If the Board approves a Preliminary Application, it shall notify the
Applicant of the approval and any conditions of such approval, if the
Applicant was not present at the meeting at which such approval
was granted.
4. Upon approval of its Preliminary Application, an Applicant is
authorized to file a Final Application with the agent of the Board.
The Board's approval of any Preliminary Application shall lapse
sixty (60) days after the date upon which such approval was given
unless the Applicant shall have filed a completed Final Application
with the agent of the Board.
4.04 Expedited Review:
A. At the Board's discretion, any Application for: (a) minor Lot Line
Adjustments, boundary agreements, or proposals which do not create
buildable lot(s), or (b) a Minor Subdivision which creates no more than
three (3) lots for building development purposes may be accepted and
approved by the Board at one meeting subject to the notice and public
hearing requirements described in these Regulations and subject to the
Applicant's full compliance with these Regulations.
B. At the time of the filing of such an Application, the Applicant shall
23
specifically state whether the proposal qualifies for expedited review and
shall file both Preliminary and Final Application Forms, Checklists and
Plans.
C. The Board shall provide notice to all parties as provided in Section 4.03D
of these Regulations of its intent both to consider the submission and the
approval of the Application under these Expedited Review Procedures,
and to hold a public hearing on the Application.
D. The Board shall hold a hearing, with notice as provided in Section 4.03G
of these Regulations, prior to approval or disapproval of the Application.
E. No public hearing shall be necessary prior to the Board's action to
disapprove an Application based upon the failure of the Applicant to
supply information required by the Regulations, including Abutters'
identification, the failure to meet reasonable deadlines established by the
Board, or the failure to pay costs of notice or other fees required by the
Board. Per RSA 676:4, I (b), as from time to time amended, the
Application shall not be disapproved due to failure to provide final
approvals of State agencies as required in 6.04 F & G.
4.05 Final Application:
A. Filing:
1. The Applicant shall file with the designated agent:
a. three (3) copies of the Final Application Form;
b. three (3) copies of a Final Application Checklist;
c. five (5) copies of a Final Plan which complies with Section
6.04 of these Regulations;
d. Sufficient legible copies of the Final Plan, reduced in size to
no more than 11 x 17 inches, to provide twelve (12) copies
to the Board and one (1) copy to each Abutter and to each
Town official referred to in Section 3.02S of these
Regulations.
e. three (3) copies of any construction plans; and
f. the appropriate filing fee based upon the fee schedule as
may be set by the Board from time to time and any required
escrow deposits for review and inspection fees.
2. Completed Final Applications must be filed with the designated
agent at least twenty-one (21) days prior to the next regular
meeting of the Board after receipt of Approval of a Preliminary
24
Application in order to be considered by the Board at such meeting.
A work session at which no vote may be taken is not a regularly
scheduled meeting of the Board.
B. Notice to Abutters and Public:
Notice of any public hearing on a Final Application shall be given as
provided in Sections 4.03D of these Regulations.
C. Public Hearings:
No Final Application shall be approved or denied without a public
hearing as provided in Section 4.03G of these Regulations.
D. Action on Final Application:
1. Subject to the provisions of Section 4.03G, the Board shall act to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove any Final Application
which has been timely filed and complies with these Regulations
and with the approval of the Preliminary Plat within sixty-five (65)
days after the Board voted to accept the Preliminary Application.
The Applicant may waive this time period and consent to such
extensions as may be mutually agreeable.
2. The Board may apply to the Board of Selectmen for an extension,
not to exceed an additional ninety (90) days, to act on the Final
Application. The Applicant may also waive this time period and
consent to such extensions as may be mutually agreeable.
3. The Board may grant conditional approval of an Application, which
shall become a final approval without further public hearing, upon
certification to the Board by its designee or based upon evidence
submitted by the Applicant of satisfactory compliance with the
conditions imposed. Final approval may occur in this manner only
when the conditions are:
a. minor plan changes whether or not imposed by the Board as
a result of a public hearing, compliance with which is
administrative and which does not involve discretionary
judgment; or
b. conditions which are in themselves administrative and which
involve no discretionary judgment on the part of the Board;
or
c. conditions with regard to the Applicant's possession of
permits and approvals granted by other boards or agencies.
All other conditions shall require a hearing after notice in
accordance with Sections 4.03D and 4.03G.
25
4. If the Board rejects a Final Application, it shall provide the Applicant
with written notice of its decision which shall describe the reasons
for the rejection.
5. Upon approval, the Chairman shall sign and date the Final Plat as
approved. Approved plats and any documents affecting covenants,
deed restrictions, etc., with the exception of road and other
construction plans, shall be recorded with the Merrimack County
Registry of Deeds. “As-built” plans for roads and all other public
improvements shall be filed with the Planning Board after approval
of the Engineer and acceptance by the Planning Board. All
conditions of approval as imposed by the Planning Board shall
appear on the face of the final plat to be recorded. Two recordable
mylars of the final plat with original signatures and seals shall be
submitted to the Planning Board agent for execution by the
Planning Board and Building Inspector. Recording of the plats and
associated documents shall be the applicant's responsibility. A
digital copy compatible with the Town Tax Map and three paper
copies of the recorded plat and one copy of associated documents
certified by the Merrimack County Registrar of Deeds shall be
submitted to the Town prior to issuance of building permits or start
of any construction activity, including but not limited to site clearing
and grading activities, and within ten (10) days following the
recording of the plat.
6. The Board's approval of a Final Application shall lapse if all
conditions of Final Approval have not been met within ninety (90)
days of the date of the Final Approval. Upon request, and where it
can be shown to the satisfaction of the Board that the applicant has
diligently pursued other required permits, the approval may be
extended for an additional ninety (90) days to a total of 180 days
from the date of Final Approval. Where the applicant demonstrates
to the satisfaction of the Board that a hardship exists and that
conditions beyond the control of the applicant have caused the
delay, an applicant may request and the Planning Board may grant
additional reasonable extension of this time period up to a
maximum total of one year from the date of Final Approval.
4.06 Expenses and Fees:
All expenses incurred by the Town of Bow in processing an Application for
Board action shall be borne by the Applicant. The cost of recording the
Final Plat with the Registry of Deeds, cost of any required publication, cost
of posting notices, cost of mailing notices of hearing, the reasonable
anticipated cost of the consultation by the Board with any expert or
specialist, and the reasonable anticipated costs to the Town for the
services of the Board's designated agent, its attorney and its engineer, all
must be paid by the Applicant at the time of filing an Application with the
26
designated agent of the Board. All additional costs incurred during review
of the Application shall be paid prior to Final Approval. Failure to pay these
costs as specified will be valid grounds for refusal to accept the
Application as complete, or for disapproval of the Application.
4.07 Modification of Approvals
A. Minor design modifications and minor modifications of approved
subdivisions may be approved by the Planning Board upon
recommendation of the Road Agent/Town Engineer, Building Inspector,
and Town Planner at a public meeting without specific notification of
abutters provided that all of the following conditions are met:
1. The modification is the result of circumstances relating to the
property that were not anticipated at the time of approval.
2. The modification is minor, insubstantial, and will not in any way
adversely affect abutters, future occupants, owners, or the public.
3. In all other cases, modifications shall be approved only pursuant to
the provisions of Section 4.03F of these regulations.
a. When the Board has determined that a requested
modification shall require a public hearing in accordance with
Section 4.03F, the Applicant shall be responsible for all
expenses and fees as set forth in Section 4.06 of these
regulations.
27
Section 5.00 - Non-Residential Development:
Refer to Site Plan Regulations, Town of Bow.
28
Section 6.00 - Plat Details:
Plans, reports, documents, and other materials submitted to the Planning Board to fulfill
the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations shall be free of any restrictions on
reproduction. Proximate to any copyright symbols, reservations of rights, or statements
of ownership, shall be an affirmative statement which expressly agrees to reproduction.
6.01 Preliminary Conceptual Consultation: The Applicant shall prepare a Concept
Plan of the site and surrounding properties in sufficient detail to allow the
Planning Board to discuss the proposal. The Concept Plan should be drawn on
a USGS, other topographical map or aerial photograph at a scale of one inch
equals five hundred feet (1" = 500') or larger, and should show approximate tract
boundary lines and tax map, block, and parcel numbers for the proposed area of
development, all contiguous holdings of the Applicant, and the names and
addresses of the owners of all contiguous abutting properties. All existing
Streets, sewer and water lines, and other rights-of-way or easements should be
shown as appropriate. One week prior to the meeting at which the concept plan
is to be discussed, the applicant shall submit a summary of the project; a list of
waivers, variances, and special exceptions required; the specific questions to be
posed to the Board; and, if the applicant is not the owner, written permission from
the owner to proceed.
6.02 Preliminary Design Plat Details - deleted July 5, 1990.
6.03 Preliminary Plat:
The Preliminary Plat shall be prepared to a scale of not less than one inch equals
one hundred feet (1" = 100') or at greater detail as directed by the Board to
indicate clearly the existing and proposed features of the site. Said plat shall be
prepared on twenty-two by thirty-four inches (22" X 34") standard sheets
measured from cutting edges. If one sheet is not of sufficient size to contain the
entire area for the site and environs, the plat shall be divided into sections to be
shown on separate sheets of equal size with reference on each sheet to the
adjoining sheets. The Preliminary Plat shall show or be accompanied by the
following:
A. Date of survey, name and legal description of Subdivision, locus map
superimposed on the Town Tax map (scale of 1"=1,000') showing the
relation of the proposed Subdivision to existing streets, and surrounding
property within one thousand feet (1000'), name of owner of record and
Subdivider, north arrow showing grid north and magnetic north as of the
date of the survey, and graphic scale.
B. At least two (2) ties to New Hampshire State Grid Coordinate System shall
be established on each section or submission of a subdivision. The bench
marks shall be tied to previously established bench marks on previously
submitted plats. Said bench marks to be plainly marked in the field and
stationed on the final plat with its elevation.
29
C. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, park areas, or land to be reserved or
dedicated to public use. All lot lines with accurate dimensions, bearing or
reflection angles and radii, arc, and central angles of all curves. All
bearings shall be based on the State Grid Coordinate System.
D. Water courses and Area of Special Flood Hazard locations with base flood
elevations that may exist within five hundred feet (500') of the Subdivision
boundaries. For Subdivisions that involve land designated as Special
Flood Hazard Areas, the applicant shall submit sufficient evidence
(construction drawings, grading, and land treatment plans) to allow the
Planning Board to determine that the proposal is consistent with the need
to minimize flood damage; that all public utilities and facilities, such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage; and that adequate drainage is
provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
E. Plans shall reflect all land within one thousand feet (1000') of any portion
of the Subdivision in which the owner/Subdivider or any person or entity
which has an interest in the owner/Subdivider has interest. If the plans
include only a portion of the entire holdings, any possible future plans, in
the form of a sketch, for these remaining holdings, shall be shown. Said
plan to include possible road layout, lots, service, etc.
F. The purpose of any easement or land reserved, or dedicated to public use
shall be designated, and the proposed use of sites other than residential
shall be noted.
G. The tax block parcel number and names and addresses of owners of
property abutting the tract to be divided. Proposed lots shall be numbered
consecutively as instructed by the Town.
H. Name and address of engineer or surveyor.
I. Certification and seal of engineer or surveyor as to accuracy of the plat
details.
J. Where an Applicant proposes a temporary turnaround, sufficient
documentation must be submitted to demonstrate that the road terminus is
suitably located to facilitate the future extension of the road into adjoining
properties.
K. Where an Applicant proposes to extend a street which currently ends in a
T-type turnaround, a plan for restoring the "ears" of the turnaround to a
"natural" condition and continuing surface drainage through must be
submitted. The "ears" may be left where the abutting property owners
specifically request such treatment and where surface drainage is
appropriately accommodated.
30
L. Existing and proposed ground elevation contours based on USGS
topographic data and tied to a Town of Bow, State of New Hampshire, or
United States government benchmark as follows:
- slopes 0% to 2% - two foot (2') contour interval plus spot-elevations
- slopes 2% to 5% - two foot (2') contour intervals
- slopes greater than 5% - five foot (5') contour intervals
M. Existing soils delineation based on the "Merrimack and Belknap Counties
Soils Survey” (Soils Maps, Version 4, 2007 or later edition) USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service available at Web Soil Survey and a
legend which explains the map symbols, describes the NRCS soils groups
with drainage class, and describes the properties of the soils regarding
septic leach fields, basement/foundations, building construction, and road
construction.
Soil types will typically range as follows:
Group 1 - well-drained to excessively well-drained with rapid
permeability
Group 2 - well-drained with moderate permeability
Group 3 - moderately well-drained and well-drained with hardpan
Group 4 - somewhat poorly drained; bedrock relatively close to the
surface
Group 5 - poorly drained
Group 6 - floodplain or very poorly drained
Examples of soil types which fall within these categories are:
Group 1
Colton (CoA, CoB, CoC, CtE)
Gloucester (GcB, GcC, GcD, GrB, GrC, GrD, GrE, GsD, GsE)
Hermon (HmB, HmC, HmD, HnB, HnC, HnD, HoD, HoE)
Hickley (HrE, HsA, HsB, HsC)
Merrimac (MmA, MmB, MmC)
Windsor (WdA, WdB, WdC, WdE)
Group 2
Agawam (Afa, Afb)
Group 3
Acton (AcB, AdB, AdC)
Belgrade (PcB)
Duane (DuB)
Ninigret (NnA)
Paxton (PaB, PaC, PaD, PnB, PnC, PnD, PnE)
Sudbury (SuA, SuB)
Woodbridge (WoB, WoC, WvB, WvC)
31
Group 4
Canaan (CaC, Cad)
Shapleigh (SgB, SgC, ShC, ShD, SoD, SoE)
Group 5
Au Gres (Aga, AgB, Aub)
Ridgebury (Rba, RbB, RdA, RdB)
Group 6
Limerick (Lm)
Ondawa (Of, Oh)
Pondunk (Po)
Rumney (Ru)
Scarboro (Sc)
Suncook (Sy)
Muck and Peat (Mp)
N. All areas of wetlands and associated buffer areas as defined in the Town
of Bow Zoning Ordinance Section 10.01.B.2 with certification of Wetland
Scientist. Wetlands and buffers shall be delineated and stamped and
sealed by a Certified Wetland Scientist on the Plat. Such delineation shall
have been conducted per professional standards no earlier than six (6)
years prior to the date of submission of the Preliminary Plat application
package to the Planning Board. Very poorly drained soils, bogs, vernal
pools, streams, and the high water mark of water bodies shall be labeled.
O. A layout indicating how the site will be served by electric, telephone, and
any other public utility must be provided. If the utility company(s) require
an easement to provide service, no final approval shall be granted by the
Board until such easements are secured. If no easements are required, a
letter of intent to provide service from the utility company(s) must
accompany the application.
P. Locations of all existing and proposed sanitary sewer systems, water
mains, and all storm water management facilities, including but not limited
to catch basins, culverts, drainage swales, rip-rap areas,
detention/retention areas, and dams and weirs. Drainage/grading plans
shall be prepared by and bear the stamp and signature of a New
Hampshire Registered Professional Engineer.
Q. When individual sewage disposal systems are proposed, the plans for
such systems must be approved by the appropriate Local or State agency.
When a public sewage disposal system is not available, the Subdivider
shall have percolation tests made and submit the results with the
preliminary plat. Before the preliminary application is approved the
location of the septic system as proposed or, if applicable, as approved by
the NHDES Subsurface Systems Bureau shall be depicted on each lot.
R. A statement that the proposed street center lines, lot locations, and
32
required buffers have been adequately flagged on the ground at the site to
allow on-site evaluation of the proposed Subdivision by the Board,
Engineer, and Town Staff.
S. Certification that the Applicant is agent for the owner or is the owner of
the land, or that the owner has given consent under an option agreement.
T. Data Listing: The following listed data shall be included on the preliminary
plat prior to approval by the Bow Planning Board:
1. Area of Land subdivided _________ acres.
2. Number of building lots _________.
3. Length of streets _________ feet.
4. Area of open space/conservation strips ______ acres.
5. List of abutters with addresses.
U. Construction Sequencing Plan. A plan outlining the construction process
for all required improvements required for the Subdivision. The plan shall
include:
1. the location of the construction entrance and site for mobilization.
2. traffic control and traffic impacts for the construction entrance.
3. the sequence for commencement of clearing, grubbing, and
grading and the initial installation of sedimentation / erosion control
facilities.
4. the program for maintenance of sedimentation / erosion control
measures.
5. truck routes through town to the site.
6. estimates of earthen materials to be removed from the site or to
be brought to the site.
7. location of stockpiles of earthen materials.
8. timing of removal of existing traffic control devices.
9. identification of areas likely to require blasting for construction of
required improvements and duration of blasting activities.
10. description of noise generating activities (see Noise Control
Bylaw).
11. areas for parking and access for construction workers.
12. provisions for re-fueling and servicing construction equipment,
including fuel storage, secondary containment, spill clean up, and
proposed management procedures.
13. detailed cost estimate for restoration of the site (reestablishment
of stable grades, erosion / sedimentation control facilities,
drainage facilities, construction of 4 inch thick layer of loam, and
establishment of grass.
V. Provisions and performance guarantees for the long term maintenance of
private streets and quasi-public improvements including utilities, health
and sanitation facilities, water supply, cisterns and hydrants, amenities,
and other customary shared facilities, including proposed management
procedures and contractual arrangements.
33
W. Operational Brief for Major Subdivisions. A written description of the
development to include: natural features of the site and identification of
those to be preserved; market orientation of the project and how the site
features will be used in marketing; special design considerations or theme;
access routes to the site; neighborhood and abutting sites and uses and
proposed relationship to surrounding properties; known historical features
of site; and NHDES / USEPA environmental status including known
releases of regulated substances, hazardous waste sites, and storage
tanks for regulated materials on site and surrounding properties.
X. Restoration Plan, Independent Cost Estimate, and Proposed Security. To
comply with 3.03 F, a restoration plan that specifies the methods and
standards proposed to permanently reclaim disturbed areas, an
independent cost estimate to implement the restoration plan, and
performance security sufficient to implement the restoration plan shall
accompany all Applications for Major Subdivisions that require an
Alteration of Terrain Permit or propose a new street.
Y. Other information required by the Planning Board.
6.04 Final Plat:
In addition to all items listed in Section 6.03, the Final Plat shall be accompanied
by the following:
A. Locus Map at a scale of one inch equals one thousand feet (1"=1,000')
and suitable for use in updating the Town Tax Map showing all proposed
lots and streets and all existing lots and streets within one thousand feet
(1,000') of the proposed subdivision.
B. When any officer or body of the Municipality, State or County is required to
approve a plat, approval shall be certified on the plat in an appropriate
space provided therefore.
C. Existing and proposed ground elevation contours based on accurate field
survey as follows: (Contours shall be accurate within one half a contour
interval.)
- slopes 0% to 2% - two foot (2') contour interval plus spot-elevations
- slopes 2% to 5% - two foot (2') contour intervals
- slopes greater than 5% - five foot (5') contour intervals
D. Cross-sections and profiles of streets, including proposed locations for
underground utilities (cross-sections at fifty (50) feet intervals plotted at
one inch equals ten feet (1"=10') horizontal and vertical). Cross sections
shall be provided at stream crossings, showing proposed drainage and
channel treatments. Profiles shall be shown for all proposed driveways
where slopes exceed eight percent (8%) unless the drive is shown on the
cross sections. Profiles plotted with the same horizontal scale as the
34
plans and a horizontal to vertical scale ratio of five to one (5:1)
respectively. All data based on a field survey. These plans shall bear the
seal and certification of a Registered New Hampshire Professional
Engineer.
E. Profiles of sewers, storm drains, culverts, catch basins, headwalls, and all
other drainage facilities, as well as sanitary sewers, water, gas and
underground electric layouts showing feasible connections to existing or
proposed utility systems shall be required to accompany the final plat.
These plans shall bear the seal and certification of a Registered New
Hampshire Professional Engineer.
F. Certification of approval of the subdivision by the NH Department of
Environmental Services, Subsurface Systems Bureau, or appropriate
successor agency, accompanied by a duplicate copy of all data submitted
to them and any stipulations related to the approval.
G. Final State of New Hampshire approvals when appropriate from the
Department of Transportation (RSA 236:13), the NHDES Wetlands
Bureau (RSA 482-A and RSA 483-B), and the NHDES Alteration of
Terrain Bureau (RSA 485-A:17) shall be filed before Final Approval is
granted.
H. A lot area table which depicts for each lot the total area, buildable area,
and the areas of wetlands, third party easements, and slopes greater than
33%.
I. Certifications:
The following listed certifications shall be affixed to the final plan together
with the appropriate signatures and seals (when available) prior to the
approval by the Planning Board.
1. It is hereby certified that the lands subdivided on this map are
owned by title of record and that consent to the approval of said
map is given.
________ _______________________________
(date) (corporate or individual name)
2. I hereby certify that this map and survey has been made under my
supervision. The date of the survey was:
________ ______________________________
(date) (Land Surveyor)
3. I have carefully examined this map and find it conforms with the
laws and requirements applicable thereto.
35
________ ______________________________
(date) (Building Inspector)
4. This map is hereby approved by the Bow Planning Board at an
official meeting held on_________ and shall be filed on or before
____________ with the Merrimack County Registry of Deeds.
________ ______________________________
(date) (Chair of the Bow Planning Board)
J. All required variances and special exceptions granted by the Zoning Board
of Adjustment and all waivers granted under Section 11.00 shall be noted
on the Final Plat.
K. The recorded Final Plat shall contain an approval note “All New
Development on lots in the Subdivision shall be subject to the impact fees
in effect at the time of building permit.”
L. Other information required by the Planning Board.
M. The Final Plat once approved shall be drawn on mylar or equivalent
material at a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred feet
(1"=100') or at greater detail as directed by the Board to indicate clearly
existing and proposed features of the site. Said plat shall be prepared in
compliance with all applicable statutory requirements and shall be
prepared on twenty-two by thirty-four inches (22" X 34") standard sheets
measured from cutting edges. If one sheet is not of sufficient size to
contain the entire area of the site and environs, the plat shall be divided
into sections to be shown on separate sheets of equal size with reference
on each sheet to the adjoining sheets. All dimensions shall be shown to
hundredths of a foot and bearing to at least the nearest thirty (30)
seconds. The error of closure shall not be more than one to ten thousand
(1:10,000).
Required information that can not be recorded per RSA 478:1-a
(refer to sections 6.03 E., J., K., L., M., O., P., R., and U., and 6.04 C., D.,
and E.) shall be shown on separate sheets. The recorded sheets shall
contain a note that “This plan represents sheets of . The nonrecorded
sheets are on file with the Town of Bow.”
6.05 Yield Plan:
The Yield Plan shall be a realistic, reasonable, regular and ordinary layout
reflecting a development pattern that could be expected to be implemented,
taking into account the presence of wetlands and buffers, floodplains, steep
slopes, existing easements and encumbrances, and suitability of soils for on-site
sewage disposal. The plan shall depict lots that conform to dimensional
standards of the Zoning Ordinance, roads, and other pertinent features of the
36
site. The plan shall be prepared to a scale of not less than one inch equals two
hundred feet (1" = 200') or at greater detail as directed by the Board to indicate
clearly the existing and proposed features of the site. The Yield Plan shall show
or be accompanied by the following:
A. Date of survey, name and legal description of Subdivision, locus map
superimposed on the Town Tax map (scale of 1"=1,000') showing the
relation of the proposed Subdivision to existing streets, and surrounding
property within one thousand feet (1000'), name of owner of record and
Subdivider, north arrow showing grid north and magnetic north as of the
date of the survey, and graphic scale.
B. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, existing easements and
other rights-of-way, and land to be reserved for open space. All lot lines
and right-of-way lines of streets shall be shown with accurate dimensions.
1. Lots shall show gross and net buildable area and depict a 100 feet
radius on the front to confirm required lot width.
2. Within proposed street rights-of-way, areas of slopes in excess of
10% shall be identified.
C. Water courses and flood zone locations within the Subdivision boundaries.
D. All land within one thousand feet (1000') of any portion of the Subdivision
in which the owner/Subdivider or any person or entity which has an
interest in the owner/Subdivider has an interest. If the plans include only a
portion of the entire holdings, the Planning Board may require a sketch for
these remaining holdings showing possible road layout.
E. The tax block parcel number and names and addresses of owners of
property abutting the tract to be divided.
F. Name and address of engineer or surveyor, and certification and seal of
engineer or surveyor as to accuracy of the plan details.
G. Existing and proposed ground elevation contours for areas containing
roads and the front 200' of proposed lots. The contours shall be based on
USGS topographic data and tied to a Town of Bow, State of New
Hampshire, or United States government benchmark with a maximum of
five foot (5') contour intervals.
H. Existing soils delineation based on the "Merrimack and Belknap Counties
Soils Survey” (Soils Maps, Version 4, 2007 or later edition) USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service available at Web Soil Survey and a
legend which explains the map symbols, describes the Water Division
soils groups, and describes the properties of the soils regarding septic
leach fields.
37
I. All areas of wetlands, surface waters, and associated buffer areas as
defined in the Town of Bow Zoning Ordinance Section 10.01 B. 2. with
certification of Wetland Scientist for areas containing roads and the front
200 feet of proposed lots. Very poorly drained soils, bogs, vernal pools,
streams, and the high water mark of water bodies shall be labeled.
1. All wetland crossings required for roads shall be identified with
approximate square footage of impact to wetlands and buffers.
J. Locations of all existing and proposed sanitary sewer systems and water
mains.
K. A statement that approximate proposed street center lines and lot
locations have been adequately flagged on the ground at the site to allow
on-site evaluation of the plan.
L. Certification that the Applicant is the agent for the owner or is the owner
of the land, or that the owner has given consent under an option
agreement.
M. Data Listing: The following listed data shall be included on the Yield Plan:
1. Area of Land subdivided _________ acres.
2. Number of building lots _________.
3. Length of streets _________ feet.
4. List of abutters with addresses.
N. Other information required by the Planning Board.
6.06 Record Drawings (As-Builts):
To document the horizontal and vertical location of constructed roads, drainage
and stormwater control facilities, fire suppression water supply, public and private
utilities, other structures within road rights of way, and other required public
improvements, the Subdivider shall submit record drawings in paper and
electronic form in compliance with the Record Drawing (As-Built) Plan
Requirements checklist in APPENDIX C.
38
Section 7.00 - Required Improvements:
Unless superseded or otherwise specified herein, all materials and construction
methods used for Streets and Drainage shall meet NH Department of Transportation
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS for ROAD AND BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION.
7.01 Public and Private Streets:
A. Subgrades: All topsoil, stumps, brush, roots, boulders, and like materials
shall be stripped or removed from the proposed subgrade area. The
subgrade shall be excavated to a depth not less than twelve inches (12")
below the bottom of the bank run gravel grade or to such limits as the
Engineer may direct and backfilled with compacted sand meeting the
requirements of NHDOT Standard Specification 304.1. A geotextile fabric
meeting NHDOT specifications for Geotextiles, installed in accordance
with the manufacturer’s specification over compacted fill, all as approved
by the Engineer, may be substituted for the 12 inch compacted sand layer.
Where a geotextile fabric is substituted for the 12 inch compacted sand
layer, the bank run gravel layer shall be a minimum of eighteen inches
(18") deep. Ledge shall also be removed to a depth of two feet (2') below
the bank run gravel grade of the roadway. Test pits will be performed at
the direction of the Engineer to determine if ledge exists within two feet (2')
of the subgrade. The subgrade shall be shaped and compacted evenly as
shown on the profile and cross sections (see typicals). All soft and spongy
places and other soils not suitable for roadways shall be excavated to a
minimum depth of two feet (2') below the bank run gravel grade of the
roadway or as directed by the Engineer as shall be necessary to stabilize
the foundation of the road and refilled solidly with sub-base material as
directed by the Engineer. Compaction is to be obtained by use of
approved rollers and equipment, to at least ninety-five percent (95%) of
the Standard Proctor Density (ASTM-698). Said density to be checked by
an approved Testing Service, and the results of all tests are to be provided
to the Town for incorporation into the proper records. Compaction tests
shall not exceed twelve inches (12") in depth. All costs incurred for the
conduction of such tests shall be the responsibility of the Developer/
Contractor.
B. That before any clearing has started on the right- of-way, the centerline of
the new road shall be staked and side-staked at fifty (50) foot intervals.
Sidestakes to be set back off the right-of-way at right angles from the
centerline so as to be out of the construction area and with stationing and
distances to the centerline of the road.
C. Limits of clearing shall be marked by stakes or flagging. Distance from the
centerline to be obtained from the cross-section.
D. After clearing is done and before excavation is started, elevations shall be
taken on the tops of sidestakes. Cuts and fills shall be marked on
sidestakes.
39
E. Embankments: Embankments shall be formed of suitable material placed
in successive layers of not more than twelve (12) inches in depth for the
full width of the roadway cross-section and shall be compacted uniformly
and sufficiently to prevent settlement. Stumps, trees, rubbish, and other
unsuitable materials of substance shall not be placed in the fill. The fill
shall be allowed to thoroughly settle before applying gravel. Compaction is
to be obtained by use of approved rollers and equipment, to at least
ninety-five percent (95%) of the Standard Proctor Density (ASTM-698).
Said density to be checked by an approved Testing Service, and the
results of all tests are to be provided to the Town for incorporation into the
proper records. Compaction tests shall not exceed twelve inches (12") in
depth. All costs incurred for the conduction of such tests shall be the
responsibility of the Developer/Contractor.
All fill material necessary to achieve subgrade elevation shall consist of
stone and sand reasonably free from loam, silt, clay, and organic material
and shall meet the requirement of the following table:
Sieve Size Percent Passing by Weight
6 inch (6") 100
No. 4 20 - 100
No. 200 0 - 12
F. Base Course: The base course shall not be laid until the subgrade has
been inspected by the Engineer. The base course shall conform to the
typical sections. The 12" - 18" Bank Run Layer shall meet the
requirements for NHDOT Standard Specification 304.2 and the 6"
Crushed Gravel layer shall meet the requirements for Specification 304.3.
Where ledge is blasted on site and crushed to meet the requirements for
Specification 304.4 for Crushed Stone, the Engineer may permit it to be
substituted for both the bank run and crushed gravel layers. Base course
shall be laid in layers not to exceed six (6) inches. Compaction is to be
obtained by use of approved rollers and equipment, to at least ninety-five
percent (95%) of the Standard Proctor Density (ASTM-698). Said density
to be checked by an approved Testing Service, and the results of all tests
are to be approved by the Town for incorporation into the proper records.
All costs incurred for the conduction of such tests, shall be the
responsibility of the Developer/Contractor.
G. Hot Bituminous Concrete Pavement: Four inch (4") minimum NH
Standards for road and bridge construction. Prior to pavement
construction, all sideslopes, ditches, treatment swales, and detention
areas shall be final graded, loamed, and seeded.
1) Base Course = 2.5 inch (after compaction) Type "B"
2) Wearing Course = 1.5 inch (after compaction) Type "E"
H. Shoulders: Shoulders shall be constructed in the same manner as
described above as noted on the typical cross-sections or as directed by
40
the Engineer.
I. Roadway Width: Centerlines of roadways shall coincide with centerlines
of street rights-of-way and shall have the dimensions shown on the
typicals.
J. Immediate Installation of Street Name Signs: Once construction of a new
street has commenced, a street name sign in compliance with Section
8.01I, shall be installed to facilitate the response of emergency vehicles.
K. Driveways: During construction of Streets, paved driveways to individual
lots shall be constructed from the edge of pavement of the street to the
private property line or to the limit of grading, whichever is greater.
7.02 Drainage:
A. Underdrains: Underdrains shall be installed where the character and
composition of the soil in the roadbed and other areas of the subdivision
render such installation necessary in the opinion of the Engineer. The
location of the underdrain shall be four (4) feet beyond the traveled way
and at a depth of two feet below subgrade, three feet in guard rail
sections. A minimum 2 inch sand cushion in earth excavation and a 6
inch sand cushion in rock excavation shall be placed in the bottom of the
trench for its full width and length to the grade of the bottom of the
underdrain pipe. These underdrains shall consist of perforated metal pipe
or perforated fiber pipe of a minimum six (6) inches in diameter and laid in
the bottom of a trench at such depth and width as may be necessary. The
trench backfill shall consist of a mixture of stones or rock fragments and
particles with 95 to 100 percent passing the 3 inch sieve and 25 to 70 per
cent passing the No. 4 sieve.
B. Storm drains, culverts, catch basins: Storm drains, culverts and related
installations, including catch basins and drop inlets, shall be installed
within or without the Subdivision as necessary to permit unimpeded flow of
all natural water courses, to insure adequate drainage of all low points
along streets, and to intercept storm water run-off along streets at intervals
reasonable related to the extent and grade of area drained. (Where
required, catch basins may be on both sides of the roadway on continuous
grade at intervals of approximately three hundred (300) feet.) Drainage
improvements shall meet the specification of AASHTO (American
Association of State Highway Transportation Officials) in regard to
material and strength requirements. Catch basins and drop inlets shall be
equal to New Hampshire Standard Type E or acceptable to the Engineer.
Storm sewer pipes and culverts shall be reinforced concrete, corrugated
aluminum, corrugated steel, or equivalent and shall have a minimum two
(2) foot cover over all pipes. Pipes constructed under the traveled way
shall have a minimum cover of 4 feet, unless otherwise authorized.
Headwalls where required shall be either of concrete or rubble masonry.
41
C. Erosion protection ditches: Class C stone shall be provided in ditches
where soil or velocity conditions warrant protection from erosion as
determined by the Engineer.
7.03 Topsoil Protection:
Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be redistributed to provide
at least four (4) inches of cover to all areas of the Subdivision and shall be
stabilized by seeding and mulching or planting. No topsoil shall be removed from
the Subdivision site.
7.04 Monuments:
A. All lot lines, beginning and end of curves, and points of a curve change
shall be identified in the field by monuments in conformance with NH Land
Surveyors Association Ethics and Standards for acceptable monuments
(6.2 and 6.2a for materials), August 1989. Principal corners that
monument the furthest extent of each lot shall be of stone or concrete, 4
inch X 4 inch X 35 inch long. Concrete bounds are to be reinforced with
two reinforcing bars of a minimum diameter of ½ inch. The final plat shall
identify each monument found or set and shall describe the monument.
A change in bearing along a property line or an accumulated
change of bearing of five (5) degrees or greater shall indicate separate lot
lines and shall be monumented. Where such lines are marked in the field
with stone walls, the stone wall may be used for monumentation, except
on principal corners.
B. All monuments shall be set under the direct supervision of a licensed land
surveyor. All monuments shall be flush with finished grade. No
monument shall be set until all construction which would disturb or destroy
the monument is completed. The maximum distance between
monuments shall be 500 feet.
C. All monuments shall be set and their installation certified by a licensed
land surveyor prior to recording the final plat unless installation of the
monuments is assured by a performance guarantee in conformance with
Section 9.02.
7.05 Water and Sewer Facilities
A. Common systems: Such systems proposed by a Subdivider shall be of
sufficient capacity to serve the Subdivision and shall be designed and
constructed for incorporation into the future town or precinct systems. All
such facilities shall meet the requirements of and be approved by, the
NHDES Drinking Water and Groundwater Bureau, local and county health
and public works agencies, and/or other public body having jurisdiction,
and shall be accepted by the Engineer.
42
1. Site plans to include:
a. Five (5) foot contour intervals.
b. Well site with two hundred (200) foot protective radius. No
subsurface disposal system permitted in this area.
c. All lots numbered.
d. Distribution system with water line sizes, pipe material,
buried depth of piping, all valving and hydrant locations.
e. Indicate type of establishment; manufactured housing park,
apartment buildings, etc.
2. Complete quality analysis for the well water as conducted by the
NHDES Laboratory Services Bureau or other certified laboratory
within the past six (6) months.
3. Continuous forty-eight (48) hour yield test log of the well showing
water level and rate of pumping at one hour intervals.
4. Schematic drawing of pumphouse piping.
5. Detailed elevation of pumphouse facilities.
6. Detailed elevations of well design.
7. Storage facilities to be provided.
8. Characteristic curve for all pumps-well and booster.
9. The proposed water systems must meet all the requirements of the
NHDES Drinking Water and Groundwater Bureau at the date plans
are presented to and accepted by the Town of Bow Planning
Board.
10. Show that new and replacement water and sewer systems
including on site and common systems be located, designed and
constructed to minimize infiltration and avoid impairment when
locations fall within five hundred (500) feet of a Flood Zone.
B. Individual Service: Individual wells and subsurface disposal facilities shall
in all respects comply with all applicable local and/or state requirements
including those of the NHDES Subsurface Systems Bureau. In areas not
currently served by common sewer systems, it shall be the responsibility
of the Subdivider to provide adequate information to the installation and
operation of an individual sewerage disposal system (septic tank and drain
field). The Subdivider shall be required to provide the necessary
43
equipment and labor for the making of these tests, required by local,
county, and/or state authorities having jurisdiction.
1. Show that new and replacement water and sewer systems
including on site and common systems be located, designed and
constructed to minimize infiltration and avoid impairment when
locations fall within five hundred (500) feet of a Flood Zone.
7.06 Winter Conditions: All ditches, slopes, drainage ways, and other disturbed areas
shall be loamed and seeded within two weeks of final grading. Seeding done
after October 1st shall consist of fast germinating grasses and shall be
considered temporary. Areas shall be regraded and reseeded as necessary into
the following growing season. Final approval of grading and seeding shall not be
granted before the following June 15th.
Erosion and sedimentation control measures and facilities shall be in place and
maintained through winter until final grading and seeding is completed and
approved. In addition the Developer/Contractor shall file an inspection and
maintenance plan. The plan shall set forth the names, addresses, and telephone
numbers (including night and weekend telephone numbers) of all responsible
parties. The plan shall provide for monthly reports of periodic inspections and
inspections immediately following substantial rainfalls and snow melt conditions,
as well as maintenance and corrective measures required. The reports shall be
filed over the signature of the engineer/surveyor who designed the improvement
or other similarly qualified individual.
7.07 Time Limit to Complete: At the time of the Board's approval of a Final Plat, the
Board may specify a time limit, not to exceed three (3) years, within which all
required improvements caused in the course of the work performed in the
development of the Subdivision shall be completed. In the event no time limit is
specified by the Board, all such improvements and repairs shall be completed
within (3) years of the date of such Final Approval. This time limit may be
extended by mutual agreement of the Subdivider and the Planning Board.
44
Section 8.00 - Design Standards:
The Subdivision plat shall conform to the design standards set forth herein to encourage
good development patterns within the Town. Whether either or both an official map or
comprehensive plan has or have been adopted, the Subdivision shall conform thereto
with respect to streets, public open spaces and drainage ways.
8.01 Streets:
A. General Design: All streets in the Subdivision, with the exception of a
permanent turnaround (see 8.01G2), shall be designed to provide safe
vehicular travel at a design speed of 30 MPH. Due consideration shall be
also given to the attractiveness of the street layout in order to obtain an
optimum livability and amenity of the Subdivision. Where safe vehicular
travel and optimum livability and amenity can be demonstrated, alternative
designs that incorporate accepted traffic calming techniques may be
approved by the Planning Board. All Public and Private Streets shall
comply with State Fire Code standards (NFPA 1141, Chapter 5 Means of
Access) for Fire Department Access Roads. Provisions shall be made for
the future extension of streets to adjoining unsubdivided property.
Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform to
the width shown on the comprehensive plan or official maps or the street
width requirements of these Regulations shall dedicate the differential
width along either or both sides of said existing streets in accordance with
Section 3.02D. If the Subdivision is along one side only, one-half (½) of
the differential width shall be dedicated. Setbacks shall be measured from
the new or future right-of-way line.
B. Naming: No street shall have a name which duplicates or which is
substantially similar to the name of an existing street. The continuation of
an existing street, however, shall have the same name. Proposed street
names shall be submitted to the Board of Selectmen for review and
approval. Submittals shall be on the form and in the manner prescribed
by the Selectmen.
C. Cross-Section: Street right-of-way width shall be as follows:
Minimum (ft)
Arterial (Class A) 80
Collector (Class B) 70
Local (Class C) 60
Industrial (Class C) 70
Right-of-way widths and other applicable cross- sectional standards are
shown in Appendix B.
45
D. Alignment: The minimum sight distance at intersecting roadways shall be
400 feet or farther as a result of an AASHTO analysis. Street jogs at
intersections with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five
(125) feet shall be avoided. The minimum centerline radii of curved
streets shall be as follows:
Arterial (Class A) 500 feet
Collector (Class B) 300 feet
Local (Class C) 275 feet
Industrial (Class C) 300 feet
All reversed curves on Class A and B streets shall be separated by a
tangent at least one hundred (100) feet long. When required, the roadway
shall be superelevated at a maximum rate of 6%. Streets shall be laid out
so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. No street shall
intersect any other street at less than seventy-five (75) degrees.
E. Design of intersections: Intersecting roadway pavements shall have a
paved transitional area at all corners to accommodate turning movements
according to the following radii:
From: To: Class A Class B Class C
Class A 50 50 30
Class B 50 30 30
Class C 30 30 30
For all intersections in commercial and industrial areas, this paved area
shall have a minimum radius of fifty (50) feet.
New streets shall be located such that minimum K values as shown
in subsection F below are maintained on existing and new streets through
the intersection.
F. Grade: The centerline grade for any street shall not be less than fivetenths
percent (.5%). Maximum allowable centerline grades shall be as
follows:
Arterial (Class A) 6%
Collector (Class B) 8%
Local (Class C) Residential 10%
All changes in grade exceeding five-tenths percent (.5%) shall be
connected by vertical curves of sufficient length to afford adequate sight
distances, in the opinion of the Board. The minimum K value for sag
vertical curves shall be 40, and for crest vertical curves, 30, unless
otherwise required.
G. Deadend Streets: Deadend streets shall be provided with an approved
type turnaround, as determined by the Planning Board to be a
46
"Temporary" or "Permanent" need. Design for the turnarounds shall be as
follows:
1. Temporary turnaround: The right-of-way width, per classification of
the roadway, shall be maintained to the end of the improvements
and further, to the property line, if so ordered by the Board. An "L"
type turnaround shall be constructed at the end of the road. Said
"L" to have the dimensions shown on the typicals.
The "ear" or "extension" that forms the "L" shall be deeded to the
Town of Bow in the form of an Easement. Driveways shall not be
located off of any portion of the "L".
The Easement shall stipulate that the Town has sole rights to use
and maintain the area until such time as the Easement shall expire
and the portion of the "L" which is no longer needed, expires. The
portion of the "L" no longer needed shall revert to owners of the
abutting lots. For the purposes of frontage requirements only, that
portion of a lot that would front on an extension of a street when the
"L" is discontinued, or the width of the right-of-way for the "L", shall
be counted and not the lines around the "L". This type of
turnaround shall be used only when the possibility of extension is
evident. This type of turnaround shall not be considered as a
permanent turnaround.
Where a Subdivider proposes to extend a street which currently
ends in an “L” type turnaround or other temporary deadend, it is the
Subdivider's responsibility to restore the temporary turnaround to
through street standards. This includes, but is not limited to
removing the "ears" or other maneuvering facilities where abutters
desire and installing a suitable drainage system.
2. Permanent turnaround: All streets that shall permanently
terminate, as shown on plans, shall have a turnaround constructed
to the following minimum specifications: The right-of-way shall be
flared so as to form a circular, or partially circular section or
roadway for the ease of maintenance and travel. The radius of the
centerline of the pavement around the turnaround shall be a
minimum of seventy-five (75) feet. Shapes such as a "tear drop" or
a "P" are preferred over the "lolly-pop" shape. Pavement widths
shall be the same as for the road servicing the development as will
all other improvements within the turnaround area. The Deed to
the Town for the roadway shall include ALL lands within the
outermost dimensions of the turnaround area. All drainage, signs,
and other improvements within the area of the turnaround shall be
as per guidelines contained within these Regulations for "Required
Improvements". (SEE TYPICALS IN REAR OF THESE
REGULATIONS).
Where a Subdivider proposes to extend a street which currently
ends in a permanent turnaround, it is the Subdivider's responsibility
47
to restore the turnaround to through street standards. This may
include, at the discretion of the Board, removing the paved surface,
restoring to a natural state the previously paved area, providing
proper access to abutting lots, necessary title and deed work
required by the proposal, and other work required to create a
through street to Town of Bow standards.
3. General: (1) Delineator posts or reflectors of a design approved by
the Town Engineer, shall be furnished, located and installed as a
part of the required improvements for all roadways and
turnarounds; (2) the roadways constructed within the turnaround
areas, shall conform exactly with the design criteria contained in
these Regulations.
H. Street Lights: Street lights of a type or style acceptable to the Board, the
Director of Public Works, and the Police Chief, and compliant with RSA 9-
D:2, III shall be provided at intersections and other locations as the Board
may reasonably require, after consultation with the Director of Public
Works and Police Chief. Street lights shall be required where needed for
public safety based on traffic volumes and to achieve adequate
intersection recognition. At all new intersections, conduits for
underground electric power shall be installed to power future street lights.
I. Street Signs: Street signs of a type of style acceptable to the Board, the
Road Agent and the Police Chief shall be provided at all intersections.
J. Mail Boxes: No portion of any mail box or mail delivery receptacle shall be
installed closer than twelve (12) inches to the edge of pavement or curbing
of any street.
K. Driveways: Driveways shall be designed and constructed with grades
which do not exceed 10% and to include a turnaround. Driveways in
excess of 500 feet in length shall be designed and constructed so as to
provide access for a SU (single unit) vehicle.
L. Traffic Control: Traffic control signs, pavement marking, and other
devices shall be installed in accordance with the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices unless otherwise stipulated by the Planning Board
or Engineer.
8.02 Blocks:
Blocks generally shall not be less than five hundred (500) feet, nor shall the
length exceed one thousand two hundred (1200) feet. In blocks over one
thousand (1000) feet long, pedestrian crosswalks may be required in locations
deemed necessary by the Planning Board.
8.03 Lots:
48
A. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance, or as required by soil or topography conditions.
B. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines should be at right angles to straight
streets, and radial to curved streets.
C. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets, lots
shall begin at such extra width line, and all setbacks shall be measured
from such line.
D. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for its or their
intended use due to shape or the presence of such factors as rock
formations, steep slopes, unusual surface configurations, tendency to
periodic flooding, poor drainage, unsuitable soil or soils, and inadequate
capacity for sanitary sewer disposal, the Planning Board may withhold
approval of such lot or lots.
E. Lots shall be graded in such a manner so as to prevent the collection of
water at low points thereon.
F. Any land designated as Area of Special Flood Hazard or shown to be bog,
marsh, swamp area, area of high water table or any similar situation, shall
not be counted toward the required minimum lot size, but shall be allowed
to be added to lots if the Public Welfare and safety is protected. Any soils
considered by the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service as
being poorly drained or very poorly drained, in addition to the above
conditions, shall not be counted towards the minimum lot sizes.
8.04 Easements:
A. Easements for utilities across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall
be provided where necessary and shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide.
B. Where a Subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way,
channel or stream, the Board may require that there be provided a storm
water easement or drainage right-of-way of adequate width to conform
substantially to the lines of such water courses, drainage way, channel or
stream, and provide for construction and permanent maintenance of
associated storm water control facilities such as rip-rap, flow dissipaters,
headwalls and catch basins. Required flowage easements, within the
subdivision, shall be extended until a drop of 4 feet in elevation from the
drainage structure’s outlet is obtained.
8.05 Utilities:
All underground utilities shall be placed immediately after preparation of the
roadway to subgrade, but prior to placement of and beneath select roadway
materials in conduit in streets under construction. The conduit shall extend a
minimum of three feet (3') beyond paved areas and shall be placed a minimum of
49
12 inches below subgrade, unless otherwise specified.
Crossings shall be perpendicular to the roadway whenever possible.
Excepting water and sewer facilities, underground utilities running parallel to the
traveled way, shall be located a minimum of three feet (3') outside paved areas
with a minimum of two feet (2') of cover and in the manner prescribed by the
utility company providing service.
When underground utilities are encountered, the contractor shall notify the
appropriate agency to assure proper construction procedure in that area. Any
damage to a utility is to be reported to and repaired by that utility prior to
backfilling.
A. Water and Sewer:
The Engineer shall oversee all work related to required water and sewer facilities.
1. All water and sewer facilities shall be designed by a registered
professional engineer
2. Sanitary sewer mains shall have a minimum of six feet (6') of cover
under street surfaces.
3. Water mains shall have a minimum of five and one half feet (5 ½')
of cover under street surfaces.
B. Electric Power:
1. At crossings, underground electric conductors must be contained
within rigid conduits (4 inch minimum diameter Schedule 80 PVC or
rigid steel conduit).
2. Underground electric conductors shall have a minimum of 40
inches of cover.
3. Electrical site work shall be performed by Licensed Electrical
Contractors, not general contractors.
C. Warning Tape:
An appropriately labeled warning tape shall be laid approximately 12 inches
above all underground utilities within the street right of way.
8.06 Storm Drainage:
A. General Design: Unless superceded or otherwise specified herein, all
drainage design shall meet the standards for “Minor State Aid Highways
and Betterments” contained in the NH Department of Transportation
50
Manual on DRAINAGE DESIGN FOR HIGHWAYS.
B. General Applicability: These design standards shall apply to drainage
facilities referred to in sections 3.03 B Drainage/Grading Plan and 7.02
Drainage.
C. Specific Design Standards: Drainage Structures shall be designed to
accommodate storms of the following frequency:
Bridges 50 years
Culverts 25 years
Storm Drains for depressed sections 25 years
Storm Drains 10 years
Detention Ponds / Structures 10 years
Curbed Roadway & Roadside Ditches 10 years
Based on the Drainage Calculations required in section 3.03 B, the
design engineer shall address potential adverse impacts to downstream
improvements, property, and receiving waters.
51
Section 9.00 -Inspections and Performance Guarantee:
9.01 Performance and Inspection of Work:
A. All work necessary for the construction of required improvements and the
repair of damage to existing public improvements shall conform to the
requirements of these Regulations. Such work shall be performed in a
good and workmanlike manner, and shall be free from faults and defects.
All materials incorporated in such construction shall conform to the
requirements of the current State of New Hampshire’s Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. Any work or materials
not conforming to the foregoing standards may be considered defective
and rejected by the Engineer. All work and materials rejected by the
Engineer as defective shall be removed and corrected by the Subdivider.
All work shall be completed within the time limits, if any, specified by the
Planning Board, but in the absence of such specified limits and in all
events no later than three (3) years from the date of the approval of the
Final Plat, unless the time limit is extended by mutual agreement of the
Planning Board and the Subdivider.
B. The Engineer will be the Town's representative during the construction of
required improvements. He shall at all times have access to the site when
the work is in preparation and progress. He will make periodic visits to the
site to familiarize himself generally with the progress and quality of the
work and to determine in general if the work is proceeding in accordance
with the requirements of these Regulations. The Subdivider shall provide
the Engineer in advance with a schedule of work to be performed outside
of the Engineer's normal office hours and give the Engineer timely notice
of the completion of each major stage in the construction of any required
improvement so that the Engineer may inspect the work so completed
prior to the covering thereof, and the Engineer shall make all such
inspections with reasonable promptness so as to cause no delay in the
work. In particular, the Subdivider shall in the case for streets, give timely
notice to the Engineer of the completion of subgrades, drainage base
course, and base and final surfacing. The Subdivider shall provide to the
Engineer, the name and telephone number of the individual(s) responsible
for the construction, so that he/she may be contacted for any emergency,
night, or weekend maintenance problems.
C. The Subdivider shall give the Engineer notice when any required
improvements is completed and ready for final inspection. The Engineer
will promptly make such inspection and, when he finds that the particular
improvement has been fully completed in accordance with the
requirements of these Regulations, he shall approve the same in writing.
Such approval, in the case of a street, shall not constitute the legal
acceptance of the street by the Town nor shall it modify in any way the
requirements of law for the acceptance of streets by the Town.
D. The Subdivider shall promptly remedy any defects in any required
52
improvement due to faulty workmanship or materials which appear within
a period of one (1) year after approval thereof by the Engineer.
E. Notwithstanding the on-site observations and inspections and any
approvals of required improvements issued by the Engineer, the
Subdivider shall be and remain fully responsible for the performance of the
construction work in accordance with the requirements of these
Regulations and the Engineer shall have no responsibility for the failure of
the Subdivider to carry out the work as required herein.
F. The Subdivider shall upon demand, promptly reimburse the Town for the
expense of all inspection work performed by the Engineer pursuant to the
provisions of subparagraphs B and C of this Paragraph 1, Section 9.00. In
the case of a Major Subdivision, the Subdivider shall file with the Town a
cash deposit of such amount as the Engineer may reasonably require as
security for such reimbursement, and if the Subdivider fails to make
reimbursement as and when required hereunder the Town may
appropriate such cash deposit as necessary to affect reimbursement.
9.02 Performance Guarantee:
A. Estimate of Cost: Prior to the submission of the Final Plat to the Board,
the Subdivider or owner shall obtain from the Engineer an estimate of the
cost of construction of all improvements which will be required by the
Board as a condition of final approval up to the standards set forth in these
Regulations, together with an estimate of any damage to any existing
public improvements caused in the course of the work performed in the
development of the Subdivision.
B. Posting of Performance Guarantee: As a condition of the approval of a
Final Plat by the Board, the Subdivider shall provide the Town with a
Performance Guarantee to assure the Town of the completion of
improvements required under these Regulations and repair of potential
damage to existing public improvements. In accordance with RSA 674:36
III, the Performance Guarantee shall be posted and in full effect prior to
the signing of the plat by the Chair of the Planning Board.
C. Amount: The Performance Guarantee shall be in an amount equal to one
hundred and ten percent (110%) of the estimated cost of required
improvements and potential damages to public improvements, and shall
be upon conditions and in such form as the Board and the Board of
Selectmen may require. The Performance Guarantee shall be in the form
of a bond issued by a surety company registered and licensed to do
business in the State of New Hampshire, a Letter of Credit or other
collateral or surety arrangement, all in form and substance satisfactory to
the Board of Selectmen, or a cash escrow, or a savings bank deposit book
properly endorsed to the Town and deposited with it.
D. Term: The Performance Guarantee shall remain in full force and effect
53
until the expiration of twenty-five (25) months after the date of the approval
by the Engineer of the completion of all required improvements and repair
of all damages to public improvements in accordance with the provisions
of these Regulations, or the date that all latent defects have been
corrected by the Developer and approved by the Engineer, whichever is
later, and shall be conditioned in part upon the faithful correction by the
Developer of any latent defects which appear within the period of two (2)
years after the approval by the Engineer of any required improvements as
set forth in these Regulations. Prior to commencing the two year latent
defects period, the developer must complete all phases of winter
maintenance for a complete freeze-thaw cycle (December 1 through April
1). Should defects appear, the developer shall make repairs acceptable to
the Engineer and maintain the road for another complete freeze-thaw
cycle. Prior to commencing the two year latent defects period, the
developer must provide a complete set of Record Drawings (As-Builts) in
conformance with Section 6.06 for all required improvements and utilities
completed and documentation certified by a licensed land surveyor that all
required monuments have been set in accordance with Section 7.00 -
Required Improvements: 4. Monuments. In the case of a Letter of Credit,
cash deposit or an assignment of a savings bank deposit book, the
amount on deposit may be reduced by the Planning Board by resolution
when portions of the required improvements have been installed, provided
a sufficient amount not to exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total is
retained to cover the correction of any latent defects which may appear
within two (2) years following the approval by the Engineer of any required
improvements as set forth in these Regulations. A joint inspection for
latent defects shall be made by the Engineer and owner or Developer not
earlier than the twenty-second (22nd) nor later than the twenty-third (23rd)
month following approval by the Engineer.
E. Commencement of Work: After approval of the Final Plat but prior to the
commencement of any such work or the commencement of work on
separate phases, the Developer or owner shall:
1. Contact the Engineer to schedule a preconstruction conference
with the Public Works Director, Building Inspector, Utilities, and
Town Planner.
The preconstruction conference checklist shall include at a
minimum the review of the items listed under section 6.03 U
Construction Sequencing Plan, the Construction Observation for
Subdivision Roads checklist, related local permits and regulations,
all required state and federal permits, and the Storm Water
Pollution Prevention Plan.
2. Notify the Engineer of a change in the owner or contractor to
schedule another preconstruction conference with the Public Works
Director, Building Inspector, Utilities, and Town Planner.
54
3. Notify the Engineer in writing of the date on which work or required
improvements are to be commenced and the date by which work is
to be completed in accordance any conditions imposed by the
Board, any conditions imposed by the Board of Selectmen, and the
provisions of these Regulations.
4. File a copy of the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP)
with the Board agent and shall file a complete Notice of Intent with
the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The SWPPP shall
be kept up to date and on site during construction.
5. Receive the written authorization of the Engineer to commence the
work.
F. Default: If the required improvements and repairs to public improvements
have not been installed and completed in accordance with the
requirements of these Regulations or if any latent defects in such
improvements or repairs appearing within a period of two (2) years after
approval thereof by the Engineer have not been corrected as required
herein above, then and in that event any cash deposit or savings bank
deposit may be used to complete the improvements or correct the latent
defects, and in the event the Performance Guarantee is in the form of a
performance bond, Letter of Credit, cash escrow or other suretyship, the
Town shall be entitled to exercise its rights under the appropriate
documents to require the surety or issuer of the Letter of Credit to provide
the Town with sufficient funds to complete such work.
9.03 Maintenance of Improvements and Facilities
A. The recipient of subdivision approval or his successor shall be responsible
for maintaining all improvements or facilities required by this regulation or
approval conditions issued in accordance with its provisions. As
illustrations, and without limiting the generality of the foregoing, this means
that streets, parking areas, and water, sewer, storm water, and recreation
facilities must be properly maintained so that they can be used in the
manner intended. All vegetation required for screening, landscaping, or
erosion and sediment control must be replaced if it dies or is destroyed.
B. As provided in section 9.03A of these regulations, all facilities and
improvements with respect to which the owner makes an offer of
dedication to public use shall be maintained by the owner until such offer
of dedication is accepted by the appropriate public authority.
55
Section 10.00 - Compliance with Regulations - Penalties:
No subdivision of land shall be made, and no land in any Subdivision shall be
transferred, sold or offered for sale until a Final Plat, prepared in accordance with the
requirements of these Regulations, has been approved by the Planning Board. As
provided in RSA 676:16 (formerly RSA 36:27), any owner, or agent of the owner, of any
land located within a Subdivision, who transfers or sells any land before a plan of the
said Subdivision has been approved by the Planning Board and recorded or filed in the
office of the Merrimack County Registry of Deeds, shall forfeit and pay a civil penalty of
One Thousand Dollars ($1,000) for each lot or parcel so transferred or sold; and the
description of metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents used
in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such
penalties. The Town of Bow may enjoin a transfer or sale which violates the provisions
of this Section and may recover the penalty imposed by a civil action. In any such
action, the prevailing party may recover reasonable court costs and attorney's fees as
the same may be ordered by the court. The Town of Bow may invoke the authority of
any applicable statute to obtain compliance with these regulations, including, but not
limited to the provisions of RSA 676:15 Injunctive Relief or 676:17 Fines and Penalties;
Second Offense.
56
Section 11.00 - Waivers:
The proposed Subdivision shall conform to the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Bow.
Where (a) strict conformity to these Subdivision Regulations would cause undue
hardship to the owner of the land or where (b) specific circumstances relative to the
subdivision, or conditions of the land in such subdivision, indicate that the waiver will
properly carry out the spirit and intent of the regulations, a Subdivision plan substantially
in conformity with these Regulations may be approved by the Board, provided that the
spirit of these Regulations and public convenience and welfare will not be adversely
affected.
Requests for waivers shall be submitted in writing and shall include the basis for
granting the waiver. The Board may accept an oral request for waiver at the public
hearing for a subdivision application. The basis for any waiver granted by the Board
shall be recorded in the minutes of the board.
57
Section 12.00 - Amendments:
These Regulations may be amended or rescinded by the Planning Board but only
following public hearing on the proposed changes. The Chair or Secretary of the
Planning Board shall transmit a record of any changes so authorized to the Merrimack
County Registry of Deeds.
58
Section 13.00 - Appeals:
Pursuant to RSA 677:15, any persons aggrieved by any decision of the Planning Board
concerning a Plat or Subdivision may present to the superior court a petition, duly
verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal or unreasonable in whole or in part,
specifying the grounds upon which the same is claimed to be illegal or unreasonable.
Such petition shall be presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the date upon
which the Planning Board voted to approve or disapprove the Subdivision. In
accordance with RSA 677:15, I-a, if any of the matters to be appealed are appealable
to the Zoning Board of Adjustment under RSA 676:5, III, such matters shall be appealed
to the Zoning Board of Adjustment before any appeal is taken to the superior court.
59
Section 14.00 - Appendices
60
61
APPENDIX B
Typical Sections for Roads
General Notes
Arterial (Class A) Street
Collector (Class B) Street
Local Industrial (Class C) Street
Local (Class C) Street - Through "fill" area
Local (Class C) Street - Through "cut" area
Typical Temporary Turnaround
Typical Permanent Turnaround - "tear drop" design
Typical Permanent Turnaround - "lolly pop" design
Typical Permanent Turnaround - reversed "P" design
62
APPENDIX B; TYPICAL SECTIONS FOR ROADS
GENERAL NOTES
A. Surface Treatment
Hot bituminous concrete pavement - 4 inches minimum
NH Standards for Road and Bridge Construction
1) Base Course – 2.5 inches (after compaction) Type "B"
2) Wearing Course – 1.5 inches (after compaction) Type "E"
3) Paved Shoulders on Arterial, Collector, and Industrial Streets:
Base Course – 2.5 inches (after compaction) Type "B"
Wearing Course - 1 inch (after compaction) Type "E"
B. In Fill Areas
Original ground to be "stripped and grubbed" and properly shaped
All non-acceptable materials ie. stumps, branches, leaves, roots, muck, clay,
etc., shall be removed prior to placing fill or structural section (gravel) layers
A minimum of twelve inches (12") below the bottom of the bank run gravel grade
shall be compacted sand meeting the requirements of the a NHDOT Standard
Specification 304.1. A geotextile fabric may be substituted for the 12 inch sand
layer in accordance with section 7.01 A.
Slopes steeper than 3:1 shall be stabilized by a method approved by the Town’s
Engineer.
In "Cut" Areas
Subgrade to be shaped and graded prior to the placing of gravel
A minimum of twelve inches (12") below the bottom of the bank run gravel grade
shall be compacted sand meeting the requirements of the a NHDOT Standard
Specification 304.1. A geotextile fabric may be substituted for the 12 inch sand
layer in accordance with section 7.01 A.
Slopes steeper than 3:1 shall be stabilized by a method approved by the Town’s
Engineer.
C. 1) Superelevate roadways on curves, as directed. Maximum superelevation
rate shall be 6%.
2) Ditches or gutters shall be paved where required
3) All drainage pipes to have minimum 2 feet of cover. Pipes constructed
under the traveled way shall have a minimum cover of 4 feet, unless
otherwise authorized.
63
4) All drainage to be constructed as shown on plans or as directed by the
Engineer
D. Where required by the Town Engineer or Road Agent, the ditches shall be lined
in the following manners:
1) "Hot top" at a depth of 2 inches after compaction (minimum)
2) Stones - NH Standard Class "C" placed so that the pattern is "stone
to stone" in a neat and controlled manner
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
APPENDIX C; RECORD DRAWING (AS-BUILT) PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Record Drawings (As-Built Plans) shall meet the following requirements:
1. Sheet size shall be 22 inches x 34 inches.
2. Plan scale shall not exceed 1 inch = 50 feet. Profile horizontal scale shall match
plan scale with a horizontal to vertical scale ratio of 5:1.
3. Proposed elevations for road centerline at fifty foot stations shall be shown on the
profile. As-built elevations shall appear in parentheses next to the proposed
elevations. As-built vertical curve information shall appear on the profile.
4. Horizontal alignment of the street centerline with tie in to intersecting streets,
edges of pavement, width of shoulders, sidewalks, shoulder breaks, centerline of
ditches and bottom and top of slopes (all with spot elevations), shall be shown on
the plan.
5. The location of the right of way and all monuments delineating the right of way
shall be shown on the plan. The location of all utility, slope, drainage and sight
distance easements shall appear on the plan.
6. The location of fire cisterns including exposed fill and vent pipes, bollards and
turnout areas shall appear on the plan.
7. All storm and sanitary sewer structures and piping shall appear on the plan and
profile. As-built elevations shall appear in parentheses next to the proposed
elevations for pipe inverts, structure rims and pipe outlets at headwalls and ditch
lines. Indicate size and type of material for all piping and structures.
8. The location of water mains, water services, bends, valves, hydrants, and blow
offs.
9. The location of all water and sewer service laterals shall be shown to the limit of
the street right of way. Indicate the size and type of material.
10. The location of surface runoff retention/detention ponds, water quality swales,
water quality facilities, erosion stone, etc. shall be shown on the plan. Elevation
information in the form of spot elevations and/or contours indicating the as-built
grading shall appear on the plan.
11. A statement that sight distance requirements at all affected intersections have
been determined post construction, meet the Town requirements for sight
distance and have been observed in the field by a Town representative or the
Town’s Consulting Engineer.
12. Location of all visible roadway components including but not limited to utility
poles, guardrail, curbing, drive aprons and drive culverts, lighting and
landscaping.
13. Location of all private utilities such as gas, electric, telephone and cable conduit,
transformer pads, junction boxes and services stubs.
14. Plans shall be submitted in electronic form tied to state plane coordinates. A
minimum of two points with state plane coordinates, located within the project,
shall be shown on the plan.
15. Plans shall be sealed and signed by a professional surveyor licensed by the
State of NH.
i
INDEX
Subject Section Page
Abutters Names and Addresses of Owners ...................................... 6.03G . . . . . . . . . 29
Abutters Notice of a Preliminary Application ..................................... 4.03D . . . . . . . . . 19
Abutters Notice to Public for Final Application ................................... 4.05B . . . . . . . . . 24
Access ............................................................................................... 3.02P . . . . . . . . . 10
Alignment of Streets .......................................................................... 8.01D. . . . . . . . . .45
Amendments .................................................................................... 12.00 . . . . . . . . . .57
Appeals ............................................................................................ 13.00 . . . . . . . . . .58
Application, Final ............................................................................... 4.05 . . . . . . . . . . 23
Application, Preliminary ..................................................................... 4.03 . . . . . . . . . . 19
Approvals, State ............................................................................... 3.02F . . . . . . . . . . 7
As-Built Plans (Record Drawings) requirements ............................................ Appendix C
As-Builts ........................................................................................... 6.06 . . . . . . . . . . 37
Base Course ..................................................................................... 7.01F . . . . . . . . . 39
Bench Marks ..................................................................................... 6.03B . . . . . . . . . 28
Blasting Areas and Duration of Blasting Activities ............................. 6.03U9 . . . . . . . . 32
Boundaries, Lot ................................................................................. 3.02E . . . . . . . . . . 7
Bounds ............................................................................................. 7.04 . . . . . . . . . . 41
Buffer Strip ........................................................................................ 3.02C . . . . . . . . . . 7
Building Inspector Certification ......................................................... 6.04I3 . . . . . . . . . 34
Catch Basins ..................................................................................... 7.02B . . . . . . . . . 40
Catchbasins, Culverts, Drainage Swales .......................................... 6.03P . . . . . . . . . 31
Centerline of the New Road Staked .................................................. 7.01B . . . . . . . . . 38
Certification, Applicant Is Agent for the Owner .................................. 6.03S . . . . . . . . . 32
Certification and Seal of Engineer or Surveyor ................................. 6.03I . . . . . . . . . .29
Certification by NH Dept of Environmental Services .......................... 6.04F . . . . . . . . .34
Certifications: Owner, Surveyor, Building Inspector, Etc. .................. 6.04I . . . . . . . . . .34
Clearing, Grubbing, and Grading Sequence ...................................... 6.03U3 . . . . . . . 32
Clearing and Excavation .................................................................... 7.01D . . . . . . . . .38
Community Services Impact Assessment .......................................... 3.04E . . . . . . . . .16
Compliance with Regulations ............................................................. 3.02T . . . . . . . . .12
Compliance with Regulations - Penalties .......................................... 10.00 . . . . . . . . . 55
Conceptual Consultation, Preliminary ............................................... 4.01 . . . . . . . . . . 18
Conceptual Consultation, Preliminary ............................................... 6.01 . . . . . . . . . . 28
Condominiums ................................................................................... 3.02R . . . . . . . . .10
Consent from Owner- Applicant Is Agent ........................................... 6.03S . . . . . . . . .32
Construction Entrance ........................................................................ 6.03U1 . . . . . . . .32
Construction Sequencing Plan .......................................................... 6.03U . . . . . . . . . 32
Construction Workers Parking and Access ....................................... 6.03U11 . . . . . . . 32
Consultation with Specialists ............................................................. 4.03G . . . . . . . . . 21
Contours ............................................................................................ 6.03L . . . . . . . . . 30
Conveyances to Town ....................................................................... 3.02G . . . . . . . . . . 8
ii
Copyright ............................................................................................. 6.00 . . . . . . . . . 28
Cross-section of Street ...................................................................... 8.01C . . . . . . . . . 44
Cross-sections and Profiles of Streets .............................................. 6.04D . . . . . . . . . 33
Culverts, Catch Basins ...................................................................... 7.02B . . . . . . . . . 40
Data Listing ....................................................................................... 6.03T . . . . . . . . . 32
Deadend Streets ................................................................................ 8.01G . . . . . . . . .45
Dedicated Land to Public Use ........................................................... 6.03F . . . . . . . . . 29
Definitions ........................................................................................ 2.00 . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Dept of Environmental Services Certification .................................... 6.04F . . . . . . . . . 34
Design Standards .............................................................................. 8.00 . . . . . . . . . . 44
Design of Intersections ....................................................................... 8.01E . . . . . . . . .45
Detention/retention Areas, and Dams and Weirs ............................... 6.03P . . . . . . . . .31
Disturbing Environment ..................................................................... 3.01M . . . . . . . . . .9
DOT Approvals .................................................................................. 6.04G . . . . . . . . .34
Drainage ............................................................................................ 7.02 . . . . . . . . . . 40
Drainage/grading ............................................................................... 6.03P . . . . . . . . . 31
Drainage/grading Plan ....................................................................... 3.03B . . . . . . . . . 12
Driveway Access ............................................................................... 3.02K . . . . . . . . . . 9
Driveways .......................................................................................... 8.01K . . . . . . . . . 47
Earthen Materials Removed or Brought to Site ................................. 6.03U6 . . . . . . . . 32
Easement or Land Reserved, or Dedicated to Public Use ................ 6.03F . . . . . . . . . 29
Easements ........................................................................................ 8.04 . . . . . . . . . . 48
Electric Power ................................................................................... 8.05B . . . . . . . . . 49
Embankments ................................................................................... 7.01E . . . . . . . . . 39
Engineer or Surveyor Certification and Seal .................................... 6.03I . . . . . . . . . .29
Environment, Disturbing .................................................................... 3.01M . . . . . . . . . .9
Environmental Assessment ............................................................... 3.04D . . . . . . . . . 16
Erosion Control ................................................................................. 6.03U3 . . . . . . . 32
Erosion Plan ...................................................................................... 3.03A . . . . . . . . . 12
Erosion Protection Ditches ................................................................ 7.02C . . . . . . . . . 41
Excavation and Clearing ................................................................... 7.01D . . . . . . . . . 38
Expedited Review ............................................................................. 4.04 . . . . . . . . . . 22
Federal Approvals ............................................................................. 3.02F . . . . . . . . . . 7
Fees and Expenses........................................................................... 4.06 . . . . . . . . . . 25
Fees for Offsite Improvements .......................................................... 3.05 . . . . . . . . . . 16
Final Action on Preliminary Application ............................................... 4.03J . . . . . . . . .22
Final Application ................................................................................ 4.05 . . . . . . . . . . 23
Final Plat ........................................................................................... 6.04 . . . . . . . . . . 33
Final Plat Mylar ................................................................................. 6.04L . . . . . . . . . 35
Fire Suppression Water Supply .......................................................... 3.02Q . . . . . . . . .11
Fiscal Impact Analysis ........................................................................ 3.04B . . . . . . . . .15
Flagged Proposed Street Centerlines and Lot Locations .................. 6.03R . . . . . . . . .31
Flood Zone and Water Courses Locations ......................................... 6.03D . . . . . . . . 29
Grade of Streets ................................................................................. 8.01F . . . . . . . . 45
Grading ............................................................................................. 6.03P . . . . . . . . . 31
Grading/drainage Plan ...................................................................... 3.03B . . . . . . . . . 12
iii
Grading Sequence ............................................................................ 6.03U3 . . . . . . . . 32
Grubbing, and Grading Sequence ..................................................... 6.03U3 . . . . . . . 32
Improvements Plan ........................................................................... 6.03U . . . . . . . . . 32
Inspection of Work............................................................................. 9.01 . . . . . . . . . . 51
Inspections and Performance Guarantee .......................................... 9.00 . . . . . . . . . . 51
Intersection Design............................................................................ 8.01E . . . . . . . . . 45
Land Reserved, or Dedicated to Public Use ...................................... 6.03F . . . . . . . . . 29
Land, Unsuitable ............................................................................... 3.02H . . . . . . . . . . 8
Ledge ................................................................................................ 3.01I . . . . . . . . . . .9
Locus Map ......................................................................................... 6.04A . . . . . . . . . 33
Lot Area Table ................................................................................... 6.04H . . . . . . . . . 34
Lot Boundaries .................................................................................. 3.02E . . . . . . . . . . 7
Lot Dimensions and Area .................................................................. 8.03A . . . . . . . . . 48
Lot Line Adjustment.......................................................................... 2.34.04 . . . . . . . . . 5
Lot Numbers, Proposed .................................................................... 6.03G . . . . . . . . . 29
Lots ................................................................................................... 8.03 . . . . . . . . . . 47
Mail Boxes .......................................................................................... 8.01J . . . . . . . . . 47
Maintenance of Improvements and Facilities .................................... 9.03 . . . . . . . . . . 54
Major Subdivisions ............................................................................ 3.03 . . . . . . . . . . 12
Materials Removed or Brought to Site................................................ 6.03U6 . . . . . . . .32
Maximum lots on dead end road ....................................................... 3.02P . . . . . . . . . 10
Modification of Approvals .................................................................. 4.07 . . . . . . . . . . 26
Monuments ....................................................................................... 7.04 . . . . . . . . . . 41
Mylar of Final Plat.............................................................................. 6.04M . . . . . . . . .35
Naming of Streets.............................................................................. 8.01B . . . . . . . . . 44
Noise Generating Activities ............................................................... 6.03U10 . . . . . . . 32
Non-residential Development ............................................................ 5.00 . . . . . . . . . . 27
Notice to Abutters and Public for Final Application ............................ 4.05B . . . . . . . . . 24
Notice to Abutters of a Preliminary Application ................................. 4.03D . . . . . . . . . 20
Offsite Improvements, Fees for ......................................................... 3.05 . . . . . . . . . . 16
On-site Board Inspection, Consent to ................................................ 4.03H . . . . . . . . . 21
Operation Brief for Major Subdivisions .............................................. 6.03W . . . . . . . . .33
Owner Certification ............................................................................ 6.04I1 . . . . . . . . .34
Owner Certification That the Applicant Is Agent ................................ 6.03S . . . . . . . . . 32
Parking and Access for Construction Workers .................................. 6.03U11 . . . . . . . 32
Parks and Recreation ........................................................................ 3.03C . . . . . . . . . 12
Pavement, Hot Bituminous ................................................................ 7.01G . . . . . . . . . 39
Penalties, Compliance with Regulations .......................................... 10.00 . . . . . . . . . 55
Performance and Inspection of Work ................................................ 9.01 . . . . . . . . . . 51
Performance Guarantee .................................................................... 9.02 . . . . . . . . . . 52
Performance Security ........................................................................ 3.03F . . . . . . . . . 14
Phasing Plan ..................................................................................... 3.03D . . . . . . . . . 13
Plat Details ........................................................................................ 6.00 . . . . . . . . . . 28
Plat Size ........................................................................................... 6.03 . . . . . . . . . . 28
Plat, Preliminary ................................................................................ 6.03 . . . . . . . . . . 28
Preliminary Application ...................................................................... 4.03C . . . . . . . . .19
iv
Preliminary Application ...................................................................... 4.03 . . . . . . . . . . 19
Preliminary Conceptual Consultation ................................................ 6.01 . . . . . . . . . . 28
Preliminary Conceptual Consultation ................................................ 4.01 . . . . . . . . . . 18
Preliminary Plat ................................................................................. 6.03 . . . . . . . . . . 28
Premature Subdivisions .................................................................... 3.02L . . . . . . . . . . 9
Private Streets .................................................................................. 3.03E . . . . . . . . . 14
Profiles of Streets ............................................................................. 6.04D . . . . . . . . . 33
Profiles of Utilities .............................................................................. 6.04E . . . . . . . . . 34
Proposed Lot Locations Adequately Flagged .................................... 6.03R . . . . . . . . . 32
Proposed Lot Numbers ...................................................................... 6.03G . . . . . . . . .29
Proposed Street Centerlines Adequately Flagged ............................ 6.03R . . . . . . . . . 32
Protection of Natural Features ........................................................... 3.02J . . . . . . . . . . 9
Public and Private Streets ................................................................. 7.01 . . . . . . . . . . 38
Public Hearing Requirement ............................................................. 4.03G . . . . . . . . . 21
Public Hearings for Final Application ................................................. 4.05C . . . . . . . . . 24
Public Utilities ..................................................................................... 6.03O . . . . .. . . 31
Recreation Dedication ........................................................................ 3.03C . . . . . . . . .12
Record Drawings ............................................................................... 6.06 . . . . . . . . . . 37
Record Drawings (As-Built Plans) requirements ............................................ Appendix C
Required Improvements .................................................................... 7.00 . . . . . . . . . . 38
Reserved Land, or Dedicated to Public Use ...................................... 6.03F . . . . . . . . . 29
Restoration of Site ............................................................................. 6.03U13 . . . . . . . 32
Restoration Plan ................................................................................. 3.03F . . . . . . . . .13
Retention Areas, and Dams and Weirs ............................................. 6.03P . . . . . . . . . 31
Review by Other Town Officials ........................................................ 3.02S . . . . . . . . . 11
Road Typical Sections .................................................................................... Appendix B
Roadway Width ................................................................................. 7.01I . . . . . . . . . .39
Sanitary Sewer Systems, Water Mains, Etc. ..................................... 6.03P . . . . . . . . . 31
Scale of Plat ....................................................................................... 6.03. . . . . . . . . . 28
Scattered Subdivisions ...................................................................... 3.02L . . . . . . . . . . 9
School Impact Analysis (SIA) ............................................................ 3.04C . . . . . . . . . 16
Sedimentation / Erosion Control ........................................................ 6.03U4 . . . . . . . . 32
Sewage Disposal Systems ................................................................. 6.03Q . . . . . . . . .31
Sewer and Water Facilities ................................................................ 7.05 . . . . . . . . . . 41
Sewer, Town ..................................................................................... 3.01N . . . . . . . . . 10
Shoulders .......................................................................................... 7.01H . . . . . . . . . 39
Sidestakes for Clearing and Excavation ........................................... 7.01D . . . . . . . . . 38
Signs for Street Names ..................................................................... 7.01J . . . . . . . . . .40
Site Walk / On Site Visit .................................................................... 4.03I . . . . . . . . . .21
Size of Plat ........................................................................................ 6.03 . . . . . . . . .. .28
Soil Types and Delineation ................................................................ 6.03M . . . . . . . . .30
Special Exceptions Granted ............................................................... 6.04J . . . . . . . . . 35
Special Requirements ....................................................................... 3.04 . . . . . . . . . . 14
Staking of Right- Of-way, Centerline of the New Road...................... 7.01B . . . . . . . . . 38
State Approvals ................................................................................. 3.02F . . . . . . . . . . 7
State Approvals, DOT and Wetlands Board ...................................... 6.04G . . . . . . . . .34
v
State Grid Coordinates ...................................................................... 3.02A . . . . . . . . . . 7
Storm Drains, Culverts, Catch Basins ............................................... 7.02B . . . . . . . . . 40
Stormwater Management Facilities ................................................... 6.03P . . . . . . . . . 31
Street Alignment ................................................................................ 8.01D . . . . . . . . . 45
Street Centerlines, Proposed, Adequately Flagged .......................... 6.03R . . . . . . . . . 31
Street Cross-section .......................................................................... 8.01C . . . . . . . . . 44
Street Cross-sections and Profiles .................................................... 6.04D . . . . . . . . . 33
Street Lights ...................................................................................... 8.01H . . . . . . . . . 47
Street Name Signs ............................................................................ 7.01J . . . . . . . . . 40
Street Naming ................................................................................... 8.01B . . . . . . . . . 44
Street Signs ....................................................................................... 8.01I . . . . . . . . . .47
Streets ............................................................................................... 8.01 . . . . . . . . . . 44
Streets, Substandard......................................................................... 3.02D . . . . . . . . . . 7
Subdivider's Responsibility ................................................................ 3.01 . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Subgrades of Public and Private Streets ........................................... 7.01A . . . . . . . . ..38
Substandard Streets.......................................................................... 3.02D . . . . . . . . . . 7
Surveyor Certification ........................................................................ 6.04I2 . . . . . . . . .34
Surveyor or Engineer Certification and Seal ..................................... 6.03I . . . . . . . . . .29
Tax Block and Parcel Number ............................................................ 6.03G . . . . . . . . .29
Temporary Turnaround ...................................................................... 8.01G1 . . . . . . . .46
Temporary Turnaround ...................................................................... 6.03J . . . . . . . . . 29
Time Limit to Complete ..................................................................... 7.07 . . . . . . . . . . 43
Topsoil Protection.............................................................................. 7.03 . . . . . . . . . . 41
Town Sewer ...................................................................................... 3.02N . . . . . . . . . 10
Town Officials, Review by Other ....................................................... 3.02S . . . . . . . . . 11
Traffic Control .................................................................................... 6.03U2 . . . . . . . . 32
Traffic Control Devices ...................................................................... 6.03U8 . . . . . . . . 32
Traffic Control Signs .......................................................................... 8.01L . . . . . . . . . 47
Traffic Impact Assessment (TIA) ....................................................... 3.04A . . . . . . . . . 14
Truck Routes Through Town to the Site ............................................ 6.03U5 . . . . . . . . 32
Turnaround, Permanent ..................................................................... 8.01G2 . . . . . . . .46
Turnaround, Temporary ..................................................................... 6.03J . . . . . . . . . 29
Typical Sections for Roads ............................................................................. Appendix B
U.S.G.S. Data ................................................................................... 3.02B . . . . . . . . . . 7
Underdrains ....................................................................................... 7.02A . . . . . . . . . 40
Underground Utilities ......................................................................... 8.05 . . . . . . . . . . 48
Unsuitable Land ................................................................................ 3.02H . . . . . . . . . . 8
Utilities ............................................................................................... 8.05 . . . . . . . . . . 48
Utilities ................................................................................................ 3.02O . . . . . . . . .10
Utilities ................................................................................................ 6.03O . . . . . . . . .31
Utility Profiles .................................................................................... 6.04E . . . . . . . . . 34
Variances and Special Exceptions Granted ....................................... 6.04J . . . . . . . . . 35
Waivers ............................................................................................. 11.00 . . . . . . . . . 56
Waivers Granted ............................................................................... 6.04J . . . . . . . . . 35
Water and Sewer .............................................................................. 8.05A . . . . . . . . . 49
Water and Sewer Facilities ................................................................ 7.05 . . . . . . . . . . 41
vi
Water Courses and Flood Zone Locations ........................................ 6.03D . . . . . . . . . 29
Water Mains, Stormwater Management ............................................ 6.03P . . . . . . . . . 31
Water Supply, Fire Suppression ......................................................... 3.01Q . . . . . . . . .11
Wetlands and Associated Buffer Areas ............................................. 6.03N . . . . . . . . . 31
Wetlands Board Approvals ................................................................. 6.04G . . . . . . . . .34
Width of Roadway ............................................................................. 7.01I . . . . . . . . . .40
Winter Conditions .............................................................................. 7.06 . . . . . . . . . . 43
Yield Plan .......................................................................................... 6.05 . . . . . . . . . . 35
South Bow Mixed Use District
I. Authority
This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of RSA 674:21, Innovative Land Use Controls
and shall be administered by the Planning Board.
II. Purpose
The purpose of this article is:
A. To expand the Town’s tax base and allow high value development in the southern part
of town close to Route 3A and Interstate 93
B. To permit the development of a walkable community with a mix of compatible
residential, commercial, and industrial uses to help meet the demands of the current
and future market,
C. To allow flexibility in development, and
D. To promote cooperation between the Towns of Bow and Hooksett and encourage the
sharing of municipal resources when feasible.
III. Permitted Uses
Uses permitted by right, by special exception, or conditionally are listed in Article 5, Table of
Use Regulations
IV. Dimensional Requirements
A. Minimum tract size: 3 acres
B. Minimum road frontage: 300 ‘ for any lot fronting a public street, 200’ for lots
fronting a private street
C. Maximum building height: 55 feet
D. Maximum number of stories: 4
E. Maximum lot coverage: 80 %
F. Maximum floor to area ratio (FAR): 0.80
G. Minimum setbacks, front, rear, and side: 10 feet
V. General Provisions
The following standards shall be applied to any new or expanded development within
the District and may be waived by the Planning Board under Section 11 of the Bow Site
Plan Review Regulations:
1
A. Access and Parking
1. The minimum parking requirements found in Appendix A of the Bow Site
Plan Review Regulations shall apply. To allow design flexibility and encourage
efficiency, parking spaces may be located on-site or off-site within 600 feet of
the principle use to be served and reasonable shared parking arrangements
can be used to meet the minimum requirement.
2. Parking areas shall be located primarily behind and to the side of buildings,
as well as below grade and in parking structures as appropriate. No more
than 50 % of the parking spaces provided shall be located between the
building to be served and the public or private road providing access.
3. A traffic impact assessment in accordance with Section 6.01 of the Bow Site
Plan Regulations shall be required for all developments exceeding the
threshold.
4. The Planning Board encourages and may require the construction of shared
access and cross access connections between adjacent lots, as well as
easements for future connections.
5. Accommodations for pedestrian circulation between businesses, residences,
and parking areas shall be provided and connections to adjacent sites shall
be made when feasible.
6. The incorporation of transit facilities, such as a bus pull-out, may be required
by the Planning Board at its discretion.
7. All access improvements shall be designed to meet guidelines set forth by
the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
(AASHTO) and best engineering practices.
B. Building Design
The standards found in Section 15.10 of the Bow Zoning Ordinance shall apply.
C. Landscaping
The standards found in Section 15.09 & 15.11 of the Bow Zoning Ordinance shall
apply.
D. Lighting
The standards found in Section 15.15 of the Bow Zoning Ordinance shall apply.
2
E. Residential Uses
1. Residential units shall be located primarily above commercial floor space; not
more than 25 % of the total proposed ground-level floor space may be
designated for residential use.
2. For each residential unit, the following minimum space dedication shall be
required:
a) Public open space: A minimum of 600 square feet (sf) per unit of
outdoor area, which is defined as land that is accessible to residents
and contains recreational amenities, excluding all parking areas and
sidewalks.
b) Private open space: A minimum of 80 sf for each unit of outdoor
area which is defined as outdoor space with private access, including
decks, balconies, porches, and gated patios
c) Common building area: A minimum of 30 sf/unit
3. Residential developments shall have appropriately scaled recreational
facilities, such as trails, fitness centers, tennis courts, or swimming pools.
F. New Uses
In order to protect exiting uses, at the Planning Board’s discretion, new uses may
require more extensive screening, buffering, or other forms of mitigation to make
such uses compatible with the surrounding area.
G. Review Process
The review process is established in the Bow Site Plan Review and Subdivision
Regulations, as applicable.
H. Signs
The standards found in Article 8 of the Bow Zoning Ordinance shall apply.
I. Nonconforming lots, structures, and uses
The provisions of Section 2.09 and Article 11 of the Zoning Ordinance shall apply.
All legal lots of record that existed prior to adoption of this ordinance are
exempt from the minimum tract size requirement, but no new lot shall be
created that does not meet the minimum tract size.
3
Legend of Districts
RU = Rural
R = Residential
R-1 = Residential One Family
C = Commercial
CV = Civic
Legend of Districts
I-1 = Limited Industrial
I-2 = General Industrial
IN = Institutional
BD = Business Development
SB = South Bow Mixed Use
Legend of Uses
dash = Not permitted
C = Conditional Use Permit required
P = Permitted Use
S = Special Exception required
* = no more than 20% of floor space
PRINCIPAL USES DISTRICTS
RU R R-1 C I-1 I-2 CV IN BD SB
Supplementary
Regulations
Reference
A. RESIDENTIAL
1. Single Family P P P - - - - - - P
2. Duplex or Two-Family P P - - - - - - - P Section 7.05
3. Multi-Family S S - - - - - - - P Section 7.05
4. Housing for the Elderly P P P - - - P - - P Section 7.05
5. Manufactured Housing Park C - - - - - - - - - Section 7.03
6. Manufactured Housing Subdivision P - - - - - - - - - Section 7.03
7. Boarding or Rooming House S S S - - - - - - -
8. Open Space Residential
Development
P P P - - - - - - - Section 7.02
4
PRINCIPAL USES DISTRICTS
RU R R-1 C I-1 I-2 CV IN BD SB
Supplementary
Regulations
Reference
B. PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL
1. Churches S S S S S S S S S S*
2. Public or Private Schools S S S S S S S S P S*
3. Hospitals - - - P P P - P P P
4. Residential Care Facility S S S P P P P P P P RSA 151:2 I(e)
5. Child Day Care Center - - - S S S P P P P Section 7.08
6. Adult Day Care Facility - - - S S S - S P P RSA 151:2 I (f)
7. Libraries and Museums - - - S P P P P P S*
8. Social, Fraternal Clubs and Lodges - - - P P P S S P S*
9. Municipal & Public Works Facilities S S S P P P P P P P
10. Cemeteries S S S S S S S S S S
11. Essential Public Utilities and
Appurtenances
S S S P P P P P P P Section 7.12
12. Home Based Day Care (see RSA
672:1V-a)
P P P S S S S S S P
5
PRINCIPAL USES DISTRICTS
RU R R-1 C I-1 I-2 CV IN BD SB
Supplementary
Regulations
Reference
C. RECREATION AND
ENTERTAINMENT
1. Publicly Owned Recreation Facility P P P P P P P P P P
2. Commercial Outdoor Recreational
Facility
S S S P P P - - P P
3. Indoor Commercial Recreational
Facility
- - - P P P C - P P
4. Movie Theater or Concert Hall - - - P P P S S P P
5. Campgrounds or Youth Camps S - - - - - - - - - Section 7.21
6. Golf Courses S S S S S S - - S -
D. OFFICES
1. General Professional, Business,
Financial, or Government Offices
- - - P P P P P P P
2. Medical, Dental or Health Care
Offices
- - - P P P P P P P
3. Banks - - - P P P P P P P
6
PRINCIPAL USES DISTRICTS
RU R R-1 C I-1 I-2 CV IN BD SB
Supplementary
Regulations
Reference
E. COMMERCIAL
1. Retail Sales and Rental of Goods
and Merchandise
a. Less than 6000 SF of floor area - - - P P P P P P P
b. No floor area limit - - - P P P S S P P
2. Personal and Business Services - - - P P P P P P P
3. Hotels, Motels, and Inns - - - P P P S S P P
4. Animal Hospital - - - P P P - - P P Section 7.09
5. Commercial Kennels - - - S S S P P S P Section 7.09
6. Mortuary or Funeral Homes - - - S - S - S S P
7. Auction and Auction Houses - - - P P P S S P P
8. Mini-Storage - - - S P P - - P P
F. RESTAURANTS
1. Within a fully enclosed structure - - - P P P P P P P
2. With service outside - - - P S P S S P P
7
PRINCIPAL USES DISTRICTS
RU R R-1 C I-1 I-2 CV IN BD SB
Supplementary
Regulations
Reference
G. AUTOMOTIVE & TRANSPORTATION
1. Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental - - - P S S - - S P
2. Sales and Installation of Vehicle
Parts and Accessories
- - - P S P - - P P
3. Motor Vehicle Repairs and
Maintenance
- - - P S P - - P P
4. Gasoline Sales - - - P S S - - S P
5. Car Wash and Truck Wash - - - P S S S S S P
6. Motor or Rail Freight Terminal - - - S S P - - P P
7. Bus or Train Station - - - P S P - - P P
8. Sales or Rental of Recreational
Vehicles, Camping Trailers, or
Boats, including Servicing & Repair
- - - P S S - - S P
9. Marina (including the servicing and
repair of boats)
- - - P S P - - P P
10. Heliport and Airstrip - - - S S S S S S S Section 7.19
8
PRINCIPAL USES DISTRICTS
RU R R-1 C I-1 I-2 CV IN BD SB
Supplementary
Regulations
Reference
H. INDUSTRIAL
1. Manufacturing, Processing,
Repairing, and Assembling Goods
and Merchandise
- - - S P P - - P P Section 7.12
2. Warehousing and Storage of Non-
Flammable, Non-Explosive Goods
- - - S P P - - P P Section 7.12
3. Bulk Storage of Fuels, Chemicals,
or Flammable Materials
- - - - S S - - S - Section 7.12
4a. Sales of Construction Equipment
and/or Materials with Outdoor
Display or Storage
- - - S - P - - P P
4b. Sales of Construction Equipment
and/or Materials up to 15,000 SF
with no Outdoor Display or
Storage
- - - P P P - - P P
5. Materials Recycling Center - - - - S S - - S S
6a. Removal and Excavation of Earth
Materials
S - - - S S - - S S Section 7.14
9
PRINCIPAL USES
DISTRICTS
RU R R-1 C I-1 I-2 CV IN BD SB
Supplementary
Regulations
Reference
H. INDUSTRIAL
6b. Minor / Pre-development
Excavation of Earth Materials
C C C C C C C C C C Section 7.14
7. Processing of Earth Materials - - - - S S - - S S
8. Planing Mill or Sawmill S - - - - S - - S S Section 7.13
9a. Contractor’s Yard - - - - - P - - S S
9b. Tradesman’s Shop - - - P P P - - P P
10. Laboratory or Research Facility - - - P P P - - P P
11. Junk Yard - - - - - S - - S - Section 7.17
12. Commercial Electricity Generation - - - S S P S S P P
Legend of Districts
RU = Rural
R = Residential
R-1 = Residential One Family
C = Commercial
CV = Civic
Legend of Districts
I-1 = Limited Industrial
I-2 = General Industrial
IN = Institutional
BD = Business Development
SB = South Bow Mixed Use
Legend of Uses
dash = Not permitted
C = Conditional Use Permit required
P = Permitted Use
S = Special Exception required
* = no more than 20% of floor space
10
PRINCIPAL USES DISTRICTS
RU R R-1 C I-1 I-2 CV IN BD SB
Supplementary
Regulations
Reference
I. AGRICULTURAL
1. Farming and Agricultural Operations
a. Agricultural P S S S S S S S S S
b. Horticultural P S S S S S S S S S
c. Livestock P P P - - - - - - - Section 7.18
2. Silvicultural Operations P P P P P P P P P P
3. Stables and Equestrian Facilities C S S - - - - - - P Section 7.18
4. Commercial Greenhouses
including Wholesale and Retail
Sales
S S S P P P - - P P
J. MISCELLANEOUS
1. Condominium Conversion S S S S S S S S S S
4. Radio or Television Tower or
Antenna or Personal Wireless
Service Facility
C C C C C C C C C C Section 7.10
3. Sexually Oriented Businesses - - - - - C - - - - Section 7.11
11
ACCESSORY USES
DISTRICTS
RU R R-1 C I-1 I-2 CV IN BD SB
Supplementary
Regulations
Reference
A. RESIDENTIAL
1. Home Occupation P P P P P P P P P P Section 7.06
2. Cottage Industry S S S S S S S S S P Section 7.07
5. Storage of Equipment / Surplus
Associated with an Off-Premise
Occupation
S S S S S S - - S S
6. Accessory Structures and
Facilities including but not limited
to Tool Sheds, Greenhouses,
Swimming Pools, and Tennis
Courts
P P P P P P P P P P Section 7.15
7. Grazing, Care, Raising, and/or
Keeping of Livestock for Personal
Use
P P P S S S S S S S Section 7.18
6. Accessory Dwelling Unit P P P P P P P P P P Section 7.04
8. Home Based Day Care (RSA
672:1 V-a)
P P P P P P P P P P Section 7.08
9. Storage and Use of a Registered
Boat, Recreational Vehicle,
Camping Trailer, or Motor Vehicle
P P P P P P P P P P Section 7.17
12
ACCESSORY USES
DISTRICTS
RU R R-1 C I-1 I-2 CV IN BD SB
Supplementary
Regulations
Reference
B. NON-RESIDENTIAL
1. Drive In or Drive Through - - - S S S S S S S
10. Dwelling Unit for Resident
Caretaker or Security Personnel
- - - S S S S S S S Section 7.26
3. Farm or Roadside Stand P P P P P P - - P P Section 7.15
C. RESIDENTIAL AND NON-RESIDENTIAL
1. Signs P P P P P P P P P Article 8
2. Child Day Care Center S S S P P P P P P P Section 7.08
3. Small Wind Energy Systems P P P P P P P P P P Section 7.25
4. Small Electricity Generation P P P P P P P P P P
Legend of Districts
RU = Rural
R = Residential
R-1 = Residential One Family
C = Commercial
CV = Civic
Legend of Districts
I-1 = Limited Industrial
I-2 = General Industrial
IN = Institutional
BD = Business Development
SB = South Bow Mixed Use
Legend of Uses
dash = Not permitted
C = Conditional Use Permit required
P = Permitted Use
S = Special Exception required
* = no more than 20% of floor space
13
S I T E P L A N R E V I E W
R E G U L A T I O N S
T O W N of B O W , N E W H A M P S H I R E
October 6, 2016
SITE PLAN REVIEW REGULATIONS
ADOPTIONS AND AMENDMENTS
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Bow Planning Board by the voters of the Town of
Bow in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 675, Section 6, New Hampshire
Revised Statutes Annotated, 1955, as amended, the Bow Planning Board adopts the
following regulations governing the site plan review of land in the Town of Bow, New
Hampshire.
The Zoning Ordinance amendments adopted on November 7, 1972 included Planning
Board authority for site plan review. At the March 11/12, 1986 Town Meeting, Zoning
amendment VIII deleted the authority from the Zoning Ordinance and warrant article 11
granted statutory authority to approve and disapprove site plans.
Adopted: May 5, 1986
Amended:
January 26, 1989
October 5, 1989
July 5, 1990
August 2, 1990
February 7, 1991
February 6, 1992
July 8, 1993
January 6, 1994
April 7, 1994
August 4, 1994
July 1, 1999
November 15, 2001
March 4, 2004
May 5, 2005
February 4, and March 25, 2010
January 16, 2014
September 17, 2015
October 6, 2016
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section Page
1. Authority and Title 1
2. Intent 1
3. Jurisdiction 1
4. Definitions 2
5. General Requirements 4
5.01 Responsibility 4
5.02 All Site Plans 4
5.03 Residential Site Plans 12
6. Special Requirements 14
6.01 Traffic Impact Analysis 14
6.02 Fiscal Impact Analysis 15
6.03 School Impact Analysis 15
6.04 Environmental Impact Analysis 15
6.05 Community Services Impact Assessment 15
6.06 Other Considerations 16
6.07 Impact Fees 16
7. Procedure 17
7.01 Preliminary Conceptual Consultation 17
7.02 Site Plan Review Application 18
7.03 Notice to Abutters and Public 20
7.04 Action on a Proposed Site Plan 20
7.05 Expedited Review 22
7.06 Expenses and Fees 23
7.07 Modifications of Approvals 23
7.08 Certificates of Occupancy 24
8. Application Requirements: Exhibits and Data 25
8.01 Application Forms & Checklist 25
8.02 All Site Plans 25
8.03 Residential Site Plans 30
8.04 Preliminary Conceptual Consultation 31
9. Inspections and Performance Guarantee 32
10. Other Ordinances 32
11. Waivers 32
12. Enforcement 32
13. Appeals 32
14. Validity 32
Appendix A - Parking A.1
Off-Street Parking Requirements A.1
Dimensional Requirements A.9
Design Standards A.10
Off-Street Loading Requirements A.12
Loading Area Design Standards A.13
Appendix B - Recommended Plants for Semi-Opaque Screens B.1
Care and Maintenance B.1
Table of Recommended Plants B.2
1
Section 1 - Authority and Title:
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Bow Planning Board by the voters of the Town of
Bow in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 674, Sections 43 and 44, New
Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, 1955, as amended, the Bow Planning Board
adopts the following Regulations governing the review and approval or disapproval of
Site Plans in the Town of Bow, New Hampshire.
Section 2 - Intent:
The purpose and intent of the Site Plan Review Regulations are as set forth in RSA
674:44, adopted by reference here.
Section 3 - Jurisdiction
These regulations shall apply to the development or change or expansion of use of
tracts for nonresidential uses or for multi-family dwelling units, which are defined as any
structures containing more than two (2) dwelling units, whether or not such development
includes a subdivision or Resubdivision of the site.
3.01 No building permit(s) shall be issued until the Applicant or his agent shall
obtain Site Plan approval by the Planning Board.
3.02 No building permit(s) shall be issued until the approved Site Plan is filed
with the County Registry of Deeds.
3.03 Any non-residential development that includes only additions of not more
than 1,200 square feet to an existing building(s), is a Home Occupation, or
has been approved as a Cottage Industry, and that does not constitute a
change of use, shall be handled in the same manner as building permit
application. No site plan submission for review under these regulations
shall be required.
2
Section 4 - Definitions:
A. Abutter: Refer to Section 2.01 of the Subdivision Regulations of the Town
of Bow.
B. Applicant: Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership or
corporation, trust or other legal entity commencing proceedings under
these Regulations for himself or for another.
C. Application: Any Preliminary or Final Application.
D. Development: Any proposal for Site Plan Review under these Regulations.
E. Drainage Right-of-Way: Land required for the installation of storm water
sewers or drainage ditches, or required along a natural stream or
watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water
therein to secure safety from flood damage and to preserve natural
amenity.
F. Easement: Authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and
for a specified purpose, of any designated part of his property.
G. Improvements:
(a) Capital Improvements: Any physical public betterment or
improvement and any preliminary studies and surveys relative
thereto; the acquisition of property of a permanent nature; or the
purchase of equipment for any public betterment or improvement
when first erected or acquired.
(b) Lot Improvement: Any building, structure, place, work or art, or
other object, or improvement of the land on which they are situated
constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of
such betterment.
(c) Public Improvement: Any drainage ditch, roadway, park, sidewalk,
tree, lot improvement or other facility for which the Town of Bow
may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and
operation or for which the Town's responsibility is already
established.
(d) Temporary Improvement: An improvement built and maintained by
a developer during construction of the Development and prior to
release of a performance bond.
H. Private Street: as defined in Section 2.35.04 of the Subdivision
Regulations.
I. Subdivision Regulations: Refers to the Subdivision Regulations of the
Town of Bow, New Hampshire, adopted July 28, 1988, as it may be
amended from time to time.
3
J. Zoning: Refers to the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Bow, adopted
March 8, 1955, as it may be amended from time to time.
4
Section 5 - General Requirements:
5.01 Responsibility: It is the responsibility of each Applicant to read and follow
these Regulations. If an Applicant does not fully understand the
Regulations, it is his or her responsibility to seek the advice and counsel of
Town Officials, agents, or other qualified persons.
5.02 All Site Plans: This Section sets forth certain general requirements that
apply to all Site Plans.
A. State Grid Coordinates: All surveys, control and boundary
information shall have at least two (2) ties to the State Grid
Coordinate System.
B. U.S.G.S. Data: All contours, profiles and other elevations shall refer
to current U.S.G.S. Data.
C. State and Federal Approvals: Copies of all Applications to the
State of New Hampshire for approval of on-site septic systems,
alteration of terrain permits, dredge and fill permits, and driveway
permits, and copies of Applications to federal agencies for Section
404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1972, 33 USC 1334 or for any other permit or approval required by
the State of New Hampshire or federal agency for the Site Plan
must be filed with the application. Approval of any Final Application
shall be conditioned upon filing with the Board copies of permits for
all such state and federal approvals.
D. Conveyances to Town: Before recordation of a Final Plan requiring
new road construction or the extension of municipal services, the
owner shall transfer to the Town of Bow by Warranty Deed, all
lands required for public roads, easements, and rights of way.
E. Unsuitable Land: Land of such character that it cannot be safely
used for building purposes because of danger to health or peril
from fire, flood or other hazard shall not be platted for occupancy,
nor for other use which would tend to increase the danger to health,
life or property or aggravate the flood hazard. Land subject to
periodic flooding, poor drainage or other hazardous conditions,
shall not be developed. Land with unsuitable soil or inadequate
capacity for individual sanitary sewerage disposal systems shall not
be developed unless connected to a common sewer system. No
land described above and no land designated as Area of Special
Flood Hazard or shown to be bog, marsh, swamp area, area of high
water table, or designated as wetlands as set forth in the Town of
Bow Zoning Ordinance Article 10, or any similar situation, or area
necessary for the protection of aquifers which may serve as future
5
sources of drinking water for the Town, or with slopes in excess of
thirty-three percent (33%), or ledge which is exposed or lying within
four (4) feet of the soil surface, or which is subject to an easement
or a right-of-way in favor of the Town, County, State, Federal
Government, or any third party shall be developed. Any land
covered by any soils listed by the "Merrimack and Belknap
Counties Soils Survey”, USDA Natural Resources Conservation
Service as poorly drained or very poorly drained, shall likewise not
be developed. In the event that property proposed for Site Plan
Review Approval contains any land, soils or natural features
described in this Subsection, the Applicant shall, at the discretion of
the Board, submit as part of the Application the report and
associated plan of a certified soil scientist as defined in RSA 310-
A:76 who has performed a High Intensity Soil Survey of the
property.
F. Ledge: All areas of exposed ledge shall be identified and plotted on
any Plat submitted to the Board.
G. Protection of Natural Features: Due regard shall be shown for all
natural features, such as trees, water courses, scenic points, rare
plant or animal species, historic spots and similar community
assets, which if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the
Development or preserve the natural resources of the Town. In the
case of residential site plans, existing natural features should be
preserved when such features can be practically used to minimize
adverse affects on abutting single family neighborhoods.
H. Disturbing Environment: No person who is required to submit an
Application for approval of a Development pursuant to these
Regulations shall commence the construction of roads within the
land proposed to be developed or clear the land of natural
vegetation or place any artificial fill thereon or do any other act or
acts which will alter the natural state of the land or environment,
unless and until the Site Plan relating thereto has been submitted
and approved in accordance with the requirements of these
Regulations. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to
prevent such preliminary ground surveys, marking by stakes,
engineering studies, inspections, and testing (including test borings
and test pits) as may be necessary to evaluate the suitability of the
land for development and to assemble the information required to
be shown on a Site Plan, provided, however, that such preliminary
surveys, staking, studies, inspection and testing shall be
accomplished with the minimum disturbance or alteration of the
natural state of the land environment.
6
I. Town Utilities:
1. Town Sewer: If any portion of a Development fronts on an
existing street served or reasonably expected to be served by Town
sewer; or fronts on a new street and lies within one thousand
(1000) feet of a street served or reasonably expected to be served
by Town sewer; the Plat shall show appropriate extensions to the
existing sewer lines and appropriate sewer connections from all
improvements to the new or existing sewer lines. The construction
of on-site sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted in such a
Development after such sewer service becomes available.
2. Municipal Water System: If any portion of the frontage of the
site of a Site Plan contains a Municipal water main from which
Municipal water service is available, the Plan shall show
appropriate water connections from all improvements to the new or
existing water mains. If Municipal water service later becomes
available within the frontage, all improvements in such site plan
shall be connected within one year after Municipal water service
becomes available. At that time, the then property owner shall pay
a proportionate share of the cost of water main extension per the
TOWN OF BOW, NH MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM RULES AND
REGULATIONS then in effect. The approved Site Plan shall bear a
note that memorializes the requirements to connect and pay a
share of cost. The use of wells for domestic water supply for all
improvements other than one and two-family dwellings and
irrigation shall not be permitted in such Site Plan after such
Municipal water service becomes available. This provision shall
apply to all Site Plan applications accepted after this provision is
adopted (January 16, 2014).
J. Utilities: All utility facilities, including but not limited to gas, electric
power, telephone, and CATV cables, shall be located underground
at the expense of the Applicant. Whenever existing utility facilities
are located above ground on any land to be developed, except
where existing on public roads and rights-of-way, they shall be
removed and placed underground. This shall not apply to major
transmission facilities not intended to serve individual properties.
Utilities serving more than one (1) parcel shall be located within
street rights-of-way in accordance with applicable State and Local
Regulations and utility company rules and regulations. Utilities
shall not be located beneath the paved surface of any street except
where necessary at intersections and for service connections.
K. Review by Other Town Officials: Before approval of a Site Plan is
given, the Applicant and Board Agent shall solicit written
statements from the following Town Officials regarding the
proposed application. The Applicant shall address all comments
7
contained within the statements.
1. The Road Agent and Engineer as to the design of the street
system, location of easements, and design of the water,
sewer, and drainage systems, including appurtenances.
2. The Police Chief, or representative, as to vehicular and
pedestrian traffic safety and access for emergency vehicles.
3. The Fire Chief, or representative, as to the adequacy of fire
protection and access for emergency vehicles.
4. The Recreation Commission, or its Director, and the
Conservation Commission as to the suitability and location of
any lands proposed to be dedicated for Town open space,
park or playground or other recreational purposes.
5. The Town Manager as to the design of extensions to water
and/or sewer lines and capacity of existing water and/or
sewer systems to service the new demand.
6. The Building Inspector / Code Enforcement Officer,
Assessor, Heritage Commission, Business Development
Commission, Highway Safety Committee, Bow School
Superintendent, all as apllicable, as to matters under their
jurisdiction.
7. Utility providers, as applicable, as to matters related to
provision of adequate utilities to service the development.
Town Officials may opt to attend the regular Planning Board
meeting to express their concerns regarding the Site Plan.
L. Compliance with Regulations: All Applications shall comply with the
Zoning Ordinance and all other ordinances and regulations of the
Town of Bow.
M. Erosion Plan: All Applications shall include a "Soils Erosion and
Sediment Control Plan", conforming to the recommendations and
specifications of the NHDES NH Stormwater Manual, December
2008 or later update. Said plan shall address slopes,
embankments, ditches, drainage ways, and the effect of the
Development on water bodies and all disturbed areas. These plans
shall be stamped by a New Hampshire Registered Professional
Engineer.
N. Drainage/Grading Plan: All Applications shall include a Drainage
and Grading Plan showing the entire area which is directly involved.
8
The Plan shall indicate existing grades for the entire tract and
proposed grading for all areas of proposed construction activity.
The Plan shall show all existing and proposed drainage facilities,
including but not limited to catch basins, all storm water culverts,
headwalls, detention/retention basins, drainage swales, rip-rap
areas, dams and weirs, groundwater recharge structures, and
storm water flow dissipaters. The plan shall show all contributing
drainage and sub-catchment areas and existing and proposed
storm water flow calculations. All drainage plans for the
Development shall be based on hydrological calculations from said
Drainage/Grading Plans. The hydrological calculations shall
analyze 10, 25, and 50 year storm events. These Plans and
accompanying calculations shall be prepared by and bear the
stamp and signature of a New Hampshire Registered Professional
Engineer. The developer shall provide appropriate detention and
groundwater recharge facilities to assure that existing flow
quantities or velocities will not be exceeded and that existing
groundwater recharge will be maintained. A waiver of these
regulations is required if the storm water drainage system creates
any additional storm water flow quantities or velocities over other
properties. Such waiver will be considered only where the
developer has obtained easements therefore from all owners of
said downstream properties.
Required drainage facilities shall be designed in accordance with
the standards contained in Subdivision Regulations section 8.06
Storm Drainage.
O. Phasing Plan: A written phasing plan shall accompany Applications
for large scale Developments as determined by the Board. The
plan shall specify the development time table for each phase of the
Development. The plan shall include approximate dates for road
and other public improvement construction for
building/development commencement, and for building occupancy.
In cases where specific impacts have been identified, the Board
may require that the development of a large scale project proceed
at a rate which will allow the Applicant and the Town a reasonable
length of time in which to plan and prepare for impacts and to take
steps to mitigate adverse impacts. All residential site plan
applications shall include a written phasing plan.
P. Streets: Developments that adjoin or include existing streets that do
not conform to the width shown on the comprehensive plan or
official maps or the street width requirements of these Regulations
shall dedicate the differential width along either or both sides of
said existing streets. If the Development is along one side of the
street only, one-half (½) of the differential width shall be dedicated.
Setbacks shall be measured from the new or future right-of-way
9
line.
Q. Landscaping and Building Design: Every Application shall include a
detailed landscaping plan and the architectural design of all
buildings on the site shall be compatible with that of surrounding
properties.
R. Evacuation and Emergency Plan: A written emergency access and
evacuation plan shall be submitted for each Development.
Residential Site Plans shall show on site circulation and access for
emergency vehicles.
S. Access: Any road or driveway serving more than twelve (12) lots or
residential units shall have an approved secondary means of
access. Where recommended by the Fire Department, the Board
may require an approved secondary access for non-residential
development. The secondary access may, at the discretion of the
Board, be parallel to the primary access, separated by a continuous
island with a minimum width of 25 feet, to accommodate safety
vehicles. All Public and Private Streets shall comply with State Fire
Code standards (NFPA 1141, Chapter 5 Means of Access) for Fire
Department Access Roads. For deadend streets in excess of three
hundred (300) feet, the radius of the centerline of the pavement
around the turnaround shall be a minimum of one hundred five
(105) feet.
T. Monuments:
1. All lot lines, beginning and end of curves, and points of a
curve change shall be identified in the field by monuments in
conformance with NH Land Surveyors Association Ethics
and Standards for acceptable monuments (6.2 and 6.2a for
materials), August 1989. Principal corners that monument
the furthest extent of each lot shall be of stone or concrete, 4
inches X 4 inches X 35 inches long. Concrete bounds are to
be reinforced with two reinforcing bars of a minimum
diameter of ½ inches. The final plat shall identify each
monument found or set and shall describe the monument.
A change in bearing along a property line or an accumulated
change of bearing of five (5) degrees or greater shall
indicate separate lot lines and shall be monumented. Where
such lines are marked in the field with stone walls, the stone
wall may be used for monumentation, except on principal
corners.
2. All monuments shall be set under the direct supervision of a
licensed land surveyor. All monuments shall be flush with
finished grade. No monument shall be set until all
10
construction which would disturb or destroy the monument is
completed. The maximum distance between monuments
shall be 500 feet.
3. All monuments shall be set and their installation certified by
a licensed land surveyor prior to recording the final plat
unless installation of the monuments is assured by a
performance guarantee in conformance with Section 9 -
Inspections and Performance Guarantees.
U. Notation of Waivers and Exactions All waivers granted (requested)
and all exactions and other outstanding conditions imposed shall be
noted on the face of the approved plan.
V. Performance Guarantees Suitable guarantees, in accordance with
Section 9 of these regulations and Section 9 of the Subdivision
Regulations, shall be submitted by the applicant prior to beginning
site work. The guarantee shall ensure installation of all public
improvements, buffers, drainage facilities, landscaping, and other
improvements, as well as the restoration of wetlands and other
natural areas, as required by the Planning Board.
W. Solid Waste: Provisions for storage and disposal of solid waste
shall be shown on the site plan. Dumpsters shall be screened from
view from public roads and abutting properties.
X. Snow Storage: Provisions for removal and storage of snow from all
parking, maneuvering, loading, and pedestrian areas must be
shown on the site plan. The plan shall include a calculation of the
area from which snow will be cleared. For every five (5) square
feet of area to be cleared, onsite snow storage areas of a minimum
of one (1) square foot shall be shown on the plan and designated
on the site.
Y. Aesthetic Design Standards: The below listed Performance
Standards contained in the Business Development District are
adopted by reference herein and shall be applied to all Site Plans.
The applicable Performance Standard Sections in the Business
Development District include:
15.09 Minimum Landscaping and Screening Performance Standards
15.10 Exterior Building Facade Performance Standards
15.11 Screening Performance Requirements
15.12 Parking Performance Requirements
15.15 Lighting Standards
15.16 Environmental Performance Standards
11
Z. Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan and Filing EPA Notice of
Intent: Prior to issuance of building permits or start of any
construction activity, including but not limited to site clearing and
grading activities, the applicant shall file a copy of the Storm Water
Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) with the Board agent and shall
file a complete Notice of Intent with the US Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA). The SWPPP shall be kept up to date
and on site during construction.
AA. Private Streets: Where access is to be provided to multiple parcels
or sites via a Private Street, a statement shall be added to the
approved plan and included in each deed requiring each parcel,
unit, or site owner to be responsible for a proportionate share of the
total cost to upgrade the Private Street(s) to Town road standards
in the event the Town chooses, in accordance with RSA 231:28-33,
to conditionally lay out the Private Street as a Town road. The
statement shall include each parcel, unit, or site owner’s
acknowledgment that the development has been approved
conditioned upon the cost of any betterment being unconditionally
borne solely by the owners of the land abutting or being served by
the betterments. The total cost of the betterment shall include, but
is not limited to, construction, engineering, right of way and
drainage easements, and relocation of underground utilities.
BB. Restoration Plan and Performance Security Required: A
restoration plan shall accompany all Applications for Site Plans that
require an Alteration of Terrain Permit. The purpose of the plan
and security is to ensure that disturbed areas are permanently
stabilized if construction ceases for more than one year, if erosion
and sedimentation controls during construction are not maintained
in accordance with the approved plan, if the developer disturbs an
area outside the area or phase approved, or if the site is
abandoned for any reason. The plan shall specify the methods and
standards proposed to permanently reclaim disturbed areas. The
plan shall be accompanied by an independent cost estimate to
implement the restoration plan. The cost estimate shall be subject
to approval by the Board. An approved performance security
sufficient to implement the restoration plan shall be submitted prior
to Disturbing the Environment (see 5.02 H).
For Site Plan applications that do not require an Alteration of
Terrain Permit, the Applicant shall provide written notification to the
Building Inspector and Town Planner prior to commencing
earthwork. If construction ceases for six months, the Applicant
shall restore the site. All disturbed areas that are not under roof,
paved, or otherwise stabilized, shall be appropriately graded,
loamed, and seeded to achieve a stable site.
12
CC. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for new development
in an approved site plan that includes a new private street, common
water or sewage disposal systems for multiple structures, or
underground stormwater management facilities, an approved
Record Drawing (as built plans) shall be submitted. The Record
Drawing shall comply with the Appendix C: Record Drawing Plan
Requirements of the Subdivision Regulations.
5.03 Residential Site Plans This Section sets forth certain general requirements
that apply to all Residential Site Plans.
A. Architectural Design Standards: Site and building design shall
minimize adverse effects on nearby single family neighborhoods.
Coherent design principles must demonstrate that scale,
vocabulary, exterior treatment, roofing, design features, and details
are organized and presented in New England character. The
architecture existing in the neighborhood must be considered.
B. Additional Screening and Buffering: Buildings, parking areas, and
other features larger in scale than nearby single family
neighborhoods shall be effectively screened from view from public
streets and abutting single family dwelling.
C. Pedestrian Access: The site shall be designed to promote safe
pedestrian and bicycle movement among facilities on site and to
appropriate facilities off site.
D. Park & Recreation: Depending on the size of the residential
development and available public facilities nearby, on site
recreation facilities shall be provided. The facilities shall be
appropriate to the anticipated residents. In lieu of on site facilities,
the Planning Board may approve a cash or land dedication for park
and recreation facilities.
E. Amenities and Common Facilities: Amenities appropriate to meet
the needs of anticipated residents shall be provided. Examples
include outdoor storage, community buildings/meeting rooms,
garages and carports, and storage units.
F. Fire Suppression: Specific measures to suppress and contain fires
and noxious gases shall be shown on the plan. A Site Plan that will
result in twelve (12) or more dwelling units that are not served by
municipal water supply shall install a 30,000 gallon fire suppression
water supply cistern. The design and location shall be subject to
approval by the Planning Board. Other means of providing water
supply may be accepted by the Board after consultation with the
Fire Chief. Per RSA 674:51, V and 674:36, IV, both as from time to
time amended, the Applicant may offer to construct, and the
13
Planning Board may accept, residential sprinkler systems in lieu of
a fire suppression water supply. The offer and acceptance shall be
memorialized by a note on the approved Site Plan.
G. Water Supply and Sewage Disposal: Where available within a
practical distance, residential development shall be on public water
supply and sewage disposal. Designs for water supply and sewage
disposal systems shall be submitted with the site plan application.
H. Internal Roadways: Profiles, cross-sections, and typical sections
shall be submitted for internal roadways with the site plan
application.
I. Manufactured Housing Site Plans: RSA 205-D Manufactured
Housing Installation Standards and amendments thereto is adopted
herein by reference.
J. Standby Emergency Electricity Generators: In accordance with
Zoning Ordinance (ZO) 7.05C, standby emergency electricity
generators shall be provided for developments of Housing for the
Elderly and specified multifamily dwellings. The Site Plan shall
demonstrate compliance with the requirements for standby
generators. The design, installation, and provisions for
maintenance of generation systems shall be approved by the
Board.
Upon receipt of a written request, the Board may grant waivers
from the requirements of ZO 7.05C in accordance with Site Plan
Review Regulation Section 11 - Waivers. The Planning Board may
grant Waivers or partial Waivers where the Applicant demonstrates
compliance with the provisions of ZO 7.05C2.
14
Section 6 - Special Requirements:
The following special requirements apply to certain Developments which have a
significant impact on the Town, its services or facilities, as specifically provided herein.
The cost of these assessments and studies will be borne by the Applicant.
6.01 Traffic Impact Assessment (TIA):
A. Where a Development will result in the generation of an average of
two hundred (200) weekday vehicle trip ends (according to Trip
Generation, An Informational Report, Institute of Transportation
Engineers), the Applicant must submit a TIA to the Board with its
Application. The TIA shall include, but not be limited to, information
with respect to:
(1) estimated vehicular trips per day,
(2) an analysis of approaches,
(3) an analysis of the circulation and channelization patterns,
(4) a description and analysis of the location and type of existing
and proposed traffic control devices,
(5) pedestrian traffic and systems,
(6) an analysis of signal warrants,
(7) a description of the condition and capacity of the road
network,
(8) other analysis of specific impacts as identified by the
Planning Board.
B. A "trip end" is defined as a vehicle movement either entering or
leaving the site.
C. Examples of Developments which would generate two hundred
(200) weekday vehicle trip ends include (from Trip Generation,
approximate values):
(1) 20 detached single family units,
(2) 40 manufactured (mobile) homes or condominium units,
(3) 20 motel units,
15
(4) 17,000 gross square feet general office building,
(5) 1,700 gross square feet shopping center,
(6) 1,200 gross square feet high turnover sit down restaurant,
(7) 8,400 gross square feet medical office building or clinic,
(8) 4,000 gross square feet hardware/paint store,
(9) Gasoline/service station,
(10) 1,200 gross square feet bank.
6.02 Fiscal Impact Analysis (FIA): Where a Development would contain
dwelling units equal to two percent (2%) of the existing dwelling units
within the Town at the time of the Application, or where the Planning
Board finds that a commercial or industrial Development may have an
adverse fiscal impact upon the Town, the Applicant must submit an
analysis of the projected tax and fee income to the Town and the
projected service costs of the Town with the Application.
6.03 School Impact Analysis (SIA): Where a Development would generate a
school age population equal to one classroom according to current U.S.
Census data from Merrimack County, the Applicant must submit an
analysis of the impact of the Development on the school system with the
Application.
6.04 Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA): The Applicant of each
Development containing ten (10) or more dwelling units or twenty (20) or
more acres shall submit a report from the New Hampshire Natural
Heritage Inventory (NH Department of Resources and Economic
Development) which identifies rare plant and animal species and
exemplary natural communities in or near the proposed Development with
the Application. If any of the species or communities are identified within
or adjacent to the Development, an EIA addressing the impacts on the
species and communities shall be submitted with the Application.
6.05 Community Services Impact Assessment (CSIA): Where a Development
contains one hundred (100) lots, one hundred (100) residential units, one
hundred (100) gross acres, eight thousand five hundred (8,500) gross
square feet of office or commercial space, or seventeen (17) gross acres
of industrial land, the Applicant shall submit an assessment of the
demands that the Development will place on existing or proposed
community services including, but not limited to, police, fire, emergency,
water, sewer, solid waste, roads, recreation, and Town offices with the
Application.
16
6.06 Other Considerations: The requirements contained in this Section are
based on thresholds at which the expected impacts will be measurable
and at which point mitigation measures by the Applicant may be required
by the Board. Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed to
prevent the Planning Board from requiring other special investigations, at
the Applicant's expense or from requiring the above identified
investigations at lower thresholds where, in the opinion of the Board,
circumstances related to the Development or the area warrant such
special studies. An Applicant may not evade the application of the
provisions of this Section through phased or scattered development of a
parcel. The Board may, in its discretion, consider the effects of both prior
and potential development of the land owned by the Applicant or other
prior or future owners of the Development and require compliance with the
terms of this Section.
6.07 Impact Fees: As a condition of the Approval of an Application, the Board
may require the developer to pay a proportionate share of the costs of
municipal improvements which are necessitated in whole or in part by the
Development.
17
Section 7 - Procedure:
7.01 Preliminary Conceptual Consultation:
A. Prior to submission of an Application for Board approval, the
Applicant may discuss the proposal with the Board's Agent, and
may make an appointment to discuss the proposal at a regularly
scheduled Board meeting by notifying the Board's Agent three (3)
weeks prior to the meeting. At least one week prior to the regularly
scheduled meeting, the applicant shall provide the materials
required in 8.04.
B. At the meeting, the Applicant may address the Board concerning
the proposal but must limit the presentation to the intent, location of
the proposal, and the materials identified in 8.04 without going
beyond a general description of the basic concept.
C. The Board may briefly outline the steps that an Applicant may take
to obtain Board approval. It may discuss the content of the Master
Plan of the Town and its relation to the potential Applicant's
proposal. The Board may also cite specific Sections of these
Regulations or the Zoning Ordinance. The proposal may be
discussed in conceptual form only and in general terms, such as
the desirability of types of development and proposals under the
Master Plan. The Board may make suggestions which might be of
assistance in resolving problems with meeting requirements during
formal consideration.
D. A proposal shall neither be accepted as an Application nor be
approved or disapproved by the Board under this procedure.
E. No comments made during this consultation shall bind either the
Applicant or the Board.
F. Statements made by Board members shall not be the basis for
disqualifying said members or invalidating any action eventually
taken on the Application.
G. The time limits for Board actions under RSA 674:4, I(c) and Section
7.04 of these Regulations shall not apply to Preliminary Conceptual
Consultation.
H. The Board recommends that the applicant contact abutters to
discuss the project. The applicant may notify abutters of the
Conceptual Consultation or request that the Board agent notify
abutters at the applicant’s expense.
18
7.02 Site Plan Review Application:
A. Board Agent: The Board shall designate an agent to receive all
Applications.
1. The agent shall publish a schedule for conferences at which
initial filings may be submitted. The schedule shall establish
deadlines for making appointments for conferences. The
schedule and deadlines shall be approved by the Board.
2. The Applicant shall contact the agent to schedule an
appointment to make an Initial Filing.
3. The Planning Board shall establish a fee for the
appointment. The fee shall be due when the appointment is
made.
B. Submission of Initial Filing:
1. At the Initial Filing conference, the Applicant shall present
three copies of the complete application package to the
agent. During the conference the Applicant shall
demonstrate that all required items are included.
a. if all required items are included, the Applicant shall
submit the materials under C. Filing;
b. if required items are missing, the Applicant shall
repeat the steps as outlined in 7.02 A 2 & 3 above.
C. Filing:
1. The Applicant shall file with the designated agent:
(a) three (3) copies of the completed Application Form;
(b) three (3) copies of the completed Application
Checklist;
(c) seven (7) copies of a Site Plan which complies with
Section 8 of these Regulations;
(d) sufficient legible copies of the Site Plan, reduced in
size to no more than 11 x 17 inches, to provide 30
copies to the Board and one (1) copy to each Abutter
and to each Town Official referred to in Section 5.02
K;
19
(e) three (3) copies of any construction plans;
(f) the appropriate filing fee based upon the fee schedule
as may be set by the Board from time to time; and
(g) if the Applicant signs the form rather than the owner,
certification that the Applicant is agent for the owner.
2. Completed applications must include all of the items listed in
subsection 7.02 C. (1) and must be filed with the designated
agent no later than the fourth Thursday prior to a regular
meeting of the Board in order to be considered by the Board
at such meeting. If any of the items listed in subsection 7.02
C. (1) are missing or incomplete as of the filing deadline, the
Application shall not be placed on the agenda for the next
Planning Board meeting. A work session at which no vote
may be taken is not a regularly scheduled meeting of the
Board.
3. Resubmissions. After the application has been accepted by
the Planning Board under 7.04 A, the applicant may submit
revised materials to comply with Town Regulations,
Ordinances, or design review comments. To be considered
at a meeting of the Planning Board, such materials shall
have been submitted to the agent a minimum of seven (7)
calendar days prior to the meeting.
D. Consent to On-Site Board Inspection:
1. By filing an Application, the Applicant consents to the
inspection of the property by Board members and Board
agents at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner.
The consent includes attendance by Abutters, as defined in
Section 2.01 of the Subdivision Regulations, and other
interested parties at a posted on-site visit.
2. Prior to the Board's approval of a Site Plan Application, at
least three (3) members of the Board shall schedule and
conduct an on-site inspection of the property. All lot corners
on existing streets, the centerlines of all new driveways, the
corners of proposed buildings, the location of stormwater
detention and retention facilities, wetlands, and the perimeter
of parking areas shall be staked or flagged prior to such
inspection.
3. The on-site visit and final action on the Site Plan Application
may be postponed until no later than May 1st following the
20
acceptance of the Application if, in the opinion of the Board,
winter conditions prohibit making a proper inspection and
evaluation of the site.
4. An on-site visit is considered a meeting of the Planning
Board. As such, minutes and attendance shall be taken and
attendees have the same rights to hear and record the
meeting as a meeting of the Board. Where an applicant
states in writing that security issues as envisioned in RSA
91-A:3, II,(i) are present at the site and requests prior to
scheduling of an on-site visit that on-site attendees not take
photographs or use video recorders, the Board may prohibit
such use.
7.03 Notice to Abutters and Public: The Board shall notify all listed Abutters and
the Applicant of its intent to consider a Site Plan by certified mail, mailed
not less than ten (10) days prior to the date for official submission to the
Board of a completed Site Plan. Such notice shall contain a general
description (supplied by the Applicant) of the proposal and shall identify
the Applicant and the location of the proposal and a reduced size copy of
the Site Plan. The Board shall also post such notice in two (2) public
places in the Town and publish the notice in a local newspaper within
fourteen (14) days of the date of the meeting date. Where the applicant
has requested that the Board accept the application for review and
approve the application at a single meeting, abutters shall be notified of
the site walk, if the site walk is scheduled and held prior to Board
acceptance of the application. Such notice may be combined with the
notice of submission of application, but shall be mailed not less than two
business days prior to the site walk. No Application shall be approved or
denied without a public hearing as provided herein. If the public hearing
on the application is not held at the same meeting as the official
submission of the completed site plan, then the Board shall by first class
mail notify the abutters and applicant of the date of public hearing.
7.04 Action on a Proposed Site Plan:
A. Complete applications filed in accordance with 7.02 above shall be
placed on the Planning Board agenda for Receipt of Application. If
the application is found to be complete, the Board shall vote to
accept the application.
B. Subject to the provisions of Section 4.03 G of the Subdivision
Regulations of the Town of Bow, the Board shall act to approve,
conditionally approve, or disapprove any Site Plan which has been
timely filed and complies with these Regulations within sixty-five
(65) days after the Board voted to accept the Site Plan. The
Applicant may waive this time period and consent to such
21
extensions as may be mutually agreeable.
C. The Board may apply to the Board of Selectmen for an extension,
not to exceed an additional ninety (90) days, to act on the Site Plan.
The Applicant may also waive this time period and consent to such
extensions as may be mutually agreeable.
D. The Board may grant conditional approval of a Site Plan, which
shall become a final approval without a further public hearing, upon
certification to the Board by its designee or based upon evidence
submitted by the Applicant of satisfactory compliance with the
conditions imposed. Final approval may occur in this manner only
when the conditions are:
(1) minor plan changes whether or not imposed by the Board as
a result of a public hearing, compliance with which is
administrative and which does not involve discretionary
judgement; or
(2) conditions which are in themselves administrative and which
involve no discretionary judgement on the part of the Board;
or
(3) conditions with regard to the Applicant's possession of
permits and approvals granted by other boards or agencies;
or
(4) All other conditions shall require a hearing after notice in
accordance with Section 7.03.
E. If the Board rejects the Site Plan, it shall provide the Applicant with
written notice of its decision which shall describe the reasons for
the rejection.
F. Upon approval, the Chairman or Vice-Chairman shall sign and date
the Final Plan as approved. Approved plans shall be kept on file at
the Community Development Office and covenants, Notices of
Decision, deeds, and easements shall be recorded at the
Merrimack County Registry of Deeds. All conditions of approval as
imposed by the Planning Board shall appear on the face of the final
plan to be filed.
The plan to be filed with the Town shall be drawn on mylar or
equivalent material at a scale of not less than one inch equals one
hundred feet (1"=100') or at greater detail as directed by the Board
to indicate clearly existing and proposed features of the site. Said
plat shall be prepared in compliance with all applicable statutory
22
requirements and shall be prepared on twenty-two by thirty-four
inch (22" X 34") standard sheets measured from cutting edges. If
one sheet is not of sufficient size to contain the entire area of the
site and environs, the plat shall be divided into sections to be
shown on separate sheets of equal size with reference on each
sheet to the adjoining sheets.
G. The Board's approval of a Site Plan shall lapse if all conditions of
approval have not been met within ninety (90) days of the date of
approval. Upon request, and where it can be shown to the
satisfaction of the Board that the applicant has diligently pursued
other required permits, the approval may be extended for an
additional ninety (90) days to a total of 180 days from the date of
Final Approval. Where the applicant demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the Board that a hardship exists and that conditions
beyond the control of the applicant have caused the delay, an
applicant may request and the Planning Board may grant additional
reasonable extension of this time period up to a maximum total of
one year from the date of Final Approval.
7.05 Expedited Review:
1. At the Board's discretion, any non-residential Application on a
parcel for which a site plan has been previously approved by the
Planning Board and which:
(a) involves only a change of use, and/or
(b) involves no more than a 10% increase in impermeable area and
no more than a 50% increase in total building area;
or
that (c) is a new site plan which involves (i) not more than 10,000
square feet of building and (ii) not more than 50,000 square feet of
disturbed land area; for which no waivers of Site Plan Review
Regulations are required; for which none of the special
requirements of Section 6 are applicable; and for which the
applicant has appeared before the Board for consultation at which a
site walk is scheduled;
may be accepted and approved by the Board at one meeting
subject to the notice and public hearing requirements described in
these Regulations and subject to the Applicant's full compliance
with these Regulations.
2. At the time of the filing of such an Application, the Applicant shall
specifically request expedited review and shall file all required
23
Application Forms, Checklists and Plans.
3. The Board shall provide notice to all parties as provided in Section
7.03 of these Regulations of its intent both to consider the
submission and the approval of the Application under these
Expedited Review Procedures, and to hold a public hearing on the
Application.
4. The Board shall hold a public hearing, with notice as provided in
Section 7.03 of these Regulations, prior to approval or disapproval
of the Application.
5. No public hearing shall be necessary prior to the Board's action to
disapprove an Application based upon the failure of the Applicant to
supply information required by the Regulations, including Abutters'
identification, the failure to meet reasonable deadlines established
by the Board, or the failure to pay costs of notice or other fees
required by the Board.
7.06 Expenses and Fees: All expenses incurred by the Town of Bow in
processing an Application for Board action shall be borne by the Applicant.
The cost of recording documents with the Registry of Deeds, cost of any
required publication, cost of posting notices, cost of mailing notices of
hearing, the reasonable anticipated cost of the consultation by the Board
with any expert or specialist, and the reasonable anticipated costs to the
Town for the services of the Board's designated agent, its attorney and its
engineer, all must be paid by the Applicant at the time of filing an
Application with the designated agent of the Board. All additional costs
incurred during the review of the Application shall be paid prior to
approval. Failure to pay these costs as specified will be valid grounds for
refusal to accept the Site Plan as complete, or for disapproval of the Site
Plan.
7.07 Modifications of Approvals:
Minor design modifications and minor modifications of approved site plans
may be approved by the Planning Board a public meeting without specific
notification of abutters provided that all of the following conditions are met:
(1) The modification is the result of circumstances relating to the
property that were not anticipated at the time of approval.
(2) The modification is minor, insubstantial, and will not in any way
adversely affect abutters, future occupants, owners, or the public.
(3) In all other cases, modifications shall be approved only pursuant to
the provisions of Sections 7.03 and 7.04 of these regulations.
24
(a) When the Board has determined that a requested
modification shall require a public hearing in accordance with
Sections 7.03 and 7.04, the Applicant shall be responsible
for all expenses and fees as set forth in Section 7.06 of
these regulations.
7.08 Certificates of Occupancy: Performance guarantees shall be submitted in
accordance with section 9.00 of these regulations and section 9.00 of the
Subdivision Regulations.
A. Certificates of Occupancy shall not be issued until all conditions of
Site Plan Review have been met. Conditions of approval include all
required elements of the approved site plan. Where landscaping,
permanent erosion control, off-site improvements, or other features
cannot be completed due to winter conditions, a temporary
Certificate of Occupancy may be issued provided that a
performance guarantee approved by the Planning Director is in
place.
25
Section 8 - Application Requirements: Exhibits and Data
The following items are required before a Site Plan Review will be initiated by the
Board. Plans, reports, documents, and other materials submitted to the Planning Board
to fulfill the requirements of the Site Plan Review Regulations shall be free of any
restrictions on reproduction. Proximate to any copyright symbols, reservations of rights,
or statements of ownership, shall be an affirmative statement which expressly agrees to
reproduction.
8.01 Application for Site Plan Review and checklist completely filled out.
8.02 All Site Plans shall be prepared on twenty-two by thirty-four inch (22" X
34") standard sheets measured from cutting edges and shall be drawn at
no less than one inch equals one-hundred feet (1" = 100') and shall have
the following information.
A. Date of survey, name and legal description of the proposed
Development, locus map superimposed on the Town Tax map
[scale of one inch equals one thousand feet (1" = 1,000')] showing
the relation of the proposed Site Plan to existing streets and
surrounding property within one thousand (1000) feet, the owner
and developer, north arrow showing grid north and magnetic north
as of the date of the survey, graphic scale and tie to the State Grid
Coordinate System. The tie to the State Grid Coordinate System
shall be stationed on the plan with elevation.
B. Tract Boundary lines, right-of-way lines of all streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, park areas or land to be
reserved or dedicated to public use. All lot lines and other site
lines, water courses with accurate dimensions, bearing or reflection
angles and radii, arch, and central angles of all curves, and Area of
Special Flood Hazard locations and base flood elevations as shown
on the Town of Bow Flood Insurance Rate Map as adopted by the
Board of Selectmen that may exist within five hundred (500) feet of
the development boundaries with dimensions and soil types. For
Site Plans that involve land designated as Special Flood Hazard
Areas, the applicant shall submit sufficient evidence (construction
drawings, grading, and land treatment plans) to allow the Planning
Board to determine that the proposal is consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage; that all public utilities and facilities, such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and that
adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
C. Plans shall reflect all land within one thousand (1000) feet of any
portion of the Development in which the owner/developer, or any
26
person or entity which has an interest in the owner/developer, has
interest. If the plans include only a portion of the entire holdings,
any potential future plans for these remaining holdings shall be
shown in the form of a sketch. Said sketch is to include possible
road layout, lots, service, etc.
D. The tax block, parcel number, and owners of all property abutting
the tract to be developed.
E. Location and description of all monuments.
F. Name and address of engineer or surveyor. Certification and seal
of engineer or surveyor as to accuracy of the Site Plan details and
any calculations.
G. Certification that the Applicant is the agent for the owner or is the
owner of the land, or that the owner has given consent under an
option agreement.
H. Profiles of streets, based from topography, at the same horizontal
scale as the plans and a horizontal to vertical scale ratio of five (5)
to one (1), respectively.
I. Street cross-sections based on topography at fifty (50) foot
intervals. Scale to be one inch equals ten feet (1" = 10') horizontal
and vertical. All data based on a field survey.
J. When any officer or body of the Town, State or County is required
to approve a plat, approval shall be certified on the plat in an
appropriate space provided therefore.
K. Existing and proposed ground elevation contours based on
accurate field survey as follows: (Contours shall be accurate within
one half (½) a contour interval).
- slopes 0% to 2% - two foot (2') contour interval plus spotelevations
- slopes 2% to 5% - two foot (2') contour intervals
- slopes > 5% - five foot (5') contour intervals
L. Existing soils delineation based on the "Merrimack and Belknap
Counties Soils Survey" (Soils Maps, Version 4, 2007 or later
edition) USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service available
at Web Soil Survey and a legend which explains the map symbols,
describes the NRCS soils groups with drainage class, and
27
describes the properties of the soils regarding septic leach fields,
basement/foundations, building construction, and road construction.
M. All existing wetlands and associated buffer areas as defined in the
Town of Bow Zoning Ordinance Article 10.01 with certification of
Wetland Scientist. Wetlands and buffers shall be delineated and
stamped and sealed by a Certified Wetland Scientist on the Plan.
Such delineation shall have been conducted per professional
standards no earlier than six (6) years prior to the date of
submission of the Preliminary Plat application package to the
Planning Board. Very poorly drained soils, bogs, vernal pools,
stream, and the high water mark of water bodies shall be labeled.
N. Plan views of all buildings with their use, size, location, and floor
elevations indicated.
O. A typical elevation view of buildings indicating their height, bulk,
facade design, signs, and calculation of lot coverage.
P. The location, width, curbing, and paving of access ways and egress
ways and streets within the site.
Q. In accordance with Appendix A of these regulations (see also
Article 9 of the Zoning Ordinance) the location and layout of offstreet
parking and loading spaces, including a calculation of the
required minimum number of spaces.
R. The type, extent, existing or proposed planting size, and location of
existing and proposed landscaping and open space areas
indicating what existing open space areas will be retained.
S. The location, type, size, height, and design of proposed signs and
other advertising or instructional devices.
T. Type and location of all existing and proposed utilities, including but
not limited to gas, electric, telephone, and TV cable facilities.
U. The location and type of outdoor lighting facilities, if applicable,
accompanied by an analysis showing illumination, in footcandles,
on the site and adjacent properties.
V. In the event that an Area of Special Flood Hazard may exist within
five hundred (500) feet of the Development boundaries, base flood
elevations and utilities and drainage will be located and designed to
be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and to
provide adequate drainage for the area.
28
W. When individual sewage disposal systems are proposed, the plans
for such systems shall be approved by the appropriate Local or
State agency. When a public sewage disposal system is not
available, the developer shall have percolation tests made and
submit the results with the plan. The location of the septic system
as proposed or, if applicable, as approved by the NHDES
Subsurface Systems Bureau shall be depicted on the Site Plan.
X. A statement that the proposed street centerlines, building locations,
and required buffers have been adequately flagged on the ground
at the site to allow on-site evaluation of the proposed Development
by the Board, Town Staff, and Engineer.
Y. Certification of approval of the Development by the NH Department
of Environmental Services, Water Division, or appropriate
successor agency, accompanied by a duplicate copy of all data
submitted to them and any stipulations related to the approval.
Z. At least one bench mark tied to U.S.G.S. data shall be established
on each section or submission of a Site Plan. The bench mark
shall be tied to previously established bench marks on previously
submitted plats. Said bench mark to be plainly marked in the field
and stationed on the final plat with its elevation.
AA. Final State of New Hampshire approvals, when appropriate, from
the Department of Transportation (RSA 236:13), the NHDES
Wetlands Bureau (RSA 482-A and RSA 483-B), and the NHDES
Alteration of Terrain Bureau (RSA 485-A:17) shall be received as a
condition to final approval.
BB. Data Listing: The following listed data shall be included on the plan
prior to submission to the Bow Planning Board:
1. Area of Land _________ (acres).
2. Area of building coverage, existing and proposed ____
(square feet or acres).
3. Area of impervious surfaces, existing and proposed
_________ (square feet or acres).
4. Length of streets _________ (feet).
5. Area of open space/conservation strips ____ (acres).
6. List of all abutters with addresses.
29
CC. Certifications: The following listed certifications shall be affixed to
the final plan together with the appropriate signatures and seals
(when available) prior to approval by the Planning Board.
(1) It is hereby certified that the lands developed on this map
are owned by title of record and that consent to the approval
of said map is given.
______ ______________________________
(Date) (Corporate or Individual Name)
(2) I hereby certify that this map and survey of boundary and
preexisting conditions has been made under my supervision.
The date of the survey was: _______________.
______ ________________________
(Date) (Licensed Land Surveyor)
(3) I hereby certify that the design of this site plan has been
made under my supervision.
______ ____________________
(Date) (Professional Engineer)
(4) I have carefully examined this map and find it conforms with
the laws and requirements applicable thereto.
______ ____________________
(Date) (Building Inspector)
(5) This site plan was approved by the Bow Planning Board at
an official meeting held on ____________ and shall be kept
on file at the Bow Community Development Office.
______ _________________________
(Date) (Chair of Bow Planning Board)
DD. The plan shall contain an approval note “All New Development in
the Site Plan shall be subject to the impact fees in effect at the time
of issuance of a building permit.”
EE. Maintenance: Provisions and performance guarantees for the long
term maintenance of private streets and utilities, health and
sanitation facilities, water supply, cisterns and hydrants, amenities,
standby emergency electricity generators where required, and other
customary shared facilities, including proposed management
procedures and contractual arrangements.
FF. Construction Equipment Fueling and Service Operations:
Provisions for re-fueling and servicing construction equipment,
including fuel storage, secondary containment, spill clean up, and
30
proposed management procedures.
GG. Operational Brief: A written description of the development to
include: natural feature of the site and identification of those to be
preserved; proposed use, business activities, hours of operation,
customer base and / or tenants expected; traffic volume, vehicle
types, and access routes; abutting sites and uses; and NHDES /
USEPA environmental status including known releases of regulated
substances, hazardous waste sites, and storage tanks for regulated
materials on site and surrounding properties. For residential site
plans, a description of the neighborhood and relationship to
abutting properties.
HH. Restoration Plan, Independent Cost Estimate, and Proposed
Security. To comply with 5.02 BB, a restoration plan that specifies
the methods and standards proposed to permanently reclaim
disturbed areas, an independent cost estimate to implement the
restoration plan shall accompany all Applications for Site Plans that
require an Alteration of Terrain Permit.
II. Other information required by the Planning Board.
8.03 All Residential Site Plan applications shall include the following
information.
A. Rules and Procedures: In the case of condominium ownership, the
articles of incorporation, bylaws, homeowners association, and
initial rules. In the case of residential rental units, the proposed
rules and operating procedures.
B. Mail Boxes: The location and design of mail receptacles, along with
documentation that the US Postal Service has approved the design
or has been given the opportunity to review and comment.
C. Addressing: Proposed addressing, suitable for E-911 needs and
consistent with the procedures of the Building Inspector.
D. Long Term Maintenance: Provisions and performance guarantees
for the long term maintenance of the development, including
proposed management procedures and contractual arrangements.
E. Standby Emergency Electricity Generators: Analysis of the
minimum supply of electricity sufficient to operate emergency
lighting, water supply system, elevators, (wheel) chair lifts, and
heating systems throughout the development, and appliances
needed to sustain life and health in individual dwelling units;
description of the generator(s) proposed; location of proposed
31
generator(s); fuel type, source, and storage for two days of
continuous operation; provisions for refueling during extended
power outages; and proposed maintenance procedures, including
contractual arrangements.
8.04 Preliminary Conceptual Consultation: The Applicant shall prepare a
Concept Plan of the site and surrounding properties in sufficient detail to
allow the Planning Board to discuss the proposal. The Concept Plan
should be drawn on a USGS Quad, other topographical map, or aerial
photograph at a scale of one inch equals five hundred feet (1" = 500') or
larger, and should show approximate tract boundary lines and tax map,
block, and parcel numbers for the proposed area of development, all
contiguous holdings of the Applicant, and the names and addresses of the
owners of all contiguous abutting properties. All existing Streets, sewer
and water lines, and other rights-of-way or easements should be shown as
appropriate. One week prior to the meeting at which the concept plan is to
be discussed, the applicant shall submit a summary of the project; a list of
waivers, variances, and special exceptions required; the specific questions
to be posed to the Board; and, if the applicant is not the owner, written
permission from the owner to proceed.
32
Section 9 - Inspections and Performance Guarantee:
Section 9 of the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Bow is adopted by reference to
these Regulations.
Section 10 - Other Ordinances:
The Site Plan Review Regulations in no way relieves any owner or his agent, or
individual from compliance with the Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Regulations, or any
other ordinance that pertains to the proposed Development. All Site Plans shall
conform in all respects to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision
Regulations and all other applicable Town Ordinances and Regulations. No Site Plan
will be approved unless it complies in all respects to any pertinent ordinances.
Section 11 - Waivers:
The proposed Development shall conform to the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Bow.
Where (a) strict conformity to these Site Plan Review Regulations would cause undue
hardship to the owner of the land or where (b) specific circumstances relative to the site
plan, or conditions of the land in such site plan, indicate that the waiver will properly
carry out the spirit and intent of the regulations, a Site Plan substantially in conformity
with these Regulations may be approved by the Board, provided that the spirit of these
Regulations and public convenience and welfare will not be adversely affected.
Requests for waivers shall be submitted in writing and shall include the basis for
granting the waiver. The Board may accept an oral request for waiver at the public
hearing for a site plan application. The basis for any waiver granted by the Board shall
be recorded in the minutes of the board.
Section 12 - Enforcement:
These Regulations shall be enforced by the Board of Selectmen or its duly authorized
representative.
Section 13 - Appeals:
Pursuant to RSA 677:15, any persons aggrieved by any decision of the Planning Board
concerning a Site Plan may present to the Superior Court a petition, duly verified,
setting forth that such decision is illegal or unreasonable in whole or in part, specifying
the grounds upon which the same is claimed to be illegal or unreasonable. Such
petition shall be presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the date upon which
the Planning Board voted to approve or disapprove the Site Plan. In accordance with
RSA 677:15, I-a, if any of the matters to be appealed are appealable to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment under RSA 676:5, III, such matter shall be appealed to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment before any appeal is taken to the Superior Court.
Section 14 - Validity:
If any section, subsection, or phrase of these Site Plan Review Regulations is found, for
any reason, to be invalid by a Court or competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portion of these Regulations.
A.1
APPENDIX A - Off-Street Parking Regulations
A.01 Applicability
Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for all new development, and for changes
or expansions of existing uses and buildings to the extent that such changes would
necessitate an increase in the number of parking spaces required for the proposed use
under the standards of this Regulation. Required parking spaces shall not be used for
storage of vehicles, recreational equipment or vehicles, goods, or materials, or for the
sale, repair, or servicing of any vehicles. All off-street parking shall be provided on-site
except as authorized by a Special Exception under Section 7.22 of the Zoning
Ordinance.
A.02 Off-Street Parking Requirements
A. Number of Spaces Required.
Off-street parking will be provided in accordance with the Table of Off Street Parking
Requirements, as listed in section D below, for all uses and developments proposed.
B. Computation of number of spaces required.
Where more than one principal use and/or more than one structure are located on the
same lot, the parking requirements shall be computed for each use and/or structure,
and the number of spaces provided shall not be less than the sum of the number of
spaces indicated by the Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements for the included uses.
In computing total parking requirements for a land use, fractional numbers shall be
summed. Where the sum of the parking space computations results in a fractional
number, fractions of one-half (½) or more shall be counted as one (1).
C. Parking requirements for uses not listed.
The parking requirements for uses that do not fall within one of the categories in the
Table of Off Street Parking Requirements shall be as for the closest similar use, as
determined by the Building Inspector.
D. Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements.
The Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements identifies Principal Uses and Accessory
Uses.
A.2
TABLE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
PRINCIPAL USES UNIT OF
MEASUREMENT
MINIMUM PARKING SPACES
A. RESIDENTIAL
1. Single-Family Dwelling unit Two (2)
2. Duplex or Two-Family Dwelling unit Two (2)
3. Multi-Family Dwelling unit One and one half (1.5)
4. Housing for the Elderly Dwelling unit One (1)
5. Manufactured Housing or Park Dwelling unit Two (2)
6. Boarding or Rooming House Guest rooms One (1)
B. PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL
1. Churches Seating capacity One (1) per four (4) seats
2. Public or Private Schools
Elementary & Junior High
Classrooms & public
assembly areas
One and three quarters (1.75)
per classroom plus one (1) per
four persons seating capacity of
public
School capacity &
public assembly
areas
One (1) per two and one half
(2.5) pupils classroom capacity
plus one (1) per four (4) persons
seating capacity of public
assembly areas
3. Hospitals Beds Three (3) per bed
4. Residential Care Facility Beds One (1) per two (2) beds
5. Child Day Care Facility Gross floor area One (1) per 200 sq. ft.
6. Adult Day Care Facility Gross floor area One (1) per 200 sq. ft.
7. Libraries and Museums Gross floor area One (1) per 300 sq. ft.
8. Social, Fraternal Clubs, &
Lodges
Seating Capacity One (1) per four persons
capacity
9. Municipal and Public Works
Facilities (except offices)
Public works-gross
floor area
One (1) per 500 sq. ft.
Assembly - gross
floor area
One(1) per four (4) persons
capacity
10. Cemeteries Gross floor area -
office
One (1) per 300 sq. ft.
A.3
PRINCIPAL USES UNIT OF
MEASUREMENT
MINIMUM PARKING SPACES
REQUIRED PER UNIT OF
MEASUREMENT
C. RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT
1. Publicly Owned Recreational Athletic field or
diamond
One (1) per four seats
2. Privately Owned Outdoor
Recreational Facility
All uses having
Spectator seating
capacity
One (1) per four seats
a. Golf Course Golf green Six (6) per green
b. Miniature Golf Miniature golf hole Two (2) per hole
c. Fish & Game Club Membership One (1) per club member
d. Tennis Court Court Three (3) per court
e. Swimming Pool Surface water area of
pool
One (1) per one hundred
(100) sq. ft.
f. Racetrack Spectator seating
capacity
One (1) per four seats
g. Outdoor Theater Spectator seating
capacity
One (1) per four seats
3. Indoor Commercial Spectator seating
capacity
One (1) per four seats
a. Gymnasium Gymnasium floor area One (1) per 200 square feet
b. Roller / Ice Skating Rink Gross floor & rink area One (1) per 200 square feet
4. Movie Theater or Concert Hall Seating capacity One (1) per four seats
5. Campgrounds or Youth
Camps
Campsite One per campsite
D. OFFICES
1. General Professional
Business, Financial or
Governmental Offices
Gross floor area One (1) per 200 square feet
2. Medical, Dental or Health
Service Office or Clinic
Gross floor area One (1) per 150 square feet
3. Banks Gross floor area One (1) per 200 square feet plus
Drive-up lanes Five(5) stacking spaces per lane
A.4
PRINCIPAL USES UNIT OF
MEASUREMENT
MINIMUM PARKING SPACES
REQUIRED PER UNIT OF
MEASUREMENT
E. COMMERCIAL
1.Retail Sales and Rental of Goods and Merchandise
a. Occupying Less than 3,000
sq. ft. of Floor Area
Gross floor area One (1) per 250 sq. ft.
b. Occupying more than 3000
sq. ft.
Gross floor area One (1) per 200 sq. ft.
2. Personal and Business Services
a. Occupying Less than 3,000
sq. ft. of Floor Area
Gross floor area One (1) per 300 sq. ft.
b. Occupying more than 3,000
sq. ft.
Gross floor area One (1) per 300 sq. ft.
3. Hotels, Motels, Inns Guest Rooms, One and one quarter (1.25) per
room +
Employees, One quarter (0.25) per
employee +
Seating capacity One (1) per four (4) seating
capacity
4. Veterinary Facilities Gross floor area One (1) per 500 square feet
5. Commercial Kennels Gross floor area One (1) per 500 square feet
6. Mortuary or Funeral Home Parlors or chapels Eight (8)
7. Auction and Auction Houses To be determined
8. Mini-Storage To be determined
F. RESTAURANTS
1. Within a Fully Enclosed
Structure with no drive-in
Seating capacity One (1) per four (4) seats
2. With no Limitations on Type
of Service
Seating capacity plus
Outside service
windows or ordering
stations
One (1) per four (4) seats plus
One(1) per window/station
A.5
PRINCIPAL USES UNIT OF
MEASUREMENT
MINIMUM PARKING SPACES
REQUIRED PER UNIT OF
MEASUREMENT
G. AUTOMOTIVE AND TRANSPORTATION
1. Motor Vehicle Sales and
Rental
Gross floor area plus
Outside display area
One (1) per 600 sq. ft. plus
One per 3,000 sq. ft. outside
display area
2. Sales and Installation of
Vehicle Parts and Accessories
Gross floor area One (1) per 300 sq. ft.
3. Motor Vehicle Repairs and
Maintenance
Repair bay Four (4) per bay
4. Gasoline Sales Gross floor area plus
Fuel pump nozzle
One (1) per 50 sq. ft. + stacking
space of one and a half (1.5) per
fuel nozzle
5. Car Wash
a. Car Wash - Self Service
Bay or stall
Two (2) + two stacking spaces
per bay
b. Car Wash - Automatic Bay or stall Two (2) + five stacking spaces
per bay
6. Motor or Rail Freight Terminal Gross floor area One (1) per 1000 sq. ft.
7. Bus or Train Station Gross floor area One (1) per 100 sq. ft.
8. Sales or Rental of
Recreational Vehicles, Camping
Trailers, or Boats, Including
Servicing and Repairs
Gross floor area plus
Outdoor display area
plus
Repair bays
One (1) per 600 sq. ft. plus
One (1) per 3,000 sq. ft. plus
Four (4) per bay
9. Marina Slips or berths One (1) per slip
10. Heliport or Airstrip To be determined
A.6
PRINCIPAL USES UNIT OF
MEASUREMENT
MINIMUM PARKING SPACES
REQUIRED PER UNIT OF
MEASUREMENT
H. INDUSTRIAL
1. Manufacturing, Processing,
Repairing, Assembling of
Goods and Merchandise
Gross floor area One (1) per 500 sq. ft.
2. Warehousing and Storage of
Non-flammable, Non-explosive
Goods
Gross floor area One (1) per 1,000 sq. ft.
3. Bulk Storage of Fuel,
Chemicals, or Flammable
Materials
Gross floor area of
buildings
One (1) per 1,000 sq. ft.
4. Sale of Construction Equipment
and/or Materials with Outdoor
Display or Storage
Gross floor area
Outdoor display area
Repair bays
One (1) per 600 sq. ft. plus
One (1) per 3,000 sq. ft. plus
Four (4) per bay
5. Materials Recycling Center Employees plus
Storage yard area
One (1) per employee plus
one (1) per 5,000 square feet
6. Removal, Excavation, and
Processing of Earth Materials
Employees parking at
site
One (1) per employee
7. Planing Mill or Sawmill Employees One (1) per employee
8. Contractor's Yard or
Tradesman's Shop
Company vehicles
Gross floor area
One (1) per company vehicle
plus
One (1) per 1,000 square feet
9. Laboratory or Research Facility Gross floor area One (1) per 500 square feet
10. Junk Yard To be determined
I. AGRICULTURAL
1. Farming and Agriculture Operations
a. Agricultural
b. Horticultural
c. Livestock
Gross floor area
devoted to sales
One (1) per 400 sq. ft.
One (1) per 400 sq. ft.
One (1) per 400 sq. ft.
2. Silvicultural Operations Not applicable N/A
3. Stables and Equestrian
Facilities
Stalls plus
Seating capacity
One half (0.5) per stall plus
One (1) per 4 seats
4. Commercial Greenhouses
Including Wholesale and
Retail Sales
Gross floor area One (1) per 600 sq. ft.
A.7
PRINCIPAL USES UNIT OF
MEASUREMENT
MINIMUM PARKING SPACES
REQUIRED PER UNIT OF
MEASUREMENT
J. MISCELLANEOUS
1. Condominium Conversion See appropriate
use(s) above
See appropriate use(s) above
2. Radio or Television Antenna Not applicable N/A
3. Sexually Oriented Businesses See appropriate
use(s) above
See appropriate use(s) above
A.8
ACCESSORY USES UNIT OF
MEASUREMENT
MINIMUM PARKING SPACES
REQUIRED PER UNIT OF
MEASUREMENT
A. RESIDENTIAL
1. Home Occupation Not applicable Satisfied by minimum for
dwelling
2. Cottage Industry Non-family
employees plus
Gross floor area
One (1) per employee, plus
One (1) per 500 square feet
3. Use of a Portion of a Dwelling
or Accessory Building in
Conjunction With an Off-
Premise Occupation
Not applicable Satisfied by minimum for
dwelling
4. Accessory Dwelling Unit Dwelling unit one
B. NON-RESIDENTIAL
1. Parking Space or Garage for
Employees, Visitors, and
Customers
See standards for
Principal Use
N/A
2. Cafeterias for Employees See standards
for Principal Use
N/A
3. Child Care for Employees Principal Use N/A
4. Recreational and Fitness
Facilities for Employees
See standards for
Principal Use
N/A
5. Dwelling Unit for Resident
Caretaker or Security
Personnel
Dwelling unit One (1) per unit
6. Farm or Roadside Stand Stand Six (6) spaces per stand
C. RESIDENTIAL AND NON-RESIDENTIAL
1. Child Daycare
a. With up to 6 Children Facility One(1)
b. With more than 6 Children Licensed capacity One(1) per six (6) children
A.9
A.03 Dimensional Requirements
A. Standard parking space
Each standard parking space shall contain a rectangular area at least nineteen (19) feet
in length and nine (9) feet in width, except where the spaces are located parallel to the
travel aisles, the length shall be increased to twenty-two (22) feet.
B. Spaces for handicapped.
Parking spaces for vehicles carrying handicapped individuals shall contain a rectangular
area of at least nineteen (19) feet in length and eight (8) feet in width together with an
access way of five (5) feet in width immediately adjacent to the parking space. Parking
spaces for vans carrying handicapped individuals shall contain a rectangular area of at
least nineteen (19) feet in length and eight (8) feet in width together with an access way
of eight (8) feet in width immediately adjacent to the parking space. Two (2) adjacent
parking spaces for the handicapped may share one (1) access way. Spaces for the
handicapped shall be provided as follows:
Parking Lot Size Number of Required Spaces
(Total Spaces) for the Handicapped
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 or more 2% of total spaces
The first of every six (6) spaces for the handicapped shall be designed for a van.
C. Minimum Aisle Width.
Aisles in parking lots shall be at least twenty-two (22) feet in width for two-way traffic.
Parking areas with spaces at an angle of less than ninety (90) degrees may provide for
one way traffic flow, where direction of flow is clearly marked. Aisles within parking lots
shall provide for the following minimum aisle width, according to the angle of the parking
spaces to the aisles:
A.10
Minimum Aisle Width for Parking Areas
Angle of Parking Space Minimum Aisle Width
To Drive (Degrees)
90 22 feet (two-way)
60 18 feet (one-way)
45 15 feet (one-way)
30 15 feet (one-way)
0 15 feet (one-way)
D. Setback to parking areas.
Off-street parking spaces shall not be located within the minimum setback areas in the
R, R-1, and RU districts. In the C, I-1, I-2, INST, and CIVIC districts, off-street parking
spaces may be located within the setback areas provided the minimum distance
between the parking surface area and the property line is no less than ten (10) feet.
Driveways and similar access ways may be located within the side or rear setback area
in any zone provided the minimum distance between the driveway or access way and
the property line is no less than ten (10) feet.
A.04 Design Standards
A. Safety of design.
Parking areas shall be designed so that, without resorting to extraordinary movements,
vehicles may exit the parking area without backing onto a public street. These parking
areas shall be graded and surfaced with asphalt, concrete or other material that will
provide equivalent protection against potholes, erosion, and dust, and will not be subject
to damage from snow plowing.
B. Drainage.
All parking areas shall provide for drainage of surface waters such that water will not
accumulate within the parking area nor shall it be directed over or across the adjacent
streets or any neighboring lot.
C. Demarcation.
Parking spaces, stacking lanes, entry and exit drives, and direction of traffic flow shall
be appropriately demarcated.
A.11
D. Illumination.
Where artificial lighting is provided, the illumination shall be directed away from adjacent
streets and properties.
E. Stacking space for drive-through uses.
Stacking spaces for drive-through businesses shall be located on the same lot as the
principal use, and shall not interfere with ingress to the lot from a public street, other
required parking spaces, or access aisles to said parking spaces.
F. Landscaping.
Except for parking in connection with one and two-family dwellings, all parking areas
shall have a landscaped perimeter of ten (10) feet in width. Parking areas of twenty-five
(25) spaces or more shall have landscaped areas within the perimeter of the parking
area in the minimum amount of five (5) percent of the area occupied by the required
parking spaces and associated access aisles.
G. Driveways.
The location of driveways shall minimize traffic hazards. No portion of any driveway
shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to any intersecting street, nor shall the maximum
grade of the driveway exceed twelve (12) percent.
H. Connecting driveways.
Where practical, parking areas on abutting parcels shall be connected. Driveways
connecting parking lots to a street or to another parking lot shall be at least twenty-two
(22) feet in width, for two-way traffic flow; and at least twelve (12) feet in width for oneway
traffic flow. No connecting driveway shall be greater than twenty-eight (28) feet in
width.
I. Separation of driveways.
For corner lots at the intersection of two streets, no driveway entry or exit shall be
located within fifty (50) feet of the point of intersection of curb lines. Where two (2) or
more two-way driveways connect a lot to any one (1) street, there shall be a minimum
separation between the driveways at the right-of-way line of one hundred (100) feet. For
one-way driveways, the minimum separation shall be seventy-five (75) feet. Driveways
shall intersect with streets at an angle of as near to ninety (90) degrees as site
conditions will permit and in no case less than sixty (60) degrees or more than one
hundred-twenty (120) degrees.
A.12
A.05 Off-Site Parking Allowed by Special Exception
A. Off-site parking authorized.
Off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the principal use(s) they
are intended to serve, except where off-site parking is approved as a Special Exception.
Such off-site parking area shall be specifically dedicated to the principal use(s) that it
serves.
A.06 Off-Street Loading Requirements
A. Applicability.
Wherever new off-street loading zones are established, they shall conform to the
provisions of this section. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided on the same lot as
the principal use they are intended to serve. In no case shall an off-street loading space
be counted as part of an area to satisfy the off-street parking requirements and viceversa.
B. Standard loading space.
Each loading bay shall contain a rectangular area of at least seventy (70) feet in length
and fourteen (14) feet in width and shall have a minimum height clearance of fourteen
(14) feet above grade, and may be located either within a building or outside of and
adjoining an opening in the building.
C. Table of off-street loading spaces required by gross floor area.
Off-street loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the Table of Off-Street
Loading Requirements below. The off-street loading space requirements for uses that
do not fall within one of the categories in the Table below shall be as for the closest
similar use, as determined by the Building Inspector.
A.13
Number of Loading Spaces Required by Gross Floor Area in Square Feet
Above 150,000:
For Each Additional
150,000 Or
Under 5,000 21,000 61,000 101,000 Fraction,
Principal Land Use 5,000 -20,000 -60,000 -100,000 -150,000 Add:
Manufacturing 0 1 2 3 4 1
Freight Terminals 1 1 2 3 4 1
Warehousing 1 1 2 3 4 1
Retail Uses 0 1 1 2 3 1
Services except Office 0 0 1 2 3 1
Office Uses 0 0 1 2 2 1
Institutional Uses 0 0 1 1 2 1
A.07 Loading Area Design Standards
A. Setbacks.
No loading space or bay in a Non-Residential District shall be located within fifty (50)
feet of a Residential District boundary or within fifty (50) feet of the lot line of an abutting
residential use within a Residential District. All bays shall be located at the side or rear
of the building they are intended to serve. No loading space or bay in any District shall
be located within ten (10) feet of any property line.
B. Safety of design.
Loading spaces and bays shall be so located and designed to allow shipping and
delivery vehicles to maneuver safely and conveniently to and from a public right-of-way,
and complete the loading and unloading operation without obstructing or interfering with
any public right-of-way or any on-site parking space or parking access aisles.
A.14
C. Drainage.
All loading spaces shall be graded and surfaced with asphalt, concrete, bluestone, or
other material that will provide equivalent protection against potholes, erosion, and dust,
and will not be subject to damage from snow plowing. Provision shall be made for the
drainage of surface water from loading spaces so that water will not accumulate within
the loading space nor shall it be directed over or across the adjacent streets or any
neighboring lot.
B.1
APPENDIX B - Recommended Plants for Semi-Opaque Screens
B.01 Applicability
Where vegetative screens are required by Site Plan Review Regulations, Subdivision
Regulations, Zoning Ordinance, or conditions of approval of Planning Board, Zoning
Board of Adjustment, appropriate plants, as shown on the following table of
RECOMMENDED PLANTS FOR SEMI-OPAQUE SCREENS or approved alternate
plants, shall be installed.
B.02 Care and Maintenance
Where plants are used as a semi-opaque screen, the property owner shall provide care
and maintenance sufficient to ensure that all plants thrive. Diseased, dying, or dead
plants shall be replaced such that the semi-opaque screening effect is achieved and
maintained.
TABLE OF
RECOMMENDED PLANTS FOR SEMI-OPAQUE SCREENS
EVERGREEN SHRUBS
NAME HEIGHT
in feet
SPREAD
in feet
SUN SOILS GROWTH
RATE
CULTURAL NOTES
Boxwood 6 - 12 5 - 6 Sun Mod. Well
Drained
Slow Many varieties available; does not
tolerate salt
Dwarf Alberta Spruce 3 - 6 2 - 4 Sun /
Part
Shade
Mod. Poor /
Well Drained
Slow Cultivar of White Spruce
Drooping Leucophea 3 - 4 4 - 6 Part / Full
Sun
Mod. Well
Drained
Slow Needs high moisture
Inkberry Holly 6 - 12 8 - 10 Part Sun
/ Shade
Mod. Well /
Poorly Drained
Slow Prefers acid soil. Needs high
moisture
Fortunei Euonymus 2 - 12 2 - 3 Sun /
Part
Shade
Mod. Well
Drained
Moderate Many varieties available
Globe Arborvitae 4 - 6 3 - 6 Sun Mod. Well
Drained
Moderate Needs high moisture
Japanese Privet 6 - 10 6 - 8 Sun or
Shade
Mod. Well
Drained
Rapid Adapts well to varied conditions
Juniper 4 - 20 4 - 8 Sun Well Drained Rapid Many varieties available
Mountain Andromeda 4 - 6 4 - 8 Part / Full
Sun
Well Drained Slow Needs high moisture
Mountain Laurel 4 - 15 6 - 8 Sun /
Part
Shade
Mod. Well
Drained
Slow Prefers acid soils; attractive
flowers
Rosebay Rhododendron 8 - 20 4 - 5 Part
Shade
Mod. Well
Drained
Moderate Prefers acid soils; low
maintenance
Yew 3 - 6 5 - 6 Part Sun
/ Shade
Mod. Well
Drained
Slow Many varieties available
RECOMMENDED PLANTS FOR SEMI-OPAQUE SCREENS
EVERGREEN TREES
NAME HEIGHT
in feet
SUN SOILS GROWTH
RATE
CULTURAL NOTES
Arborvitae 30 - 50 Sun / Part
Shade
Well / Poorly
Drained
Moderate Tolerates wide range of conditions
Austrian Pine (Black
Pine)
20 -40 Sun Well Drained Moderate Tolerates salt & city conditions
Canadian Hemlock 75 -100 Part / Full
Sun
Well / Poorly
Drained
Slow /
Moderate
Needs high moisture; low salt tolerance
Colorado Spruce 75 -100 Sun / Part
Shade
Mod. Poor /
Well Drained
Slow Prefers acid soil. Don’t mix with Douglas Fir
Douglas Fir 75 -100 Sun / Part
Shade
Mod. Well
Drained
Moderate High wildlife value. Don’t mix with Colorado
Spruce
Eastern White Pine 75 -100 Sun / Part
Shade
Mod. Poor /
Well Drained
Moderate Prefers acid soil. High wildlife value.
Japanese Black Pine 60- 80 Sun Well Drained Moderate Tolerates salt
Norway Spruce 50 - 75 Sun Mod. Well
Drained
Moderate Many cultivars available; attractive form
Red Cedar 50 - 75 Sun Mod. / Poorly
Drained
Slow High wildlife value.
Red Pine 50 - 100 Sun Mod. Well /
Well Drained
Moderate Tolerates droughty conditions.
Scotch Pine 30 - 60 Sun Well Drained Rapid /
Moderate
Prefers acid soils; tolerates droughty
conditions.
White Spruce 50 - 75 Sun / Part
Shade
Mod. Poor /
Well Drained
Slow Prefers acid soil.
INDEX
Subject Section Page
Abutters Notice ............................................................................................... 7.03 . . . . . . . . . . 20
Access .......................................................................................................... 5.02S. . . . . . . . . . 9
Access Ways ................................................................................................. 8.02P. . . . . . . . . .27
Action on a Proposed Site Plan ...................................................................... 7.04. . . . . . . . . . .20
Additions, Not Greater than 1,200 SF ............................................................. 3.03 . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Addressing Standards .................................................................................... 8.03C. . . . . . . . . 30
Aesthetic Design Standards ......................................................................... 5.02Y. . . . . . . . . .10
Appeals ........................................................................................................... 13. . . . . . . . . . . . 32
Application - Site Plan Review ......................................................................... 7.02. . . . . . . . . . 18
Application Requirements: Exhibits and Data .................................................. 8. . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Application Forms & Checklist ......................................................................... 8.01 . . . . . . . . . 25
Approved Plan, MCRD Copy ........................................................................... 7.04F. . . . . . . . . 21
Architectural Design Standards - Residential ................................................. 5.03A. . . . . . . . . 12
As-Built plans ................................................................................................... 5.02CC.. . . . . . . 12
Base Flood Elevations .................................................................................... 8.02B.. . . . . . . . 25
Bench Mark .................................................................................................... 8.02Z. . . . . . . . . 28
Board Agent .................................................................................................... 7.02A. . . . . . . . . 18
Bond / Performance Security Required ........................................................... 5.02BB.. . . . . . . 11
Bonds .............................................................................................................. 8.02EE. . . . . . . .29
Bounds .......................................................................................................... 5.02T. . . . . . . . . . 9
Buffering and Screening - Residential ............................................................ 5.03B. . . . . . . . . 12
Building Elevation Views .................................................................................. 8.02O. . . . . . . . .27
Building Coverage Area ................................................................................... 8.02BB. . . . . . . .28
Building Design and Landscaping ................................................................ 5.02Q. . . . . . . . . . 9
Building Plan Views ........................................................................................ 8.02N. . . . . . . . . 27
Certificate of Occupancy .................................................................................. 5.02CC.. . . . . . . 12
Certificate of Occupancy .................................................................................. 7.08 . . . . . . . . . .24
Certification of Wetland Scientist ..................................................................... 8.02M. . . . . . . . .27
Certification of Engineer or Surveyor ................................................................ 8.02F. . . . . . . . .26
Certifications ..................................................................................................... 8.02CC. . . . . . . 29
Community Services Impact Assessment ......................................................... 6.05 . . . . . . . . . 15
Compliance with Regulations ........................................................................ 5.02L. . . . . . . . . . 7
Conceptual Consultation .................................................................................. 7.01. . . . . . . . . . 17
Conceptual Consultation ................................................................................... 8.04 . . . . . . . . . 31
Condominium, Residential ............................................................................... 8.03A. . . . . . . . 30
Contours, Existing and Proposed .................................................................... 8.02K. . . . . . . . 26
Conveyances to Town ................................................................................... 5.02D. . . . . . . . . 4
Copyright ......................................................................................................... 8. . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Cottage Industry .............................................................................................. 3.03 . . . . . . . . . . .1
Data Listing ...................................................................................................... 8.02BB. . . . . . . .28
Deed - Conveyances to Town ........................................................................ 5.02D. . . . . . . . . 4
Definitions ......................................................................................................... 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Disturbing Environment ................................................................................. 5.02H. . . . . . . . . .5
Drainage/Grading Plan .................................................................................. 5.02N. . . . . . . . . 7
Driveways ........................................................................................ Appendix A.04G . . . . . . A.11
Egress Ways ................................................................................................... 8.02P. . . . . . . . 27
Emergency and Evacuation Plan .................................................................... 5.02R. . . . . . . . . 9
Enforcement ..................................................................................................... 12. . . . . . . . . . . 32
Engineer Seal and Certification ......................................................................... 8.02F. . . . . . . . 26
Environmental Performance Standards .......................................................... 5.02Y. . . . . . . . 10
Environmental Impact Assessment.................................................................... 6.04. . . . . . . . . 15
EPA Notice of Intent ........................................................................................ 5.02Z. . . . . . . . 11
Erosion Plan .................................................................................................... 5.02M. . . . . . . . 7
Evacuation and Emergency Plan .................................................................... 5.02R. . . . . . . . . 9
Exactions and Waivers, Notation of ................................................................ 5.02U. . . . . . . . 10
Expedited Review .............................................................................................. 7.05 . . . . . . . . 22
Expenses and Fees ........................................................................................... 7.06. . . . . . . . . 23
Extensions ......................................................................................................... 7.04. . . . . . . . . 20
Exterior Building Facade Performance Standards .......................................... 5.02Y. . . . . . . . 10
Federal and State Approvals ............................................................................ 5.02C. . . . . . . . 4
Fees and Expenses ........................................................................................... 7.06. . . . . . . . . 23
Final Site Plan Approval ..................................................................................... 7.04F. . . . . . . .21
Fire Suppression - Residential ........................................................................... 5.03E. . . . . . . .12
Fiscal Impact Analysis ........................................................................................ 6.02. . . . . . . . .15
Flood Zone Locations ........................................................................................ 8.02B. . . . . . . 25
Flood Zone ......................................................................................................... 8.02V. . . . . . . 27
Fueling of Construction Equipment ..................................................................... 8.02FF. . . . . . 29
General Requirements ........................................................................................ 5. . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Generators, Standby Emergency Electricity .................................................... 5.03J . . . . . . . .13
Generators, Standby Emergency Electricity ..................................................... 8.03E. . . . . . . .30
Grading/Drainage Plan .................................................................................... 5.02N. . . . . . . . .7
Handicapped Parking ........................................................................ Appendix A.03B . . . . . . .A.9
Home Occupation .............................................................................................. 3.03 . . . . . . . . . .1
Homeowners Association .................................................................................. 8.03A. . . . . . . .30
Impact Fees ........................................................................................................ 6.07. . . . . . . . .16
Impact Fees ........................................................................................................ 8.02DD. . . . . . 29
Impervious Surfaces ........................................................................................... 8.02BB. . . . . . 28
Inspections and Performance Guarantee ........................................................... 9. . . . . . . . . . . 32
Internal Roadways - Residential ........................................................................ 5.03H. . . . . . . 13
Landscaping Performance Standards ............................................................... 5.02Y. . . . . . . 10
Landscaping and Building Design .................................................................... 5.02Q. . . . . . . . 9
Landscaping ...................................................................................................... 8.02R. . . . . . . 27
Ledge ................................................................................................................ 5.02F. . . . . . . . .5
Lighting Standards ........................................................................................... 5.02Y. . . . . . . .10
Lighting, Outdoor ................................................................................................ 8.02U. . . . . . . 27
Loading Areas .................................................................................... Appendix A.07 . . . . . . A.13
Lot Coverage Calculation ................................................................................... 8.02O. . . . . . . 27
Mail Boxes, Condominium, Residential .............................................................. 8.03B. . . . . . . 30
Manufactured Housing Site Plans....................................................................... 5.03I. . . . . . . . 13
Minor Design Modifications ................................................................................. 7.07. . . . . . . . 23
Modifications of Approvals .................................................................................. 7.07. . . . . . . . 23
Monuments ....................................................................................................... 5.02T. . . . . . . . 9
Natural Features, Protection of ........................................................................ 5.02G. . . . . . . . 5
Notation of Waivers and Exactions ................................................................... 5.02U. . . . . . . 10
Notice to Abutters and Public: ............................................................................ 7.03. . . . . . . . 20
Off-Street Parking Requirements ........................................................ Appendix A . . . . . . . . . .A.1
On-Site Board Inspection .................................................................................... 7.02D. . . . . . . 19
Open Space Areas ............................................................................................. 8.02R. . . . . . . 27
Operational Brief ................................................................................................. 8.02GG. . . . . .30
Park & Recreation - Residential .......................................................................... 5.03D. . . . . . . 12
Parking Location and Layout .............................................................................. 8.02Q. . . . . . . 27
Parking Design Standards .................................................................. Appendix A . . . . . . . . .A.10
Parking Performance Requirements ................................................................. 5.02Y. . . . . . . 10
Parking ............................................................................................... Appendix A . . . . . . . . . .A.1
Pedestrian Access - Residential ......................................................................... 5.03C. . . . . . ..12
Performance Security Required .......................................................................... 5.02BB.. . . . . .11
Performance Guarantees ................................................................................ 5.02V. . . . . . . .10
Performance Guarantees ................................................................................... 8.02EE. . . . . . 29
Performance Guarantee and Inspections ........................................................... 9. . . . . . . . . . . 32
Performance Standards ................................................................................... 5.02Y. . . . . . . .10
Plan Size ............................................................................................................ 7.04F. . . . . . . .21
Planting ............................................................................................................. 8.02R. . . . . . . .27
Plants for Semi-Opaque Screens, Recommended ............................ Appendix B . . . . . . . . . . B.1
Plat Size ............................................................................................................ 8.02. . . . . . . . . 25
Preliminary Conceptual Consultation ................................................................. 7.01 . . . . . . . . .17
Private Streets ................................................................................................. 5.02AA. . . . . . .11
Procedure ......................................................................................................... 7. . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Professional Engineer Certification ................................................................... 8.02CC. . . . . . . 29
Profiles of Streets ............................................................................................. 8.02H. . . . . . . . 26
Public Notice and Abutters ............................................................................... 7.03 . . . . . . . . . 20
Re-fueling of Construction Equipment .............................................................. 8.02FF. . . . . . . 29
Record Drawing ................................................................................................. 5.02CC.. . . . . . 12
Recorded MCRD Copy to Town ........................................................................ 7.04F. . . . . . . . 21
Recreation - Residential ................................................................................... 5.03D. . . . . . . . 12
Reproduction Restrictions ................................................................................. 8. . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Requirements ................................................................................................... 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . .4
Residential Site Plans ....................................................................................... 8.03 . . . . . . . . . 30
Residential Site Plans ....................................................................................... 5.03. . . . . . . . . .12
Responsibility ................................................................................................... 5.01 . . . . . . . . . . 4
Restoration Plan and Performance Security Required ..................................... 5.02BB.. . . . . . .11
Restoration Plan ................................................................................................ 8.02HH. . . . . . .30
Review by Other Town Officials ...................................................................... 5.02K. . . . . . . . . 6
Roadways, Internal - Residential .................................................................... 5.03H. . . . . . . . 13
Scale .................................................................................................................. 8.02. . . . . . . . . 25
School Impact Analysis ...................................................................................... 6.03. . . . . . . . . 15
Screening and Buffering - Residential .............................................................. 5.03B. . . . . . . . 12
Screening, Performance Standards ............................................................... 5.02Y. . . . . . . . .10
Screens, Recommended Plants for Semi-Opaque .......................... Appendix B . . . . . . . . . . . B.1
Secondary Access .......................................................................................... 5.02S. . . . . . . . . .9
Sediment Control Plan .................................................................................... 5.02M. . . . . . . . . 7
Sewage Disposal - Residential ......................................................................... 5.03G. . . . . . . ..13
Sewage Disposal Systems ............................................................................... 8.02W. . . . . . . .28
Sewer, Town ................................................................................................... 5.02I. . . . . . . . . . 6
Sign Location .................................................................................................... 8.02O. . . . . . . . 27
Sign Design ...................................................................................................... 8.02S. . . . . . . . 27
Single Access Road ........................................................................................ 5.02S. . . . . . . . . 9
Site Walk / On-Site Board Inspection ................................................................ 7.02D. . . . . . . . 19
Site Plans .......................................................................................................... 5.02 . . . . . . . . . .4
Snow Storage ................................................................................................. 5.02X. . . . . . . . 10
Soils Delineation ................................................................................................ 8.02L. . . . . . . . 26
Solid Waste .................................................................................................... 5.02W. . . . . . . .10
State Grid Coordinates ................................................................................... 5.02A. . . . . . . . . 4
State and Federal Approvals ........................................................................... 5.02C. . . . . . . . 4
State of New Hampshire Approvals ................................................................... 8.02AA. . . . . . .28
Storm Drainage................................................................................................ 5.02N. . . . . . . . 7
Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan ............................................................ 5.02Z. . . . . . . . 11
Street Length ..................................................................................................... 8.02BB. . . . . . .28
Street Profiles .................................................................................................... 8.02H. . . . . . . .26
Streets ............................................................................................................. 5.02P. . . . . . . . 8
Surveyor Seal and Certification .......................................................................... 8.02F. . . . . . . .26
Ties to Bench Marks ........................................................................................... 8.02Z. . . . . . . .28
Town Sewer ..................................................................................................... 5.02I. . . . . . . . . 6
Traffic Impact Assessment ................................................................................ 6.01. . . . . . . . . 14
Trees, Table of Recommended ......................................................... Appendix B . . . . . . . . . . B.2
U.S.G.S. Data .................................................................................................. 5.02B. . . . . . . . 4
Underground Utilities ....................................................................................... 5.02J. . . . . . . . . 6
Unsuitable Land ............................................................................................... 5.02E. . . . . . . . 4
Utilities ............................................................................................................. 5.02J. . . . . . . . . 6
Utilities ................................................................................................................ 8.02T. . . . . . . .27
Waivers and Exactions, Notation of ................................................................ 5.02U. . . . . . . .10
Waivers .............................................................................................................. 11. . . . . . . . . . .32
Warranty Deed ................................................................................................. 5.02D. . . . . . . . 4
Water Supply and Sewage Disposal - Residential .............................................. 5.03G. . . . . . . 13
Wetland Scientist Certification and Delineation Requirements ........................... 8.02M. . . . . . . 27
Wetlands and Buffer Areas ................................................................................. 8.02M. . . . . . . 27
1
Bow Mills Mixed Use District
I. Authority
This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of RSA 674:21, Innovative Land Use Controls
and shall be administered by the Planning Board.
II. Purpose
The purpose of this article is:
A. To expand the Town’s tax base and allow high value development in close proximity to
Interstate 89 and 93,
B. To permit the development of a walkable community with a mix of compatible
commercial and residential uses to help meet the demands of the current and future
market,
C. To allow flexibility in development, and
D. To minimize the traffic impact of any proposed development on local roads by orienting
access toward the highway and transit.
III. Permitted Uses
A. Subject to the general provisions of this article and other applicable sections of the
Bow Town Code, the following land uses are permitted within the district as a use by
right:
1. Retail Sales with limited outdoor display
2. Personal Services
3. Hotels, Motels, Inns
4. Offices
5. Restaurants with or without a drive through
6. Gas stations with no service facilities
7. Movie theaters
8. Medical facilities
9. Indoor recreational facilities
10. Banks with or without a drive through
11. Research & development facilities and laboratories
12. Transit facilities
13. Residential dwelling units
2
B. Subject to the general provisions of this article and other applicable sections of the
Bow Town Code, the following land uses are permitted within the district as a use by
special exception, if the listed uses singularly or combined do not occupy more than
50 % of the floor space in the proposed development:
1. Place of worship
2. Day care facility
3. Schools, colleges, and universities
4. Libraries and museums
5. Social clubs and lodges
IV. Dimensional Requirements
A. Minimum tract size: 10 acres
B. Minimum road frontage: 300 ‘ for any lot fronting a public street, 200’ for lots
fronting a private street
C. Maximum building height: 55 feet
D. Maximum number of stories: 4
E. Maximum lot coverage: 60 %
F. Maximum floor to area ratio (FAR): 0.60
G. Minimum setbacks, front, rear, and side: 10 feet
H. Minimum setback from Residential Zone District shall be fifty feet and shall be
screened in accordance with Section 7.16 of the Zoning Ordinance.
V. General Provisions
The following standards shall be applied to any new or expanded development within
the District and may be waived by the Planning Board under Section 11 of the Bow Site
Plan Review Regulations:
A. Access and Parking
1. The minimum parking requirements found in Appendix A of the Bow Site
Plan Review Regulations shall apply. To allow design flexibility and encourage
efficiency, parking spaces may be located on-site or off-site within 600 feet of
the principle use to be served and reasonable shared parking arrangements
can be used to meet the minimum requirement.
2. Parking areas shall be located primarily behind and to the side of buildings,
as well as below grade and in parking structures as appropriate. No more
3
than 50 % of the parking spaces provided shall be located between the
building to be served and the public or private road providing access.
3. A traffic impact assessment in accordance with Section 6.01 of the Bow Site
Plan Regulations shall be required for all developments exceeding the
threshold.
4. The Planning Board encourages and may require the construction of shared
access and cross access connections between adjacent lots, as well as
easements for future connections.
5. To minimize the traffic impact on existing arterial and collector streets, the
Planning Board may require the use of parallel frontage or service roads
along state or federal highways.
6. Accommodations for pedestrian circulation between businesses, residences,
and parking areas shall be provided and connections to adjacent sites shall
be made when feasible.
7. The incorporation of transit facilities, such as a bus pull-out, may be required
by the Planning Board at its discretion.
8. All access improvements shall be designed to meet guidelines set forth by
the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
(AASHTO) and best engineering practices.
B. Building Design
The standards found in Section 15.10 of the Bow Zoning Ordinance shall apply.
C. Landscaping
The standards found in Section 15.09 & 15.11 of the Bow Zoning Ordinance shall
apply.
D. Lighting
The standards found in Section 15.15 of the Bow Zoning Ordinance shall apply.
E. Residential Uses
1. Residential units shall be located primarily above commercial floor space; not
more than 25 % of the total proposed ground-level floor space may be
designated for residential use.
2. For each residential unit, the following minimum space dedication shall be
required:
4
a) Public open space: A minimum of 600 square feet (sf) per unit of
outdoor area, which is defined as land that is accessible to residents
and contains recreational amenities, excluding all parking areas and
sidewalks.
b) Private open space: A minimum of 80 sf for each unit of outdoor
area which is defined as outdoor space with private access, including
decks, balconies, porches, and gated patios
c) Common building area: A minimum of 30 sf/unit
3. Residential developments shall have appropriately scaled recreational
facilities, such as trails, fitness centers, tennis courts, or swimming pools.
F. Review Process
The review process is established in the Bow Site Plan Review and Subdivision
Regulations, as applicable, with the following exceptions.
1. A minimum of one neighborhood meeting shall be held at least thirty days
prior to the first public hearing for a new or expanded site development
within the district. The purpose of the meeting will be to get feedback early
from abutters and address concerns prior to submitting a final application.
The Community Development Department and all abutters shall be notified
by regular mail fourteen days in advance of the meeting and meeting
minutes shall be provided by the applicant as part of the application to the
Town.
2. Any application for site development within the district shall be accompanied
by a noise management plan, which shall at a minimum assess the acoustic
impact of the proposed development on abutters relative to accepted
standards and identify reasonable measures and best operating techniques
for attenuation.
G. Signs
The standards found in Article 8 of the Bow Zoning Ordinance shall apply.
H. Nonconforming lots, structures, and uses
The provisions of Section 2.09 and Article 11 of the Zoning Ordinance shall apply.
All legal lots of record that existed prior to adoption of this ordinance are
5
exempt from the minimum tract size requirement, but no new lot shall be
created that does not meet the minimum tract size.
FINAL VERSION APPROVED BY THE PLANNING BOARD ON 2/2/2017
Article 15
Business Development District
Z O N I N G O R D I N A N C E
T O W N of B O W , N E W H A M P S H I R E
ADOPTED AND REVISED THROUGH MARCH, 2013
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 15. BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 131
15.01 Statutory Authority 131
15.02 Intent 131
15.03 Purpose 131
15.04 Location of District 132
15.05 Separability 132
15.06 Definitions 132
15.07 Permitted Uses 135
15.08 Dimensional Requirements 135
15.09 Minimum Landscaping and Screening Performance Standards 145
15.10 Exterior Building Facade Performance Standards 152
15.11 Screening Performance Requirements 154
15.12 Parking Performance Requirements 156
15.13 Signage Requirements 157
15.14 Compliance with Performance Standards 163
15.15 Lighting Standards 163
15.16 Environmental Performance Standards 164
15.17 Waivers 166
15.18 Effective Date 167
REFERENCE TABLE FOR BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
i
ARTICLE 15. BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
15.01 Statutory Authority
This Article is enacted by the Town of Bow pursuant to NH RSA 674:21, II, this
innovative land use control ordinance shall provide for all approvals, including the
granting of conditional or special use permits, by the Planning Board. Any decision
made by the Planning Board under this innovative land use control ordinance may be
appealed directly to New Hampshire Superior Court in the same manner provided by
statute for appeals from the Planning Board, as set forth in RSA 676:5, III and RSA
677:15. A waiver process from particular requirements set forth in this ordinance may
be employed by the Planning Board where the applicant demonstrates substantial
compliance with the standards set forth in this ordinance, as well as the Bow Master
Plan, and Section 15.03: "Purpose".
15.02 Intent
A. Zoning was first implemented as a technique for separating incompatible types of
land development, thereby protecting low-intensity uses from the harmful or
disagreeable impacts of high-intensity uses. However, conventional zoning may
produce its own set of undesirable side effects.
B. As design and technology continually change in the marketplace, new types of land
uses are proposed which cannot be easily assigned to existing zoning classifications.
Unfortunately, desirable land developments may be denied, appealed to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment (where demonstrating a hardship may be required), or subjected
to lengthy rezoning procedures (requiring a town-wide ballot vote).
C. Performance standards measure the quantifiable "impacts" of each proposed
development, rather than prohibiting certain classes of land use. Performance zoning
offers an alternative method for implementing community goals as outlined in the Bow
Master Plan, while offering property owners a means to optimize the use of their land.
15.03 Purpose
The purpose of the -A Business Development District Ordinance is:
A. To attract environmentally acceptable commercial, industrial, recreational, and
institutional uses to the District;
B. To encourage diversity in the community tax base through appropriate flexibility in
land use and land use development;
C. To optimize financial return on public infrastructure investments and expenditures,
131
including municipal sewer, municipal water supply, and public highways;
D. To minimize adverse traffic impacts on Route 3-A, future interstate highway
interchanges, and surrounding local streets and roadways; and
E. To preserve valuable historical, cultural, and natural features within the District and
to minimize adverse environmental impacts to water and air, while reducing light and
noise pollution, flooding, clear cutting of vegetation, and the blocking of scenic views.
15.04 Location of District
The boundaries and extent of the Business Development District is as delineated and
depicted on the map entitled, "Bow Business Development District", as drawn by the
Central New Hampshire Regional Planning Commission, dated February 1, 2001, as
amended.
15.05 Separability
Should any part of this Ordinance be held invalid or unconstitutional by a court, such
holding shall not affect, impair, or invalidate any other part of this ordinance, and, to
such end, all articles, sections, and provisions of this ordinance are declared to be
severable.
15.06 Definitions
In addition to definitions included in other Articles of this Ordinance, the following
definitions shall apply to this article:
Animated or Moving Sign: Any sign that has moving or rotating components, flashing
lights, or special materials to illustrate action or create a special effect or scene.
Berm: A graded, landscaped mound of earth, generally three (3) to eight (8) feet in
height as required by this ordinance, used to screen, shield, and buffer undesirable
views and to separate incompatible land uses.
Caliper: The diameter of a tree trunk, measured 36 inches from the finish grade at the
base of the trunk.
Canopy Eaveline or Eaveline Sign: The bottom of the roof eave or the canopy eave. An
eave as defined herein does not include the parapet of a flat roof building.
Center Identification Sign: A freestanding sign that is either a monument or directory
type.
132
Directory Sign: A separate structure supported from the sides. A sign for identification
of the business or center as a whole and for listing the major tenants and their building
numbers/address numbers.
Double - Faced Sign: A single freestanding structure designed with the intent of
providing advertising on both sides.
Easement Deed: A legally binding document that provides the grantee with specific
entitlements related to the use and enjoyment of the grantor's property.
Height of Sign: The greatest vertical distance measured from the finished ground below
the middle of the sign to the highest element of the sign.
Identification Sign: A sign that illustrates the name, name and logo, type of business, or
identifies a particular establishment.
Illuminated Sign: A sign lit with either an internal or external artificial light source.
Incentive Bonus: Provisions of this Ordinance that provide potentially advantageous
land use arrangements to individuals as compensation for voluntarily utilizing their
property(s) in a preferred, but not required, manner.
Landscape Strip: An area of a site where lawns, trees, shrubs, ornamental plants and
other natural materials, such as rock and wood chip, and decorative features, including
sculptures, fountains, and pools have been installed.
Loading / Receiving Area: A portion of a structure that is reserved for the primary
purpose of providing structure access for the arrival and dispersal of goods and
products transported by truck or rail.
Local Roads and Streets: All highways classified as Class IV or V under RSA 229:5.
Material Storage Area: Any portion of a site routinely used for the outdoor storage of
any products, goods, or raw materials.
Monument Sign: A separate structure supported from grade to the bottom of the sign
with a base or wall that is larger than the sign. A sign for identification of the business
or center as a whole and for listing the major tenants and their building
numbers/address numbers.
Multi-Tenant Commercial / Industrial Structure: Any commercial, industrial, or office
building containing more than one (1) business.
Multi-Use Path: A trail or pathway that supports a variety of simultaneous uses in
accordance with municipal ordinances and regulations and/or landowner permission.
133
Municipal Sewer: An operational system constructed and maintained for the collection
and renovation of normal or typical waste water flows, which is either owned and
maintained by a municipality or a public utility company licensed by the Public Utilities
Commission of the State of New Hampshire.
Municipal Water: An operational system constructed and maintained for the purpose of
distribution of potable water for general use, which is either owned and maintained by a
municipality or a public utility company licensed by the Public Utilities Commission of
the State of New Hampshire.
Noise: Any sound produced by any unnatural or human activity.
Non-conforming Sign: A legally established sign that fails to conform to the regulations
as presented or referenced herein.
Nuisance Odor: An odor that constitutes a nuisance.
Open Space: A portion of a lot, free of man-made structures, which is dominated by
natural materials, including woods and lawn, and is free and open to the sky.
Ornamental: A deciduous tree planted primarily for its ornamental value or for
screening purposes; tends to be smaller at maturity than a shade tree.
Performance Zoning, Performance Zoning Standards: The specific provisions,
standards, or criteria included in this Ordinance, which have been created for the
purpose of accomplishing the stated intent of the Ordinance or any portion thereof.
Roof Sign: A sign that is mounted on a roof of a building or that is wholly dependent
upon a building for support and that projects above the top walk or edge of a building
with a flat roof, the eaveline of a building with a gambrel, gable, hip, or mansard roof.
Shared Access Drive: A common access point to Route 3-A or any town road providing
access to two (2) or more properties.
Shrub: A woody plant, smaller than a tree, consisting of several small stems from the
ground or small branches near the ground; may be deciduous or evergreen.
Sign Area: The entire face, including the surface and any molding, framing, and
projections, but not including the base, wall, or column supports. Individual letters and
logos mounted on a building shall be measured by the area enclosed by four (4)
straight lines outlining each word and logo.
134
15.07 Permitted Uses
All land uses, or combinations thereof, enumerated in Article 5: "Use Regulations" are
permitted within the Route 3-A Business Development District, subject to review for
suitability by the Planning Board. Prior to any Planning Board approval of a proposed
use, the applicant must demonstrate that the proposed use will meet all of the
performance standards established in the following sections as well as the Subdivision
and Site Plan Review Regulation(s).
15.08 Dimensional Requirements
In order to accomplish the stated intent and purpose of this ordinance, as well as the
goals and objectives outlined within the Bow Master Plan and Town of Bow Economic
Development Strategy, February 2000, the following dimensional requirements are
enacted:
135
Figure 15-1: Table of Baseline Dimensional Requirements*
*Notes:
(a) No building or structure may be located within Town or NHDOT right-of-way.
(b) Front, side, and rear setbacks shall be increased when necessary to accommodate buffering
and landscape strip requirements.
(c) No building or structure shall be erected, enlarged, altered, or relocated, nor shall any existing
lot size be changed or new lot created within the Business Development District, except in
accordance with Table 15-1, or as otherwise stated within this ordinance.
(d) Lots with frontage on both Route 3-A and a local road shall be accessed from the local road.
(e) All lots requiring on site sewer systems shall meet NH Department of Environmental Services
(NHDES) lot sizing criteria.
(f) All setback ratios are calculated as a ratio of one (1) foot in building height to one (1) foot, or
multiple or portion thereof, of required setback.
(g) Parking lots, outdoor storage, and refuse areas shall be a minimum of 10 feet from side and
rear property lines. Parking, internal circulation, storage, and refuse areas are not permitted in
front setbacks.
(h) Shared access drives shall mean common access points to Route 3-A or any town road
providing access to two (2) or more properties.
(i) Building height for calculation of setback ratios shall be determined as stipulated in Article 3 of
the Bow Zoning Ordinance.
A. Dimension Incentive Bonuses
In recognition of the need to protect the overall integrity and character of the Business
Development District, as well as to promote the development of a system of local roads
and utilities for properly servicing properties within the Business Development District,
the performance zoning standards presented in Table of Baseline Dimensional
Requirements (Figure 15-1) have been formulated so as to include Incentive Bonus
136
Standards.
These Incentive Bonus Standards have been created as means for rewarding those
who choose to voluntarily develop their properties in a way that is most compatible with
the stated goals and objectives of the Bow Master Plan and Town of Bow Economic
Development Strategy, February 2000.
The sum of dimensional incentive bonuses shall not exceed the limits contained within
the Table of Dimensional Requirement Incentive Bonus Limits (Figure 15-5). Incentive
bonus standards that are implicit in these performance-zoning standards include:
1. Front Structure Setback
a. In recognition of the need to protect the aesthetic qualities of the Business
Development District, while still maintaining appreciation for the needs of all
potential users, an incentive bonus standard has been developed wherein front
structure setback requirements may be relaxed for those who choose to develop
sites utilizing one of the following options:
i. Placement of all parking and circulation pavements to the side and rear
of proposed buildings (see figure 15-2 for example).
ii. Provision of shared access drives and parking.
iii. Development of a landscaped berm within the front setback area, with
a height no less than 8 feet (see figure 15-3 for example).
b. Those who choose to take advantage of this Incentive Bonus Standard may
reduce their required front structure setback by fifty percent (50%) of that
otherwise required within this District, subject to the minimum front structure
setback dimension. In effect, use of this Incentive Bonus Standard expands the
envelope of available building area on any given site.
137
Figure 15-2: Example site plan with reduction of front setback by employing
incentive bonus to locate parking to side and rear of proposed structure.
138
Figure 15-3: Example site plan with reduction of front setback by employing
incentive to construct 8' landscaped berm
139
2. Maximum Height
a. In recognition of the need to protect the aesthetic qualities of the Route 3-A
Business Development District, while still maintaining appreciation for the needs
of all potential users, an incentive bonus standard has been developed wherein
Maximum Height may be increased for those who choose to develop sites with
lot areas greater than the minimum required lot area.
b. For site plans with lots sizes greater than the minimum required acreage, the
height of structures may be increased 10 feet per additional acre of lot size, or
portion thereof, above and beyond maximum heights offered by employing other
incentive bonuses, up to a maximum of one hundred (100) feet.
3. Maximum Impervious Coverage
a. In recognition of the need to protect the aesthetic qualities of the Route 3-A
Business Development District, while still maintaining appreciation for the needs
of all potential users, an incentive bonus standard has been developed wherein
Maximum Impervious Coverage may be increased for those who choose to
develop sites utilizing one of the following options:
i. Placement of all parking and circulation pavements to the side and rear
of proposed buildings.
ii. Provision of shared access drives and parking (see figure 15-4 for
example).
b. Those who choose to take advantage of this Incentive Bonus Standard may
increase their allowable maximum impervious coverage up to 80% of the gross
lot area, provided all landscape strips, parking lot landscape requirements, and
other screening is provided as required by this ordinance.
140
Figure 15-4: Example site plan with Incentive bonus of Share Parking and Access
Employed to increase maximum impervious surface to 80%
141
4. Donation of Off-site Land to Reduce Minimum Lot Area
a. In recognition that less restrictive minimum lot area for lots within the
Business Development District can promote favorable development along this
corridor, the following provision is created.
b. The intent of this incentive is to provide for smaller lots than as required by
the standards of this ordinance when deemed appropriate and not contrary to
the public interest by the Planning Board. This incentive can only be used for
one lot per proposed subdivision. This shall include proposed future
re-subdivisions.
c. The minimum lot area shown in Table of Base Line Dimensional
Requirements (Figure 15-1) may be reduced if all the following criteria are met:
i. A parcel of land, with an area greater than or equal to the difference
between the minimum required lot area from Table of Dimensional
Baseline Requirements (Figure 15-1) and the proposed lot area, is
deeded in fee simple to the Town of Bow or a nonprofit organization
acceptable to the Bow Board of Selectmen.
ii. Those utilizing this Performance Standard must offer any land within
the Town of Bow, which is not to be retained by the applicant, to the Bow
Board of Selectmen. In considering any such offer, the Board of
Selectmen may elect to: accept the land for town ownership and use;
reject the offer; or defer ownership to a third party, nonprofit organization
of their selection. In addition, the Board of Selectmen shall seek review
and comment regarding the offer from the Bow Conservation
Commission.
iii. The land being offered must meet the following criteria:
a. The parcel(s) must be sufficiently accessible.
b. The parcel(s) must have a permanent public recreation,
conservation, open space, or historic preservation use, or any other
public use deemed acceptable and appropriate by the Planning
Board and Board of Selectmen.
c. Each parcel to be deeded must be ½ acre or larger, as
deemed appropriate by the Planning Board and Board of
Selectmen.
iv. The parcel to be created by the applicant shall meet applicable
NHDES lot sizing criteria if public sewers are not available at the time of
142
subdivision.
d. Any parcel created under this Performance Standard shall have a total area
of not less than one and one half (1.5) acres for lots with frontage along Route
3-A and one (1) acre for lots with frontage along local roads.
143
Figure 15-5: Table of Dimensional Requirement Incentive Bonus Limits*
*Notes:
a. All setback ratios are calculated as a ratio of one (1) foot in building height to one (1) foot, or
multiple or portion thereof, of required setback.
b. Building height for calculation of setback ratios shall be determined as stipulated in Article 3 of the
Bow Zoning Ordinance.
c. Gray cells in table indicate not a bonus for selected incentive.
144
15.09 Minimum Landscaping and Screening Performance Standards
A. Intent
To preserve and enhance the aesthetic qualities of the Business Development District
by establishing landscaping and design standards, which are proportionate to the
intensity of proposed land use(s). Through the enactment of these design standards and
incentive bonuses, the following objectives can be accomplished:
1. Diminish adverse impacts of structures, lighting glare, noise, wind, and odors,
which may result from permitting widely varying land uses on adjacent parcels;
2. Ensure that each tract of land has an adequate buffer from other properties in
order to preserve property values and improve aesthetic values of properties;
3. Promote aesthetically pleasing development, consistent with the character of the
Town;
4. Promote an aesthetically pleasing relationship of scale between buildings and
their natural surroundings;
5. Redefine the character, image, and identity of the Business Development District
by promoting an attractive and maintained streetscape through landscaping and
native plantings, installation of underground utilities, and designing of monument
or pedestal signage as opposed to pole signage;
6. To achieve an attractive presentation such that office, retail, and other customer
oriented businesses are visible from public streets;
7. To achieve an attractive presentation of distribution and warehouse uses and
manufacturing or other heavy industrial uses by screening the less attractive
portions of the development; and,
8. To achieve an attractive presentation by essentially hiding outside storage and
equipment operations from view from streets and other uses.
B. Location of Landscaping
Landscaping shall be installed in the following locations in accordance with Figure 15-6
to the standards noted, unless specifically waived by the Planning Board:
145
FIGURE 15-6: Location of Landscape Strips
C. Open Space
All areas disturbed by construction shall be covered with a minimum thickness of four
inches (4") of loam and be subsequently planted with grass seed, sod, or other
vegetative ground cover in accordance with an erosion and sedimentation stabilization
plan acceptable to the Planning Board.
D. Street Side Structure Landscape Strip
Landscaping shall be provided along the perimeter of all structures with a foot print
146
greater than 50 square feet in size visible from the public right of way. The Planning
Board shall approve planting materials and densities. Minimum width of said strip shall
be five (5) feet or two (2) feet beyond the sidewalk along the structure.
E. Street Landscape Area
1. Intent: The Street Landscape Area is intended to promote the aesthetic quality of
landscaped front yards within this District.
2. Location: The Street Landscape Area shall be the area between any public
right-of-way and structures, parking areas, and other improvements along the
entire length of said right-of-way, excepting areas reserved for approved curb
cuts.
a. Where easements for future street widening(s) are conveyed, the Street
Landscape Area shall be planted along the inside of any such easement line.
b. Street trees shall be planted within the Street Tree Strip to permit adequate
sight distance for access onto Route 3-A or any town road. Street trees shall be
planted a minimum of twenty-five feet (25') from each side of the pavement edge
of the access drive.
3. Plantings: The “high” standard for the Street Landscape Area shall be planted
with a minimum of 1 native shade tree for every twenty-five feet (25') of
right-of-way frontage. Native shade trees shall be suitable for the soils and
growing conditions of the site. The size of the trees to be planted within this area
shall be a minimum of two and a half inches (2 ½") in caliper at the time of
planting. Branching height of Street Trees shall not be less than seven feet (7')
above grade when planted.
The “medium” standard for the Street Landscape Area shall contain a minimum of
1 native shade tree for every fifty feet (50') of frontage.
The “low” standard for the Street Landscape Area shall contain a minimum of 2
native shade trees within the Area.
Where overhead utility lines restrict the allowable height of plantings, alternative
tree specifications (including evergreens and fruit trees) may be substituted by a
waiver from the Planning Board.
4. Incentive Bonuses: Each healthy native hardwood tree with a caliper of three
inches (3") or greater, which is preserved within the Street Landscape Area, may
be substituted for one (1) required new Street Tree planting. Appropriate native
hardwood tree types are elm, maple, chestnut, and ash.
147
F. Side and Rear Landscape Strips
1. Intent: The Side and Rear Landscape Strips are intended to promote proper
visual separation and adequate buffering between adjoining properties. Parking,
drives, and buildings shall not be located within any required Side and Rear
Landscape Strip.
2. Location: Required Side and Rear Landscape Strips shall begin at the inner
limits of the Street Landscape Area and run parallel to side and rear property
lines. The required minimum width of these Side and Rear Landscape Strips
shall be ten (10) feet.
Where proposed shared parking or access points are proposed, side and rear
landscape requirements along common boundaries may be waived.
3. Plantings: The “high” standard for the Required Side and Rear Landscape Strips
shall be constructed so as to provide a dense visual four season screen by using
one or a combination of any of the Landscape Options provided in the following
Table of Side and Rear Landscape Options, Figure 15-8A.
The “medium” standard for the Required Side and Rear Landscape Strips shall
be constructed so as to provide a moderately dense four season screen by using
one or a combination of any of the Landscape Options provided in the following
Table of Side and Rear Landscape Options, Figure 15-8B.
The “low” standard for the Required Side and Rear Landscape Strips shall be
constructed so as to meet the requirements of 15.09 C. Open Space. Trees and
shrubs are encouraged, but not required.
4. Incentive Bonuses: Healthy woodland provides for a dense landscape screen
more effectively than new plants. Healthy existing woodland may be retained in
order to fulfill planting requirements within Side and Rear Landscape Strips. The
minimum width of woodland retained for the purpose of fulfilling Side and Rear
Landscape Strips shall be equal to the width of the setback ratio as calculated by
building height in Figure 15-1. However, in no case shall the required width of
retained woodland be less than thirty feet (30').
148
Figure 15-7: Example site plan with preservation of existing woodland to fulfill
partial side and rear landscaping requirements
149
Figure 15-8A Landscaping Options for Side and Rear Setbacks (High Standard)
Minimum Separation of Plantings (2)
Landscape
options
Number of
Required
Trees
(measured
along the
centerline of
side & rear
property
lines)
Number of
Required
Shrubs
(measured
along the
centerline of
side & rear
property
lines)
Minimum
Height of
Trees at
Planting
Required
Size of
Shrubs
at
Planting
Trees Ornamentals Shrubs
Dense
Vegetated
Screen
1 Tree + 1
additional
tree per
every 50
feet. 40%
shall be
Deciduous,
60% shall
be
Evergreen
1 Shrub + 1
additional
shrub per
every 10
feet. 40%
shall be
Deciduous,
60% shall
be
Evergreen
One-half
of
proposed
building
height
Minimum
of 6' in
height
25 feet
O.C.
Not
Applicable
8 Feet
O.C.
Trees and
Shrubs
with a
berm
1 Tree + 1
additional
tree per
every 50
feet
1 Shrub + 1
additional
shrub per
every 10
feet
One-half
of
proposed
building
height
Varies.
The
height of
berm
with
shrubs
shall be
a
minimum
of 8'
25 feet
O.C.
Not
Applicable
5 Feet
O.C.
Trees with
a 6' high
Wall /
Fence
1
Ornamental
+ 1
additional
ornamental
per every 25
feet
Not
Applicable
One-half
of
proposed
building
height
Not
Applicable
Not
Applicable
15 Feet
O.C.
Not
Applicable
NOTE 1: o.c. is abbreviation for on center
(2) Depending on circumstances and design, the applicant and Planning Board may agree to cluster
plantings.
150
Figure 15-8B Landscaping Options for Side and Rear Setbacks (Medium Standard)
Minimum Separation of Plantings (2)
Landscape
options
Number of
Required
Trees
(measured
along the
centerline of
side & rear
property
lines)
Number of
Required
Shrubs
(measured
along the
centerline of
side & rear
property
lines)
Minimum
Height of
Trees at
Planting
Required
Size of
Shrubs
at
Planting
Trees Ornamentals Shrubs
Dense
Vegetated
Screen
1 Tree + 1
additional
tree per
every 100
feet. 40%
shall be
Deciduous,
60% shall
be
Evergreen
1 Shrub + 1
additional
shrub per
every 20
feet. 40%
shall be
Deciduous,
60% shall
be
Evergreen
One-half
of
proposed
building
height
Minimum
of 6' in
height
25 feet
O.C.
Not
Applicable
8 Feet
O.C.
Trees and
Shrubs
with a
berm
1 Tree + 1
additional
tree per
every 200
feet
1 Shrub + 1
additional
shrub per
every 20
feet
One-half
of
proposed
building
height
Varies.
The
height of
berm
with
shrubs
shall be
a
minimum
of 8'
25 feet
O.C.
Not
Applicable
5 Feet
O.C.
Trees with
a 6' high
Wall /
Fence
1
Ornamental
+ 1
additional
ornamental
per every 50
feet
Not
Applicable
One-half
of
proposed
building
height
Not
Applicable
Not
Applicable
15 Feet
O.C.
Not
Applicable
NOTE 1: o.c. is abbreviation for on center
(2) Depending on circumstances and design, the applicant and Planning Board may agree to cluster
plantings.
151
G. All landscaping shall be properly maintained and any dead or diseased material
shall be removed and replaced with material meeting the requirements of this section.
The Planning Board shall require submission of a landscaping bond in an amount
sufficient to ensure compliance with this section.
15.10 Exterior Building Facade Performance Standards.
The following standards shall apply to all new buildings, or additions to existing
buildings, in the Business Development District.
A. No exterior building surface visible from a public right-of-way or abutting residential
property shall be constructed of any material except face brick, stone, stucco,
architecturally treated concrete, cast in place or precast panels, decorative block, glass,
clapboards, vinyl siding, metal or a combination thereof. As shown on the Reference
Table for BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT Guide to Aesthetic and Architectural
Standards in Ordinance, Metal may be used on a maximum percentage of the exterior
building surface visible from the street. The maximum percentage may be exceeded
where the Planning Board approves additional texture, color, and/or architectural
features proposed by the applicant.
B. Subtle, neutral colors shall be used on larger and plain buildings, such as
warehouse style or "big box retail centers". Paint colors shall relate to natural material
colors found on buildings such as brick, stucco, terra cotta, stone, or ceramic tile and
existing elements such as signs or awnings. Contrasting colors, and accent
architectural details, are encouraged.
C. Buildings shall relate vertical, horizontal, or non-directional facade characteristics of
new buildings to the predominant direction expression of nearby buildings (within 200')
constructed under these standards.
D. Roof form is an important visual element and can have a significant impact on a
building's form and silhouette. New roof forms shall relate to the roof forms of adjacent
structures where appropriate, by duplicating the shape, pitch, and materials. A pitched
roof shall be provided for structures with a building footprint of 5,000 square feet or less
in order to have new development better fit with the rural and residential character of
the community. Common roof forms shall be duplicated on the primary structures
within a development whenever possible. For structures with a foot print larger than
5,000 square feet, flat roofs shall be permitted, provided that mansard roof details, as
noted in Figure 15-10 are provided. Please refer to Figure 15-9 and 15-10 for more
detail.
152
Figure 15-9: Common Roof Form Graphic
Figure 15-10: Mansard Roof Requirement for Structures with footprints of 5,000
square feet and Larger
E. To ensure the development of commercial and industrial structures which are
consistent with, and improve the architectural character of the Town of Bow, varied
offsets, roof heights and forms, and window placement shall be incorporated into all
153
new structures, or additions to existing structures required to meet the “high” standard.
Under the “medium” standard, structures that are visible from a public right-of-way or
abutting residential property, shall be required to provide varied offsets, roof heights
and forms, and window placement.
Please refer to Figure 15-11 for more details.
Figure 15-11: Varied Offsets, Roof Heights, and Window Graphic
F. All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened from view with either building
walls or roof forms. All sides visible to the public and abutters shall have screen
materials. Screening materials shall be the same material as used for building
cladding. See Figure 15-10 for more detail.
15.11 Screening Performance Requirements
A. Ground Level Mechanical Equipment
To meet the “high” standard, all ground level view of all mechanical equipment with a
154
foot print of fifty (50) square feet or greater shall be fully screened from abutting
properties and adjacent streets.
To meet the “medium” standard, such mechanical equipment shall be fully screened
from abutting residential properties, customer oriented properties, and adjacent streets.
To meet the “low” standard, such mechanical equipment shall be fully screened from
adjacent streets. To qualify for the “low” standard, a property cannot abut residential
property or a property required to meet the “high” standard. Screening may be
accomplished by architecturally integrating the equipment into the principal structure or
by surrounding it with opaque materials compatible with the principal structure.
Screening materials shall be designed for low maintenance and long life and shall be
kept in a state of good repair. Signs shall not be used for the purpose of screening
mechanical equipment.
Landscape Plantings, in lieu of man-made enclosures architecturally consistent with the
principal structure on the site, can be employed to screen mechanical equipment.
Screening shall consist of one (1) evergreen tree or shrub per 10 linear feet of required
screen length or perimeter. The height of required trees or shrubs shall be equal to
one-half (½) of the maximum height of the item requiring the screen at the time of
planting. Required plantings shall be placed at regular intervals so as to maximize the
overall density of the landscape screen.
B. Exterior Storage Screening
All materials and equipment shall be stored within a building or fully screened so as not
to be visible from adjoining properties. No exterior storage shall be visible from any
street. Exterior storage areas shall be screened for the entire height and width of
aggregate storage area on all sides by opaque materials architecturally compatible with
the principal structure. Screens shall be constructed of materials designed for low
maintenance and long life.
C. Refuse Storage Areas
All waste material shall be kept in an enclosed building or properly enclosed building or
properly contained in a closed container designed for such purposes. The owner shall
be responsible for keeping such land free of refuse. All exterior trash containers shall
be screened so as to not be visible from any street, abutting residential property, or
customer oriented property. Screening shall be by means of an opaque structure,
earthen berm, or landscaping at least eight (8) feet in height and shall be architecturally
compatible with the principal structure.
155
15.12 Parking Performance Requirements
The following standards shall apply unless waived by the Board:
A. Off-street Parking Requirements
Sufficient off-street parking, as required by the Article 9 of Zoning Ordinance, as well as
the Town of Bow Site Plan Review Regulations, shall be provided. To support reduced
parking requirements where standards require excessive parking, applicants are
encouraged to submit parking analyses.
B. Consideration of Pedestrian Circulation
Parking area designs shall adequately consider pedestrian circulation to and from
parking spaces. Design shall minimize the potential for vehicle-pedestrian conflicts and
provide for safe maneuvering of all anticipated sizes of delivery vehicles.
C. Setbacks
Parking areas may be located not less than ten (10) feet from a lot line. A parking area
shall be screened from adjacent properties by a 10' wide landscaped strip. Parking
areas adjacent to residential properties shall be screened with fencing, plantings, or
earthen berm, or combination thereof at least eight (8) feet in height.
D. Parking Landscape Strips
When parking areas are going to be visible from adjacent public roadways, a
landscaping strip shall be installed to soften the appearance of parking areas. Plantings
located at the end of parking lot isles, or near driveways, shall have a maximum height
not exceeding 24" at maturity in order to maintain adequate sight distance and visibility.
E. Interior Pavement Landscape Strips
Interior Pavement Landscape Strips shall be provided to break up large expanses of
pavement, provide summer shade on pavement areas and reduce wind velocity across
exposed surface areas.
Location: The required Interior Pavement Landscape Strips shall be calculated as a
minimum of five percent (5%) of the total area of paved drives, parking areas, etc.
Interior Landscape Strips shall be required for all parking lots with more than one
hundred (100) parking spaces. Interior Landscape Strips must be provided within the
limits of parking and/or drive pavement area(s). The minimum landscaped island size
shall not be less than two hundred fifty square feet (250 s.f.) in total area.
156
F. Alternative Pavement Materials
Though not required, applicants are encouraged, where appropriate in the opinion of
the Planning Board, to use alternative pavement materials other than asphalt and
concrete. Encouraged materials include brick, crushed stone, pea stone, stamped
concrete, cobblestone, and other similar materials. For parking lots utilizing alternative
surface treatments, a paved apron at least 20' in length, shall be constructed where
parking areas access paved roadways.
G. Shared Parking Incentive Bonuses
When shared parking between separate land uses is feasible, the Planning Board, at its
discretion, may reduce parking requirements for each land use which would participate
in shared parking arrangements, provided that the peak parking demand of each land
use does not occur during the same time periods. During the site plan review process,
the Planning Board shall have the discretion to reduce parking requirements for all land
uses which enter into common parking agreements up to 50% of parking requirements
included in the zoning ordinance and/or site plan review regulations.
H. Rights-of-way to Abutting Parcels
To reduce congestion of streets and minimize traffic safety hazards, all developments
with access to NH Route 3-A or subject to a Planning Board approved alternate access
plan, at time of subdivision or site plan review, shall provide rights-of-way to abutting
parcels for future interconnect of sites.
15.13 Signage Requirements
A. Permitted Sign Styles
Freestanding monument styles signs and wall signs shall be permitted in the Route 3-A
Business Development District:
1. Monument Signs (Free Standing)
a. Dimensional Requirements: Free standing, or monument style signs, shall
conform to the following standards:
157
Maximum Sign Area (In Square
Feet)
Maximum Sign Height
48 8
b. A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the sign area shall be devoted to the
identification of the building or center by name.
i. Location: Freestanding monument signs or directory signs shall be
placed perpendicular to approaching vehicular traffic.
ii. Design: Freestanding monument signs shall be designed to generally
conform with and be limited to styles presented in Figure 15-12. Such
signs shall contain the following:
a. The identification of the business or center as a whole; and
b. Major tenant and street address range included within the
center.
c. A freestanding sign shall be either a monument or directory type
sign.
158
FIGURE 15-12: Design Requirements for Freestanding Monument Signs
iii. Materials: Free Standing or monument style signs shall be constructed
of carved or painted wood, stone, or other masonry products.
iv. Signage Landscape Strip: A Signage Landscape Strip shall be
constructed to re-establish ground cover where disturbed by sign
installation and to screen the foundation of monument or pedestal signs
without blocking the view of signage information.
a. Location: The Signage Landscape Strip shall be a minimum
four foot (4') wide area surrounding each monument or pedestal
sign base.
b. Plantings: All monument or pedestal sign bases shall be
159
planted with shrubs or ground cover with a minimum height and
width of eighteen (18) inches at the time of planting.
c. Incentive Bonuses: Healthy vegetation that is preserved in the
location of the Signage Landscape Area may be substituted for the
required plantings.
c. One (1) free standing sign shall be permitted per lot or parcel. For lots at the
intersections of Johnson Road, Dunklee Road, Tallwood Drive, Gordon Road,
and Robinson Road with NH Route 3-A, a second free standing sign shall be
permitted to identify a business area off of Route 3-A. The Planning Board may
designate additional intersections for business area directory signs. The second
sign shall be a directory sign with 20% of the area devoted to identification of the
business area and spaces for a minimum of four businesses located in the
business area. No one space on the directory sign shall exceed 25% of the
permitted area of the sign. Only businesses on lots that do not have frontage on
NH Route 3-A may advertise on such directory sign.
2. Wall, Hanging, and Eaveline Signs (Except for Signs Directly Painted to
Structures):
a. Single Tenant Buildings
i. For commercial and industrial structures with only 1 tenant, the sign
area, per building facade, shall not exceed 5% of the building face to
which the sign applies, or fifty (50) square feet per building face,
whichever is lesser. If additional sign area is required, the Planning Board
may grant additional area, provided that the sign does not have negative
impacts on abutting properties or detracts from the intended character of
the Route 3-A Business Development District.
ii. Location: Wall, hanging, and eaveline signs shall be designed to be
compatible with the predominant visual elements of the building and
emphasize architectural elements of the building's facade.
iii. Compatibility: Signs shall establish a visual continuity with adjacent
building facades and should be oriented to emphasize pedestrian visibility.
iv. Individual Letter Height: Wall, hanging, and eaveline signs shall be
limited to a maximum letter height of thirty (30) inches. The letter area, as
it relates to the overall sign background area, shall be in proportion. In
general, letters shall not occupy more than seventy-five percent (75%) of
the sign panel area.
b. Multi-Tenant Buildings
160
i. In the case of buildings with multiple business tenants, the following
standards shall apply.
ii. Number of Permitted Signs: Only one (1) sign per tenant shall be
permitted.
iii. Design Standards: All signs at a multi-tenant commercial or industrial
structure shall be complementary to each other as follows:
a. Letter size and style of text;
b. Sign support method;
c. Sign area configuration;
d. Sign shape and proportion; and
e. Construction materials (text and background surfaces)
f. The use of back lit, individually cut, letter signs are encouraged.
iv. Dimensional Requirements: In the case of multi-tenant buildings, all
wall, hanging, and eaveline signs for each business shall not exceed
twenty-four (24) square feet.
v. Individual Letter Height: The height of all letters, logos, and insignias
on wall, hanging, and eaveline signs for multi-tenant buildings shall not
exceed one (1) foot. The letter area, as it relates to the overall sign
background area, shall be in proportion. In general, letters shall not
occupy more than seventy-five percent (75%) of the sign panel area.
vi. Location: Wall and eaveline signs shall be located at the same height
as the eaveline in accordance with examples included in Figure 15-13.
161
FIGURE 15-13: Required Location for Wall and Eaveline Signs
c. Prohibited Signs: Animated, moving, flashing, noise making, and painted wall
signs are not permitted. All other types of prohibited signs in Article 8 of the Bow
Zoning Ordinance are not permitted in the Business Development District. Wall
and hanging signs above the eaveline are not permitted.
d. Lighting:
i. Direct and indirect lighting methods are allowed provided that they are
not unnecessarily bright.
ii. Internally lit panels shall be opaque and only the lettering shall appear
to be lighted.
iii. Externally lit signs are encouraged.
iv. Lighting methods must conform to Section 15.15: Lighting Standards.
162
15.14 Compliance with Performance Standards
A. Additions Less Than 50% of Gross Floor Area (GFA)
Additions to existing buildings which do not exceed in size fifty (50) percent of the floor
area of the existing structure and which are constructed on continuous frost footings
shall be designed so that at least twenty (20) percent of the exterior building surface of
the combined structure is composed of one or more of the non-metal materials
specified in Section 15.10. Non-metal materials shall be concentrated on the portions
of the building which are visible from adjacent public rights-of-way and residential
properties. Sites on which additions are constructed shall be brought into compliance
with the requirements of this ordinance with regard to screening and landscaping.
B. Additions Greater than 50% of Gross Floor Area (GFA)
Additions which exceed fifty (50) percent of the floor area of the existing structure or
which are not constructed on continuous frost footings shall be considered new
buildings and shall comply with all requirements of this ordinance. For the purposes of
this section, the size of successive additions to a structure shall be cumulative and shall
be compared to the size of the structure in existence on the effective date of this
ordinance.
15.15 Lighting Standards
A. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area, sign, or other structure,
shall be arranged as to deflect light away from any adjoining properties or from the
public streets. Direct or sky-reflected glare, where from floodlights or from
high-temperature processes such as combustion or welding shall not be directed into
any adjoining property.
B. In order to minimize glare and other adverse effects associated with exterior lighting,
all exterior lighting fixtures shall be of a design that provides for luminaire cutoffs with a
total cutoff at an angle of seventy- five degrees from the vertical. Further, all fixtures
shall be positioned and/or installed in such a fashion as to prevent unwanted incidental
illumination of abutting properties and streets. Any light or combination of lights which
cast light on a public street shall not exceed one (1) foot-candle (meter reading) as
measured from the centerline of said street. Any light or combination of lights, which
cast light on residential property shall not exceed 0.1 foot candles (meter reading) as
measured from said property.
C. Bare light bulbs shall not be permitted in view of adjacent property or public
right-of-way.
D. All lighting fixtures shall be compatible to the architectural design of the proposed
163
structures and abutting land uses.
15.16 Environmental Performance Standards
A. General Provisions
1. Environmental performance standards specific to the Business Development
District, enumerated herein, have been developed in order to protect the long
term environmental quality and overall vitality of this District.
2. The variety of permitted uses, taken together with often intensive land use
patterns and an inventory of environmental resources specific to this District,
necessitates this series of environmental performance standards.
3. In addition to the provisions of this Article, development within this District shall
also be subject to applicable local, state, and federal land use controls and
regulations. The content of this Ordinance shall not be construed to imply relief
from the requirements of state or federal statutes.
B. Performance Standards Related to Nuisance Odors
Uses and activities which produce continuous, regular, or frequent odors and/ or
emissions, detectable beyond the boundary of the property from which the odor
originates, shall be prohibited, in whole or in part, if the odor or emission in question is a
known health risk or danger or if the Planning Board judges such odor or emission to be
harmful to the rights of others to enjoy their property(s).
C. Performance Standards Related to Noise
1. Intent: The Performance Standards governing noise are intended to ensure that
the rights of property owners, as well as the overall health and general welfare of
the District, are not diminished by unreasonable noise levels generated within
the District.
2. Maximum Permissible Sound Level: The maximum permissible sound level
produced by any continuous, regular, or frequent source of sound or noise,
produced by any permitted use or activity within this District, shall be established
by the time period listed below. Sound pressure levels shall be measured at all
lot lines, at a height of at least four feet above the ground surface.
164
The levels specified may be exceeded by 10 decibels for a single period, no
longer than 15 minutes, in any one-day.
3. Sound or Noise Abatement: In order to comply with these maximum sound level
requirements, sound or noise level abatement techniques may be used to
mitigate levels of site generated sound or noise. To this end, modern acoustical
technology may be applied to achieve compliance with these regulations.
4. If the ambient level of noise exceeds that permitted in Table noted in Section
15.16C2, the allowable noise exposure standard shall be the ambient noise
level. The ambient level shall be measured when the alleged noise violation
source is not operating.
5. Activities and Devices Exempt from Noise Performance Standards: The
following activities and devices are exempt from the provisions of this section:
a. Warning devices necessary for the protection of public safety as for example
police, fire, and ambulance sirens, and train horns.
b. Construction / demolition activities.
c. Stationary nonemergency signaling devices.
d. Emergency signaling devices.
e. Railway locomotives and cars.
f. Motor vehicles on public rights-of-way.
6. Vibration: In the Business Development District, no use of land shall be
conducted so as to create earthborne vibrations on the boundary property line
that exceed the displacement contained in the following table:
165
D. Performance Standards Related to the Protection of Wetlands
All provisions of Article 10.01: Wetlands Conservation District of the Bow Zoning
Ordinance shall apply to all areas within the Business Development District.
E. Performance Standards Related to Aquifer Areas
Developments proposed within the District shall conform to Article 10, Section 10.03:
"Aquifer Protection (AP) District.
15.17 Waivers
A. Where the Planning Board finds practical difficulties or unnecessary expense would
result from strict compliance with the foregoing ordinance or the overall purpose of
these regulations would be served even if some requirements are not strongly adhered
to or foregone, the Board may approve waivers to the performance standards within this
ordinance. The Planning Board, however, does not have the authority to waive or
modify permitted uses or minimum lot size requirements.
B. The purpose of granting waivers under provisions of these regulations shall be to
ensure that the applicant is not unduly burdened by said regulations. Strict
conformance to these regulations as presented may not be necessary or practical in all
cases and circumstances. The Board shall not approve any waiver(s) unless a majority
of those present and voting shall find that:
1. The granting of the waiver will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or
welfare or cause injury or damage to other property, or fail to promote public
interest;
2. The waiver will not, in any manner, vary the provisions of the Town of Bow
Master Plan;
3. Such waiver(s) will substantially ensure that the goals, objectives, standards, and
requirements of this ordinance are not compromised;
4. The requirement is not appropriate or reasonable due to the size and scale of
166
the proposed project; and/or,
5. A particular natural features which may impact feasibility or cause excessive
cost, as determined by the Board, including:
a. Topography
b. Existing site features
c. Geographic location of the property
d. Size and/or magnitude of the project being evaluated
C. In approving waivers, the Board may impose such conditions, as it deems
appropriate to secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of
these regulations.
D. A request for any and all waivers from any of the foregoing regulations or
requirements shall be submitted in writing by the applicant along with the application for
Subdivision or Site Plan review. Where neither Subdivision, nor Site Plan Review, is
required, an applicant may submit requests for waivers by Conditional Use Permit
application. Requests for waiver(s) shall state the reason for the waiver by addressing
items set forth in Sections 15.17B1 through 15.17B5.
15.18 Effective Date
This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption.
The ordinance was initially adopted on March 13, 2001.
The ordinance was amended May 9, 2006 to revise section 15.13 A.2.a & b to add
provisions for hanging signs.
The ordinance was amended May 13, 2008 to revise section 15.13 A.1.c for free
standing signs and business directory signs.
The ordinance was amended March 13, 2012 to revise section 15.17 D to permit waiver
requests to be submitted by CUP.
The ordinance was amended March 12, 2013 to revise the Performance Standards and
Requirements for sections 15.09 Landscaping and Screening, 15.10 Building Facade,
15.11 Screening, and 15.12 Parking.
167
REFERENCE TABLE FOR BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT dated 122012
Guide to Aesthetic and Architectural Standards in Ordinance
Performance Standard
Office / Retail -
Customer
Oriented
Distribution /
Warehouse
Manufacturing /
Heavy Industrial
Outside Storage
& Equipment
Operations
15.09 Landscaping and Screening Please see 15.09 A for statement of intent
E. Street / Front Side landscaping requirement low medium medium high
F. Side & rear landscape strip where need to screen / hide low medium medium high
15.10 Exterior Building Facade attractive presentation from front / street side
A. Maximum percentage of metal on visible surface / additional metal
permitted with architectural features - color & texture up to 20% up to 80% may be 100% not applicable
B. Subtle, neutral colors proposed/to be approved by Planning Board required required required required
E. Varied offsets, roof heights & forms, & window placement high medium medium not applicable
F. Roof top mechanical screened required required required required
15.11 Screening
A. Ground level mechanical equipment high medium medium low
15.12 Parking
D. Landscape strips to screen parking from ROW high medium medium low
F. Alternative pavement materials encouraged encouraged where appropriate
G. Shared parking incentive encouraged where appropriate
H. ROW to abutting parcel high medium medium low
zo2013\Post 020513 TM\F. BDD Aesthetic Stand Ref Table
Standards to be Applied to Below Use Categories